<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo002)  [Next](amo004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 3:0</span></span>

II\. Prophecies Concerning Israel - Amos 3-6

Although the expression "Hear this word," which is repeated at the
commencement of [Amo 3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001), [Amo
4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001) and 5, suggests the idea of
three addresses, the contents of these chapters show that they do not
contain three separate addresses delivered to the people by Amos at
different times, but that they group together the leading thoughts of
appeals delivered by word of mouth, so as to form one long admonition to
repentance. Commencing with the proofs of his right to predict judgment
to the nation on account of its sins ([Amo
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001)), the prophet exposes the
wickedness of Israel in general (ch. 3:9-4:3), and then shows the
worthlessness of the nation's trust in idolatry ([Amo
4:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004)), and lastly announces the
destruction of the kingdom as the inevitable consequence of the
prevailing injustice and ungodliness (ch. 5 and [Amo
6:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)).

Announcement of the Judgment - [Hos
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

Because the Lord has chosen Israel to be His people, He must visit all
its sins ([Amo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002)), and has
commissioned the prophet to announce this punishment ([Amo
3:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003)). As Israel has heaped up
oppression, violence, and wickedness, an enemy will come upon the land
and plunder Samaria, and cause its inhabitants to perish, and demolish
the altars of Bethel, and destroy the capital ([Amo
3:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)).

[Amos 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 3:1</span></span>

[Amo 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001) and [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002) contain the introduction and the
leading thought of the whole of the prophetic proclamation. [Amo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001). "Hear this word which Jehovah
speaketh concerning you, O sons of Israel, concerning the whole family
which I have brought up out of the land of Egypt, saying: [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002). You only have I acknowledge of
all the families of the earth; therefore will I visit all your
iniquities upon you." The word of the Lord is addressed to all the
family of Israel, which God had brought up out of Egypt, that is to say,
to all the twelve tribes of the covenant nation, although in what
follows it is the ten tribes of Israel alone who are primarily
threatened with the destruction of the kingdom, to indicate at the very
outset that Judah might anticipate a similar fate if it did not turn to
its God with sincerity. The threat is introduced by the thought that its
divine election would not secure the sinful nation against punishment,
but that, on the contrary, the relation of grace into which the Lord had
entered with Israel demanded the punishment of all evil deeds. This cuts
off the root of all false confidence in divine election. "To whomsoever
much is given, of him shall be much required. The greater the measure of
grace, the greater also is the punishment if it is neglected or
despised." This is the fundamental law of the kingdom of God. ידע does
not mean to know, to become acquainted with, or to take knowledge of a
person (Hitzig), but acknowledge. Acknowledgment on the part of God is
not merely taking notice, but is energetic, embracing man in his inmost
being, embracing and penetrating with divine love; so that ידע not only
includes the idea of love and care, as in [Hos
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#005), but expresses generally the
gracious fellowship of the Lord with Israel, as in [Gen
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019), and is practically equivalent
to electing, including both the motive and the result of election. And
because Jehovah had acknowledged, i.e., had singled out and chosen
Israel as the nation best fitted to be the vehicle of His salvation, He
must of necessity punish all its misdeeds, in order to purify it from
the dross of sin, and make it a holy vessel of His saving grace.

[Amos 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 3:3</span></span>

But this truth met with contradiction in the nation itself. The proud
self-secure sinners would not hear such prophesying as this (compare
[Amo 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#004); [Amo
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010).). Amos therefore endeavours,
before making any further announcement of the judgment of God, to
establish his right and duty to prophesy, by a chain-like series of
similes drawn from life. V. 3. "Do two walk together without having
agreed? [Amo 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#004). Does the lion roar
in the forest, and he has no prey? does the young lion utter his cry out
of his den, without having taken anything? [Amo
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#005). Does the bird fall into the trap
on the ground, when there is no snare for him? does the trap rise up
from the earth without making a capture? [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006). Or is the trumpet blown in the
city, and the people are not alarmed? or does misfortune happen in the
city, and Jehovah has not done it? [Amo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007). For the Lord Jehovah does nothing
at all, without having revealed His secret to His servants the prophets.
[Amo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008). The lion has roared; who
does not fear? the Lord Jehovah hath spoken; who must not prophesy?" The
contents of these verses are not to be reduced to the general thought,
that a prophet could no more speak without a divine impulse than any
other effect could take place without a cause. There was certainly no
need for a long series of examples, such as we have in [Amo
3:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003), to substantiate or illustrate
the thought, which a reflecting hearer would hardly have disputed, that
there was a connection between cause and effect. The examples are
evidently selected with the view of showing that the utterances of the
prophet originate with God. This is obvious enough in [Amo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007), [Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008). The first clause, "Do two men
walk together, without having agreed as to their meeting?" (nō‛Ad, to
betake one's self to a place, to meet together at an appointed place or
an appointed time; compare [Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011);
[Jos 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#005); [Neh
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#002); not merely to agree together),
contains something more than the trivial truth, that two persons do not
take a walk together without a previous arrangement. The two who walk
together are Jehovah and the prophet (Cyril); not Jehovah and the
nation, to which the judgment is predicted (Cocceius, Marck, and
others). Amos went as prophet to Samaria or Bethel, because the Lord had
sent him thither to preach judgment to the sinful kingdom. But God would
not threaten judgment if He had not a nation ripe for judgment before
Him. The lion which roars when it has the prey before it is Jehovah (cf.
[Amo 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002); [Hos
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#010), etc.). טרף אין לו is not to be
interpreted according to the second clause, as signifying "without
having got possession of its prey" (Hitzig), for the lion is accustomed
to roar when it has the prey before it and there is no possibility of
its escape, and before it actually seizes it (cf. [Isa
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#029)).

(Note: The most terrible feature in the roaring of a lion is that with
this clarigatio, or, if you prefer it, with this classicum, it declares
war. And after the roar there immediately follows both slaughter and
laceration. For, as a rule, it only roars with that sharp roar when it
has the prey in sight, upon which it immediately springs (Bochart,
Hieroz. ii. 25ff., ed. Ros.).)

On the contrary, the perfect lâkjad in the second clause is to be
interpreted according to the first clause, not as relating to the roar
of satisfaction with which the lion devours the prey in its den (Baur),
but as a perfect used to describe a thing which was as certain as if it
had already occurred. A lion has made a capture not merely when it has
actually seized the prey and torn it in pieces, but when the prey has
approached so near that it cannot possibly escape. Kephı̄r is the young
lion which already goes in pursuit of prey, and is to be distinguished
from the young of the lion, gūr (catulus leonis), which cannot yet go in
search of prey (cf. [Eze 19:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#002)). The
two similes have the same meaning. The second strengthens the first by
the assertion that God not only has before Him the nation that is ripe
for judgment, but that He has it in His power.

The similes in [Amo 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#005) do not affirm
the same as those in [Amo 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#004), but
contain the new thought, that Israel has deserved the destruction which
threatens it. Pach, a snare, and mōqēsh, a trap, are frequently used
synonymously; but here they are distinguished, pach denoting a bird-net,
and mōqēsh a springe, a snare which holds the bird fast. The earlier
translators have taken mōqēsh in the sense of yōqēsh, and understand it
as referring to the bird-catcher; and Baur proposes to alter the text
accordingly. But there is no necessity for this; and it is evidently
unsuitable, since it is not requisite for a bird-catcher to be at hand,
in order that the bird should be taken in a snare. The suffix lâh refers
to tsippōr, and the thought is this: in order to catch a bird in the
net, a springe (gin) must be laid for it. So far as the fact itself is
concerned, mōqēsh is "evidently that which is necessarily followed by
falling into the net; and in this instance it is sinfulness" (Hitzig);
so that the meaning of the figure would be this: "Can destruction
possibly overtake you, unless your sin draws you into it?" (cf. [Jer
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#035)). In the second clause pach is
the subject, and ועלה is used for the ascent or springing up of the net.
Hitzig has given the meaning of the words correctly: "As the net does
not spring up without catching the bird, that has sent it up by flying
upon it, can ye imagine that when the destruction passes by, ye will not
be seized by it, but will escape without injury?" (cf. [Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)). Jehovah, however, causes the
evil to be foretold. As the trumpet, when blown in the city, frightens
the people out of their self-security, so will the voice of the prophet,
who proclaims the coming evil, excite a salutary alarm in the nation
(cf. [Eze 33:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001)). For the calamity
which is bursting upon the city comes from Jehovah, is sent by Him as a
punishment. This thought is explained in [Amo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007), [Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008), and with this explanation the
whole series of figurative sentences is made perfectly clear. The
approaching evil, which comes from the Lord, is predicted by the
prophet, because Jehovah does not carry out His purpose without having
(כּי אם, for when, except when he has, as in [Gen
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#027)) first of all revealed it to the
prophets, that they may warn the people to repent and to reform. Sōd
receives a more precise definition from the first clause of the verse,
or a limitation to the purposes which God is about to fulfil upon His
people. And since (this is the connection of [Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008)) the judgment with which the Lord
is drawing near fills every one with fear, and Jehovah has spoken, i.e.,
has made known His counsel to the prophets, they cannot but prophesy.

[Amos 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 3:9</span></span>

Amos has thus vindicated his own calling, and the right of all the
prophets, to announce to the people the judgments of God; and now ([Amo
3:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)) he is able to proclaim without
reserve what the Lord has resolved to do upon sinful Israel. [Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009). "Make it heard over the palaces
in Ashdod, and over the palaces in the land of Egypt, and say, Assemble
yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the great tumult in
the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the heart thereof. [Amo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010). And they know not to do the
right, is the saying of Jehovah, who heap up violence and devastation in
their palaces." The speaker is Jehovah ([Amo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010)), and the prophets are addressed.
Jehovah summons them to send out the cry over the palaces in Ashdod and
Egypt (על as in [Hos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001)), and to call
the inhabitants of these palaces to hear, (1) that they may see the acts
of violence, and the abominations in the palaces of Samaria; and (2)
that they may be able to bear witness against Israel ([Amo
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#013)). This turn in the prophecy
brings out to view the overflowing excess of the sins and abominations
of Israel. The call of the prophets, however, is not to be uttered upon
the palaces, so as to be heard far and wide (Baur and others), but over
the palaces, to cause the inhabitants of them to draw near. It is they
alone, and not the whole population of Ashdod and Egypt, who are to be
called nigh; because only the inhabitants of the palace could pronounce
a correct sentence as to the mode of life commonly adopted in the
palaces of Samaria. Ashdod, one of the Philistian capitals, is mentioned
by way of example, as a chief city of the uncircumcised, who were
regarded by Israel as godless heathen; and Egypt is mentioned along with
it, as the nation whose unrighteousness and ungodliness had once been
experienced by Israel to satiety. If therefore such heathen as these are
called to behold the unrighteous and dissolute conduct to be seen in the
palaces, it must have been great indeed. The mountains of Samaria are
not the mountains of the kingdom of Samaria, or the mountains upon which
the city of Samaria was situated - for Samaria was not built upon a
plurality of mountains, but upon one only ([Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001); [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)) - but the mountains round about
Samaria, from which you could look into the city, built upon one
isolated hill. The city, built upon the hill of Semer, was situated in a
mountain caldron or basin, about two yours in diameter, which was
surrounded on all sides by lofty mountains (see at [Kg1
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024)).

(Note: "As the mountains round the hill of Semer are loftier than this
hill itself, the enemy might easily discover the internal state of
besieged Samaria." V. de Velde, R. i. p. 282.)

Mehūmâh, noise, tumult, denotes a state of confusion, in which
everything is topsy-turvy, and all justice and order are overthrown by
open violence (Maurer, Baur). ‛Ashūqı̄m, either the oppressed, or, taken
as an abstract, the oppression of the poor (cf. [Amo
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006)). In [Amo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010) the description is continued in
the finite verb: they do not know how to do right; that is to say,
injustice has become their nature; and they who heap up sins and
violence in their palaces like treasures.

[Amos 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 3:11</span></span>

Thus do they bring about the ruin of the kingdom. [Amo
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#011). "Therefore thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, An enemy, and that round about the land; and he will hurl down
thy glory from thee, and thy palaces are plundered. [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012). Thus saith Jehovah, As the
shepherd delivers out of the mouth of the lion two shin-bones or an
ear-lappet, so will the sons of Israel deliver themselves; they who sit
on the corner of the couch and on the damask of the bed." The threat is
introduced in the form of an aposiopesis. צר, enemy, וּסביב הארץ, and
indeed round about the land ( ו explic. as in [Amo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#010), etc.; and סביב in the construct
state construed as a preposition), i.e., will come, attack the land on
all sides, and take possession of it. Others regard צר as an abstract:
oppression (from the Chaldee); but in this case we should have to supply
Jehovah as the subject to והוריד; and although this is probable, it is
by no means natural, as Jehovah is speaking. There is no foundation, on
the other hand, for the remark, that if tsar signified the enemy, we
should either find the plural צרים, or הצּר with the article
(Baumgarten). The very indefiniteness of tsar suits the sententious
brevity of the clause. This enemy will hurl down the splendour of
Samaria, "which ornaments the top of the mountain like a crown, [Isa
28:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)" (Hitzig: עז, might, with the
subordinate idea of glory), and plunder the palaces in which violence,
i.e., property unrighteously acquired, is heaped up ([Amo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010)). The words are addressed to the
city of Samaria, to which the feminine suffixes refer. On the fall of
Samaria, and the plundering thereof, the luxurious grandees, who rest
upon costly pillows, will only be able to save their life to the very
smallest extent, and that with great difficulty. In the simile used in
[Amo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012) there is a slight want of
proportion in the two halves, the object of the deliverance being thrown
into the background in the second clause by the passive construction,
and only indicated in the verb, to deliver themselves, i.e., to save
their life. "A pair of shin-bones and a piece (בּדל ἁταξ λεγ.), i.e., a
lappet, of the earth," are most insignificant remnants. The grandees of
Samaria, of whom only a few were to escape with their life, are depicted
by Amos as those who sit on costly divans, without the least anxiety.
פּאת מטּה, the corner of the divan, the most convenient for repose.
According to [Amo 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004), these divans
were ornamented with ivory, and according to the verse before us, they
were ornamented with costly stuffs. דּמשׂק comes from דמּשׂק, Damascus,
and signifies damask, an artistically woven material (see Ges. Thes. p.
346). This brings the visitation of God to an end. Even the altars and
palaces are to be laid in ruins, and consequently Samaria will be
destroyed.

[Amos 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 3:13</span></span>

This feature in the threat is brought out into peculiar prominence by a
fresh introduction. [Amo 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#013). "Hear
ye, and testify it to the house of Jacob, is the utterance of the Lord,
Jehovah, the God of hosts: [Amo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#014).
That in the day when I visit the transgressions of the house of Israel
upon it, I shall visit it upon the altars of Bethel; and the horns of
the altar will be cut off, and fall to the ground. [Amo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015). And I smite the winter-house
over the summer-house, and the houses of ivory perish, and many houses
vanish, is the saying of Jehovah." The words "Hear ye" cannot be
addressed to the Israelites, fore they could not bear witness against
the house of Israel, but must either refer to the prophets, as in [Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009) ("publish ye"), or to the heathen,
in which case they correspond to "assemble yourselves and behold" in
[Amo 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009). The latter assumption is the
only correct one, for the context does not assign a sufficient motive
for an address to the prophets. On the other hand, as the heathen have
been summoned to convince themselves by actual observation of the sins
that prevail in Samaria, it is perfectly in keeping that they should now
hear what is the punishment that God is about to inflict upon Israel in
consequence, and that they should bear witness against Israel from what
they have heard. העיד ב, to bear witness towards or against (not "in,"
as Baur supposes). The house of Jacob is the whole of Israel, of the
twelve tribes, as in [Amo 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001); for
Judah was also to learn a lesson from the destruction of Samaria. As the
appeal to the heathen to bear witness against Israel indicates the
greatness of the sins of the Israelites, so, on the other hand, does the
accumulation of the names of God in [Amo
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#013) serve to strengthen the
declaration made by the Lord, who possesses as God of hosts the power to
execute His threats. כּי introduces the substance of what is to be
heard. The punishment of the sins of Israel is to extend even to the
altars of Bethel, the seat of the idolatrous image-worship, the hearth
and home of the religious and moral corruption of the ten tribes. The
smiting off of the horns of the altar is the destruction of the altars
themselves, the significance of which culminated in the horns (see at
[Exo 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#002)). The singular hammizbēăch
(the altar) preceded by a plural is the singular of species (cf. Ges.
108, 1), and does not refer to any particular one - say, for example, to
the principal altar. The destruction of the palaces and houses ([Amo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015)) takes place in the capital. In
the reference to the winter-house and summer-house, we have to think
primarily of the royal palace (cf. [Jer
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#022)); at the same time, wealthy
noblemen may also have had them. על, lit., over, so that the ruins of
one house fall upon the top of another; then "together with," as in [Gen
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#012). בּתּי שׁן, ivory houses, houses
the rooms of which are decorated by inlaid ivory. Ahab had a palace of
this kind ([Kg1 22:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#039), compare [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009)). בּתּים רבּים, not the large
houses, but many houses; for the description is rounded off with these
words. Along with the palaces, many houses will also fall to the ground.
The fulfilment took place when Samaria was taken by Shalmanezer ([Kg2
17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 4](amo004)

</div>
