<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo006)  [Next](amo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 7:0</span></span>

III\. Sights or Visions

The last part of the writings of Amos contains five visions, which
confirm the contents of the prophetic addresses in the preceding part.
The first four visions, however (ch. 7 and [Amo
8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)), are distinguished from the
fifth and last ([Amo 9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)) by the
fact, that whereas the former all commence with the same formula, "Thus
hath the Lord showed me," the latter commences with the words, "I saw
the Lord," etc. They also differ in their contents, inasmuch as the
former symbolize the judgments which have already fallen in part upon
Israel, and in part have still to fall; whilst the latter, on the
contrary, proclaims the overthrow of the old theocracy, and after this
the restoration of the fallen kingdom of God, and its ultimate glory.
And again, of these four, the first and second ([Amo
7:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)) are distinguished from the
third and fourth ([Amo 7:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007), and [Amo
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)) by the fact, that whereas the
former contain a promise in reply to the prophet's intercession, that
Jacob shall be spared, in the latter any further sparing is expressly
refused; so that they are thus formed into two pairs, which differ from
one another both in their contents and purpose. This difference is of
importance, in relation both to the meaning and also to the historical
bearing of the visions. It points to the conclusion, that the first two
visions indicate universal judgments, whilst the third and fourth simply
threaten the overthrow of the kingdom of Israel in the immediate future,
the commencement of which is represented in the fifth and last vision,
and which is then still further depicted in its results in connection
with the realization of the divine plan of salvation.

Visions of the Locusts, the Fire, and the Plumb-Line. The Prophet's
Experience at Bethel - Amos 7

[Amos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 7:1</span></span>

The first two visions. - [Amo 7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001).
The Locusts. - [Amo 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001). "Thus the
Lord Jehovah showed me; and, behold, He formed locusts in the beginning
of the springing up of the second crop; and, behold, it was a second
crop after the king's mowing. [Amo
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#002). And it came to pass, when they
had finished eating the vegetable of the land, I said, Lord Jehovah,
forgive, I pray: how can Jacob stand? for he is small. [Amo
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#003). Jehovah repented of this: It
shall not take place, saith Jehovah." The formula, "Thus the Lord
Jehovah showed me," is common to this and the three following visions
([Amo 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004), [Amo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007), and [Amo
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)), with this trifling difference,
that in the third ([Amo 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007)) the
subject (the Lord Jehovah) is omitted, and 'Adōnâi (the Lord) is
inserted instead, after vehinnēh (and behold). הראני denotes seeing with
the eyes of the mind - a visionary seeing. These visions are not merely
pictures of a judgment which was ever threatening, and drawing nearer
and nearer (Baur); still less are they merely poetical fictions, or
forms of drapery selected arbitrarily, for the purpose of clothing the
prophet's thoughts; but they are inward intuitions, produced by the
Spirit of God, which set forth the punitive judgments of God. Kōh (ita,
thus) points to what follows, and vehinnēh (and behold) introduces the
thing seen. Amos sees the Lord form locusts. Baur proposes to alter יוצר
(forming) into יצר (forms), but without any reason, and without
observing that in all three visions of this chapter hinnēh is followed
by a participle (קרא in [Amo 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004), and
נצּב in [Amo 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007)), and that the
'Adōnâi which stands before נצּב in [Amo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007) shows very clearly that this noun
is simply omitted in [Amo 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001), because
'AdōnâI Yehōvâh has immediately preceded it. גּבי (a poetical form for
גּבה, analogous to שׂדי for שׂדה, and contracted into גּוב in [Nah
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#017)) signifies locusts, the only
question being, whether this meaning is derived from גּוּב = Arab. jâb,
to cut, or from גּבה = Arab. jb‛a, to creep forth (out of the earth).
The fixing of the time has an important bearing upon the meaning of the
vision: viz., "at the beginning of the springing up of the second crop
(of grass);" especially when taken in connection with the explanation,
"after the mowings of the king." These definitions cannot be merely
intended as outward chronological data. For, in the first place, nothing
is known of the existence of any right or prerogative on the part of the
kings of Israel, to have the early crop in the meadow land throughout
the country mown for the support of their horses and mules ([Kg1
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#005)), so that their subjects could
only get the second crop for their own cattle. Moreover, if the second
crop, "after the king's mowings," were to be interpreted literally in
this manner, it would decidedly weaken the significance of the vision.
For if the locusts did not appear till after the king had got in the hay
for the supply of his own mews, and so only devoured the second crop of
grass as it grew, this plague would fall upon the people alone, and not
at all upon the king. But such an exemption of the king from the
judgment is evidently at variance with the meaning of this and the
following visions. Consequently the definition of the time must be
interpreted spiritually, in accordance with the idea of the vision. The
king, who has had the early grass mown, is Jehovah; and the mowing of
the grass denotes the judgments which Jehovah has already executed upon
Israel. The growing of the second crop is a figurative representation of
the prosperity which flourished again after those judgments; in actual
fact, therefore, it denotes the time when the dawn had risen again for
Israel ([Amo 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013)). Then the locusts
came and devoured all the vegetables of the earth. עשׂב הארץ is not the
second crop; for עשׂב does not mean grass, but vegetables, the plants of
the field (see at [Gen 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)). [Amo
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#002) and [Amo
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#003) require that this meaning should
be retained. When the locusts had already eaten the vegetables of the
earth, the prophet interceded, and the Lord interposed with deliverance.
This intercession would have been too late after the consumption of the
second crop. On the other hand, when the vegetables had been consumed,
there was still reason to fear that the consumption of the second crop
of grass would follow; and this is averted at the prophet's
intercession. והיה for ויהי, as in [Sa1
17:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#048); [Jer
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#011), etc. סלח־נא, pray forgive, sc.
the guilt of the people (cf. [Num
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#019)). מי יקוּם, how (מי qualis) can
Jacob (the nation of Israel) stand (not arise), since it is small? קטן,
small, i.e., so poor in sources and means of help, that it cannot endure
this stroke; not "so crushed already, that a very light calamity would
destroy it" (Rosenmller). for נחם על, see [Exo
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014). זאת (this) refers to the
destruction of the people indicated in מי יקוּם; and זאת is also to be
supplied as the subject to לא תהיה.

[Amos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 7:4</span></span>

The Devouring Fire. - [Amo 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004). "Thus
the Lord Jehovah showed me: and, behold, the Lord Jehovah called to
punish with fire; and it devoured the great flood, and devoured the
portion. [Amo 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#005). And I said, Lord
Jehovah, leave off, I pray: how can Jacob stand? for it is small. [Amo
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#006). Jehovah repented of this; this
also shall not take place, said the Lord Jehovah." That the
all-devouring fire represents a much severer judgment than that depicted
under the figure of the locusts, is generally acknowledged, and needs no
proof. But the more precise meaning of this judgment is open to dispute,
and depends upon the explanation of the fourth verse. The object to קרא
is לריב בּאשׁ, and ריב is to be taken as an infinitive, as in [Isa
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#013) : He called to strive (i.e., to
judge or punish) with fire. There is no necessity to supply ministros
suos here. The expression is a concise one, for "He called to the fire
to punish with fire" (for the expression and the fact, compare [Isa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016)). This fire devoured the great
flood. Tehōm rabbâh is used in [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011) and [Isa
51:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010), etc., to denote the
unfathomable ocean; and in [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)
tehōm is the term applied to the immense flood which surrounded and
covered the globe at the beginning of the creation. ואכלה, as
distinguished from ותּאכל, signifies an action in progress, or still
incomplete (Hitzig). The meaning therefore is, "it also devoured (began
to devour) 'eth-hachēleq;" i.e., not the field, for a field does not
form at all a fitting antithesis to the ocean; and still less "the
land," for chēleq never bears this meaning; but the inheritance or
portion, namely, that of Jehovah ([Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)), i.e., Israel. Consequently
tehōm rabbâh cannot, of course, signify the ocean as such. For the idea
of the fire falling upon the ocean, and consuming it, and then beginning
to consume the land of Israel, by which the ocean was bounded (Hitzig),
would be too monstrous; nor is it justified by the simple remark, that
"it was as if the last great conflagration ([Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010)) had begun" (Schmieder). As the
fire is to earthly fire, but the fire of the wrath of God, and therefore
a figurative representation of the judgment of destruction; and as
hachēleq (the portion) is not the land of Israel, but according to
Deuteronomy (l.c.) Israel, or the people of Jehovah; so tehōm rabbâh is
not the ocean, but the heathen world, the great sea of nations, in their
rebellion against the kingdom of God. The world of nature in a state of
agitation is a frequent symbol in the Scriptures for the agitated
heathen world (e.g., [Psa 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003); [Psa
93:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003)). On the latter passage,
Delitzsch has the following apt remark: "The stormy sea is a figurative
representation of the whole heathen world, in its estrangement from God,
and enmity against Him, or the human race outside the true church of
God; and the rivers are figurative representations of the kingdoms of
the world, e.g., the Nile of the Egyptian ([Jer
46:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007)), the Euphrates of the Assyrian
([Isa 8:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007)), or more precisely still,
the arrow-swift Tigris of the Assyrian, and the winding Euphrates of the
Babylonian ([Isa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001))." This
symbolism lies at the foundation of the vision seen by the prophet. The
world of nations, in its rebellion against Jehovah, the Lord and King of
the world, appears as a great flood, like the chaos at the beginning of
the creation, or the flood which poured out its waves upon the globe in
the time of Noah. Upon this flood of nations does fire from the Lord
fall down and consume them; and after consuming them, it begins to
devour the inheritance of Jehovah, the nation of Israel also. The
prophet then prays to the Lord to spare it, because Jacob would
inevitably perish in this conflagration; and the Lord gives the promise
that "this shall not take place," so that Israel is plucked like a
firebrand out of the fire ([Amo 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#011)).

If we inquire now into the historical bearing of these two visions, so
much is priori clear, - namely, that both of them not only indicate
judgments already past, but also refer to the future, since no fire had
hitherto burned upon the surface of the globe, which had consumed the
world of nations and threatened to annihilate Israel. If therefore there
is an element of truth in the explanation given by Grotius to the first
vision, "After the fields had been shorn by Benhadad ([Kg2
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#003)), and after the damage which was
then sustained, the condition of Israel began to flourish once more
during the reign of Jeroboam the son of Joash, as we see from [Kg2
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#015)," according to which the locusts
would refer to the invasion on the part of the Assyrians in the time of
Pul; this application is much too limited, neither exhausting the
contents of the first vision, nor suiting in the smallest degree the
figure of the fire. The "mowing of the king" ([Amo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)) denotes rather all the judgments
which the Lord had hitherto poured out upon Israel, embracing everything
that the prophet mentions in [Amo
4:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#006). The locusts are a figurative
representation of the judgments that still await the covenant nation,
and will destroy it even to a small remnant, which will be saved through
the prayers of the righteous. The vision of the fire has a similar
scope, embracing all the past and all the future; but this also
indicates the judgments that fall upon the heathen world, and will only
receive its ultimate fulfilment in the destruction of everything that is
ungodly upon the face of the earth, when the Lord comes in fire to
strive with all flesh ([Isa 66:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)),
and to burn up the earth and all that is therein, on the day of judgment
and perdition of ungodly men ([Pe2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007), [Pe2
3:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010)). The removal of the two
judgments, however, by Jehovah in consequence of the intercession of the
prophet, shows that these judgments are not intended to effect the utter
annihilation of the nation of God, but simply its refinement and the
rooting out of the sinners from the midst of it, and that, in
consequence of the sparing mercy of God, a holy remnant of the nation of
God will be left. The next two visions refer simply to the judgment
which awaits the kingdom of the ten tribes in the immediate future.

[Amos 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 7:7</span></span>

The Third Vision. - [Amo 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007). "Thus he
showed me: and, behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made with a
plumb-line, and a plumb-line in His hand. [Amo
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#008). And Jehovah said to me, What
seest thou, Amos? And I said, A plumb-line. And the Lord said, Behold, I
put a plumb-line in the midst of my people Israel: I shall pass by it no
more. [Amo 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009). And the sacrificial
heights of Isaac are laid waste, and the holy things of Israel
destroyed; and I rise up against the house of Jeroboam with the sword."
The word אנך, which only occurs here, denotes, according to the dialects
and the Rabbins, tin or lead, here a plumb-line. Chōmath 'ănâkh is a
wall built with a plumb-line, i.e., a perpendicular wall, a wall built
with mechanical correctness and solidity. Upon this wall Amos sees the
Lord standing. The wall built with a plumb-line is a figurative
representation of the kingdom of God in Israel, as a firm and
well-constructed building. He holds in His hand a plumb-line. The
question addressed to the prophet, "What does he see?" is asked for the
simple purpose of following up his answer with an explanation of the
symbol, as in [Jer 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011), [Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013), since the plumb-line was used
for different purposes, - namely, not only for building, but partly also
for pulling buildings down (compare [Kg2
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013); [Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011)). Jehovah will lay it beqerebh
‛ammı̄, to the midst of His people, and not merely to an outward portion
of it, in order to destroy this building. He will no longer spare as He
has done hitherto. עבר ל, to pass by any one without taking any notice
of him, without looking upon his guilt or punishing him; hence, to
spare, - the opposite of עבר בּקרב in [Amo
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#017). The destruction will fall upon
the idolatrous sanctuaries of the land, the bâmōth (see at [Kg1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002)), i.e., the altars of the high
places, and the temples at Bethel, at Daniel (see at [Kg1
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#029)), and at Gilgal (see [Amo
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004)). Isaac (ישׂחק, a softened form
for יצחק, used here and at v. 16, as in [Jer
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#026)) is mentioned here instead of
Jacob, and the name is used as a synonym for Israel of the ten tribes.
Even the house of Jeroboam, the reigning royal family, is to perish with
the sword (קם על as in [Isa 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002)).
Jeroboam is mentioned as the existing representative of the monarchy,
and the words are not to be restricted to the overthrow of his dynasty,
but announce the destruction of the Israelitish monarchy, which actually
was annihilated when this dynasty was overthrown. The destruction of the
sacred places and the overthrow of the monarchy involve the dissolution
of the kingdom. Thus does Amos himself interpret his own words in [Amo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011) and [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017).

[Amos 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 7:10</span></span>

Opposition to the Prophet at Bethel. - The daring announcement of the
overthrow of the royal family excites the wrath of the high priest at
Bethel, so that he relates the affair to the king, to induce him to
proceed against the troublesome prophet ([Amo
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010) and [Amo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011)), and then calls upon Amos
himself to leave Bethel ([Amo 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#012) and
[Amo 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#013)). That this attempt to drive
Amos out of Bethel was occasioned by his prophecy in [Amo
7:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007), is evident from what Amaziah
says to the king concerning the words of Amos. "The priest of Bethel"
(Kōhēn Bēth-ēl) is the high priest at the sanctuary of the golden calf
at Bethel. He accused the prophet to the king of having made a
conspiracy (qâshar; cf. [Kg1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#027),
etc.) against the king, and that "in the midst of the house of Israel,"
i.e., in the centre of the kingdom of Israel - namely at Bethel, the
religious centre of the kingdom - through all his sayings, which the
land could not bear. To establish this charge, he states (in [Amo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011)) that Amos has foretold the death
of Jeroboam by the sword, and the carrying away of the people out of the
land. Amos had really said this. The fact that in [Amo
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009) Jeroboam is named, and not the
house of Jeroboam, makes no difference; for the head of the house if
naturally included in the house itself. And the carrying away of the
people out of the land was not only implied in the announcement of the
devastation of the sanctuaries of the kingdom ([Amo
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009)), which presupposes the conquest
of the land by foes; but Amos had actually predicted it in so many words
([Amo 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#027)). And Amaziah naturally
gave the substance of all the prophet's addresses, instead of simply
confining himself to the last. There is no reason, therefore, to think
of intentional slander.

[Amos 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 7:12</span></span>

The king appears to have commenced no proceedings against the prophet in
consequence of this denunciation, probably because he did not regard the
affair as one of so much danger. Amaziah therefore endeavours to
persuade the prophet to leave the country. "Seer, go, and flee into the
land of Judah." בּרח־לך, i.e., withdraw thyself by flight from the
punishment which threatens thee. "There eat thy bread, and there mayst
thou prophesy:" i.e., in Judah thou mayst earn thy bread by prophesying
without any interruption. It is evident from the answer given by Amos in
[Amo 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014), that this is the meaning of
the words: "But in Bethel thou shalt no longer prophesy, for it is a
king's sanctuary (i.e., a sanctuary founded by the king; [Kg1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028)), and bēth mamlâkhâh," house of
the kingdom, i.e., a royal capital (cf. [Sa1
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#005)), - namely, as being the
principal seat of the worship which the king has established for his
kingdom. There no one could be allowed to prophesy against the king.

[Amos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 7:14</span></span>

Amos first of all repudiates the insinuation that he practises
prophesying as a calling or profession, by which he gets his living. "I
am no prophet," sc. by profession, "and no prophet's son," i.e., not a
pupil or member of the prophets' schools, one who has been trained to
prophesy (on these schools, see the comm. on [Sa1
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024)); but (according to my proper
calling) a bōqēr, lit., a herdsman of oxen (from bâqâr); then in a
broader sense, a herdsman who tends the sheep (צאן), a shepherd; and a
bōlēs shiqmı̄m, i.e., one who plucks sycamores or mulberry-figs, and
lives upon them. The ἁπ. λεγ. bōlēs is a denom. from the Arabic name for
the mulberry-fig, and signifies to gather mulberry-figs and live upon
them; like συκάζειν and ἀποσυκάζειν, i.e., according to Hesych. τὰ σῦκα
τρώγειν, to eat figs. The rendering of the lxx κνίζων, Vulg. vellicans,
points to the fact that it was a common custom to nip or scratch the
mulberry-figs, in order to make them ripen (see Theophr. Hist. plant.
iv. 2; Plin. Hist. nat. 13, 14; and Bochart, Hieroz. i. 384, or p. 406
ed. Ros.); but this cannot be shown to be the true meaning of bōlēs. And
even if the idea of nipping were implied in the word bōlēs, it would by
no means follow that the possession of a mulberry plantation was what
was intended, as many commentators have inferred; for "the words contain
an allusion to the 'eating of bread' referred to in [Amo
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#012), and the fruit is mentioned here
as the ordinary food of the shepherds, who lived at the pasture grounds,
and to whom bread may have been a rarity" (Hitzig). From this calling,
which afforded him a livelihood, the Lord had called him away to
prophesy to His people Israel; so that whoever forbade him to do so, set
himself in opposition to the Lord God.

[Amos 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">amo 7:16</span></span>

In return for this rebellion against Jehovah, Amos foretels to the
priest the punishment which will fall upon him when the judgment shall
come upon Israel, meeting his words, "Thou sayst, Thou shalt not
prophesy," with the keen retort, "Thus saith Jehovah." הטּיף, to drip,
applied to prophesying here and at [Mic
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006), [Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011), and [Eze
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#002), [Eze
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#007), is taken from [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002), "My teaching shall drip as the
rain," etc. Isaac (yishâq) for Israel, as in [Amo
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009). The punishment is thus described
in [Amo 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017) : "Thy wife will be a
harlot in the city," i.e., at the taking of the city she will become a
harlot through violation. His children would also be slain by the foe,
and his landed possession assigned to others, namely, to the fresh
settlers in the land. He himself, viz., the priest, would die in an
unclean land, that is to say, in the land of the Gentiles, - in other
words, would be carried away captive, and that with the whole nation,
the carrying away of which is repeated by Amos in the words which the
priest had reported to the king ([Amo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011)), as a sign that what he has
prophesied will assuredly stand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 8](amo008)

</div>
