<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1019)  [Next](ch1021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)

The account of the siege of Rabbah, the capital, in the following year,
[Ch1 20:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001), is much abridged as
compared with that in [Sa2 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001); [Sa2
12:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026). After the clause, "but David
sat (remained) in Jerusalem," in 2 Sam 11, from [Sa2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002) onwards, we have the story of
David's adultery with Bathsheba, and the events connected with it (2 Sam
11:3-12:25), which the author of the Chronicle has omitted, in
accordance with the plan of his book. Thereafter, in [Sa2
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026), the further progress of the
siege of Rabbah is again taken up with the words, "And Joab warred
against Rabbah of the sons of Ammon;" and in [Sa2
12:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#027) the capture of that city is
circumstantially narrated, viz., how Joab, after he had taken the
water-city, i.e., the city lying on both banks of the upper Jabbok (the
Wady Ammn), with the exception of the Acropolis built on a hill on the
north side of the city, sent messages to David, and called upon him to
gather together the remainder of the people, i.e., all those capable of
bearing arms who had remained in the land; and how David, having done
this, took the citadel. Instead of this, we have in the Chronicle only
the short statement, "And Joab smote Rabbah, and destroyed it" ([Ch1
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001), at the end). After this, both
narratives ([Ch1 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#002), [Ch1
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#003), and [Sa2
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#030), [Sa2
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031)) coincide in narrating how David
set the heavy golden crown of the king of the Ammonites on his head,
brought much booty out of the city, caused the prisoners of war taken in
Rabbah and the other fenced cities of the Ammonites to be slain in the
cruellest way, and then returned with all the people, i.e., with the
whole of his army, to Jerusalem. Thus we see that, according to the
record in the Chronicle also, David was present at the capture of the
Acropolis of Rabbah, then put on the crown of the Ammonite king, and
commanded the slaughter of the prisoners; but no mention is made of his
having gone to take part in the war. By the omission of this
circumstance the narrative of the Chronicle becomes defective; but no
reason can be given for this abridgment of the record, for the contents
of [Sa2 12:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026) must have been
contained in the original documents made use of by the chronicler. On
the differences between [Sa2 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031)
(Sam.) and [Ch1 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#003) of the Chronicle,
see on [Sa2 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031). ויּשׂר, "he sawed
asunder," is the correct reading, and ויּשׂם in Samuel is an
orthographical error; while, on the contrary, בּמּגרות in the Chronicle
is a mistake for בּמגזרות in Samuel. The omission of בּמּלבּן אותם
והעביר is probably explained by the desire to abridge; for if the author
of the Chronicle does not scruple to tell of the sawing asunder of the
prisoners with saws, and the cutting of them to pieces under threshing
instruments and scythes, it would never occur to him to endeavour to
soften David's harsh treatment of them by passing over in silence the
burning of them in brick-kilns.

The passages parallel to the short appendix-like accounts of the valiant
deeds of the Israelitish leaders in [Ch1
20:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#004) are to be found, as has already
been remarked, in [Sa2 21:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#018).
There, however, besides the three exploits of which we are informed by
the chronicler in [Sa2 21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015), a
fourth is recorded, and that in the first place too, viz., the narrative
of David's fight with the giant Jishbi-Benob, who was slain by Abishai
the son of Zeruiah. The reason why our historian has not recounted this
along with the others is clear from the position which he assigns to
these short narratives in his book. In the second book of Samuel they
are recounted in the last section of the history of David's reign, as
palpable proofs of the divine grace of which David had had experience
during his whole life, and for which he there praises the Lord in a
psalm of thanksgiving (2 Sam 22). In this connection, David's
deliverance by the heroic act of Abishai from the danger into which he
had fallen by the fierce attack which the Philistine giant Jishbi-Benob
made upon him when he was faint, is very suitably narrated, as being a
visible proof of the divine grace which watched over the pious king. For
the concluding remark in [Sa2 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017),
that in consequence of this event his captains adjured David not to go
any more into battle along with them, that the light of Israel might not
be extinguished, shows in how great danger he was of being slain by this
giant. For this reason the author of the book of Samuel has placed this
event at the head of the exploits of the Israelite captains which he was
about to relate, although it happened somewhat later in time than the
three exploits which succeed. The author of the Chronicle, on the
contrary, has made the account of these exploits an appendix to the
account of the victorious wars by which David obtained dominion over all
the neighbouring peoples, and made his name to be feared among the
heathen, as a further example of the greatness of the power given to the
prince chosen by the Lord to be over His people. For this purpose the
story of the slaughter of the Philistine giant, who had all but slain
the weary David, was less suitable, and is therefore passed over by the
chronicler, although it was contained in his authority,

(Note: Lightfoot says, in his Chronol. V. T. p. 68: Illud praelium, in
quo David in periculum venit et unde decore et illaesus exire non
potuit, omissum est.)

as is clear from the almost verbal coincidence of the stories which
follow with [Sa2 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#018). The very first
is introduced by the formula, "It happened after this," which in 2nd
Samuel naturally connects the preceding narrative with this; while the
chronicler has retained אהרי־כן as a general formula of transition, -
omitting, however, עוד (Sam.) in the following clause, and writing
ותּעמוד, "there arose," instead of ותּהי. עמד in the later Hebrew is the
same as קוּם. The hypothesis that ותעמד has arisen out of עוד ותּהי (in
Samuel) is not at all probable, although עמד is not elsewhere used of
the origin of a war. Even קוּם is only once ([Gen
41:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#030)) used of the coming, or coming
in, of a time. On בּגזר and ספּי instead of בּנב and סף, see on [Sa2
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#018). ויּכּנעוּ at the end of the
fourth verse is worthy of remark, "And they (the Philistines) were
humbled," which is omitted from Samuel, and "yet can scarcely have been
arbitrarily added by our historian" (Berth.). This remark, however,
correct as it is, does not explain the omission of the word from 2nd
Samuel. The reason for that can scarcely be other than that it did not
seem necessary for the purpose which the author of the book of Samuel
had in the first place in view. As to the two other exploits ([Ch1
20:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#006)), see the commentary on [Sa2
21:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#019). אל for אלּה in the closing
remark ([Ch1 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#008)) is archaic, but the
omission of the article (אל instead of האל, as we find it in [Gen
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#008), [Gen
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#025), and in other passages in the
Pentateuch) cannot be elsewhere paralleled. In the last clause, "And
they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants," that
David should be named is surprising, because none of those here
mentioned as begotten of Rapha, i.e., descendants of the ancient
Raphaite race, had fallen by the hand of David, but all by the hand of
his servants. Bertheau therefore thinks that this clause has been copied
verbatim into our passage, and also into [Sa2
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#022), from the original document,
where this enumeration formed the conclusion of a long section, in which
the acts of David and of his heroes, in their battles with the giants in
the land of the Philistines, were described. But since the author of the
second book of Samuel expressly says, "These four were born to Rapha,
and they fell" ([Sa2 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#022)), he can
have referred in the words, "And they fell by the hand of David," only
to the four above mentioned, whether he took the verse in question
unaltered from his authority, or himself added אלּה את־ערבּעת. In the
latter case he cannot have added the בּיד־דּוד without some purpose; in
the former, the reference of the בּיד־דּוד in the "longer section," from
which the excerpt is taken, to others than the four giants mentioned, to
Goliath perhaps in addition, whom David slew, is rendered impossible by
אלּה את־ערבּעת. The statement, "they fell by the hand of David," does
not presuppose that David had slain all of them, or even one of them,
with his own hand; for בּיד frequently signifies only through, i.e., by
means of, and denotes here that those giants fell in wars which David
had waged with the Philistines - that David had been the main cause of
their fall, had brought about their death by his servants through the
wars he waged.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 21](ch1021)

</div>
