<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1016)  [Next](ch1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 17:1</span></span>

In the Chronicle, as in 2 Samuel 7, the account of the removal of the
ark to the city of David is immediately followed by the narrative of
David's design to build a temple to the Lord; and this arrangement is
adopted on account of the connection between the subjects, though the
events must have been separated by a period of several years. Our
account of this design of David's, with its results for him and for his
kingdom, is in all essential points identical with the parallel account,
so that we may refer to the commentary on 2 Sam 7 for any necessary
explanation of the matter. The difference between the two narratives are
in great part of a merely formal kind; the author of the Chronicle
having sought to make the narrative more intelligible to his
contemporaries, partly by using later phrases current in his own time,
such as אלהים for יהוה, מלכוּת for ממלכה, partly by simplifying and
explaining the bolder and more obscure expressions. Very seldom do we
find divergences in the subject-matter which alter the meaning or make
it appear to be different. To supplement and complete the commentary
already given in 2nd Samuel, we will now shortly treat of these
divergences. In [Ch1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001), the
statement that David communicated his purpose to build a temple to the
Lord to the prophet Nathan, "when Jahve had given him rest from all his
enemies round about," is wanting. This clause, which fixes the time, has
been omitted by the chronicler to avoid the apparent contradiction which
would have arisen in case the narrative were taken chronologically,
seeing that the greatest of David's wars, those against the Philistines,
Syrians, and Ammonites, are narrated only in the succeeding chapter. As
to this, cf. the discussion on [Sa2
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#001).

[1 Chronicles 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch1 17:10</span></span>

In [Ch1 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#010), וּלמיּמים, like
וּלמן־היּום ([Sa2 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#011)), is to be
connected with the preceding בּראשׁונה in this sense: "As in the
beginning (i.e., during the sojourn in Egypt), and onward from the days
when I appointed judges," i.e., during the time of the judges. למן is
only a more emphatic expression for מן, to mark off the time from the
beginning as it were (cf. Ew. 218, b), and is wrongly translated by
Berth. "until the days." In the same verse, והכנעתּי, "I bow, humble all
thine enemies," substantially the same as the והניחתי, "I give thee
peace from all thine enemies" (Sam.); and the suffix in אויביך is not to
be altered, as Berth. proposes, into that of the third person אויביו,
either in the Chronicle or in Samuel, for it is quite correct; the
divine promise returning at the conclusion to David direct, as in the
beginning, [Ch1 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#007) and [Ch1
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#008), while that which is said of the
people of Israel in [Ch1 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#009) and [Ch1
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#010) is only an extension of the
words, "I will destroy all thine enemies before thee" ([Ch1
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#008)).

[1 Chronicles 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch1 17:11</span></span>

In [Ch1 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#011), עם־אבתיך ללכת, "to go
with thy fathers," used of going the way of death, is similar to "to go
the way of all the world" ([Kg1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#002)),
and is more primitive than the more usual אבות עם שׁכב ([Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)). מבּניך יהיה עשׁר, too, is
neither to be altered to suit ממּעיך יצא אשׁר of Samuel; nor can we
consider it, with Berth., an alteration made by the author of the
Chronicle to get rid of the difficulty, that here the birth of Solomon
is only promised, while Nathan's speech was made at a time when David
had rest from all his enemies round about ([Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)), i.e., as is usually supposed, in
the latest years of his life, and consequently after Solomon's birth.
For the difficulty had already been got rid of by the omission of those
words in [Ch1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001); and the word, "I
have cut off all thine enemies from before thee" ([Ch1
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#008)), does not necessarily involve
the destruction of all the enemies who ever rose against David, but
refers, as the connection shows, only to the enemies who up till that
time had attacked him. Had the author of the Chronicle only wished to
get rid of this supposed difficulty, he would simply have omitted the
clause, since "they seed" included the sons of David, and needed no
explanation if nothing further was meant than that one of his sons would
ascend the throne after him. And moreover, the thought, "thy seed, which
shall be among thy sons," which Bertheau finds in the words, would be
expressed in Hebrew by מבּניך אשׁר, while מבּניך יהיה אשׁר signifies,
"who will come out of (from) thy sons;" for מן היה does not denote to be
of one, i.e., to belong to him, but to arise, be born, or go forth, from
one: cf. Ben. [Ch1 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#016); [Ecc
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#020). According to this, the
linguistically correct translation, the words cannot be referred to
Solomon at all, because Solomon was not a descendant of David's sons,
but of David himself.

(Note: As old Lavater has correctly remarked: Si tantum de Salomone hic
locus accipiendus esset, non dixisset: semen quod erit de filiis tuis,
sed quod erit de te.)

The author of the Chronicle has interpreted אחריך את־זרעך theologically,
or rather set forth the Messianic contents of this conception more
clearly than it was expressed in ממּעיך יצא אשׁר. The seed after David,
which will arise from his sons, is the Messiah, whom the prophets
announced as the Son of David, whose throne God will establish for ever
([Ch1 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#012)). This Messianic
interpretation of David's זרע explains the divergence of the
chronicler's text in [Ch1 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#013) and
[Ch1 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#014) from [Sa2
7:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014). For instance, the omission of
the words after בּן in [Sa2 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013), "If
he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men" ([Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)), is the result of the Messianic
interpretation of זרעך, since the reference to the chastisement would of
course be important for the earthly sons of David and the kings of
Judah, but could not well find place in the case of the Messiah. The
only thing said of this son of David is, that God will not withdraw His
grace from him.

The case is exactly similar, with the difference between [Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014) and [Sa2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016). Instead of the words, "And thy
house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee, thy
throne shall be established for ever" (Sam.), the promise runs thus in
the Chronicle: "And I will settle (העמיד, cause to stand, maintain, [Kg1
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#004); [Ch2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#008)) him (the seed arising from thy
sons) in my house and in my kingdom for ever, and his throne shall be
established for evermore." While these concluding words of the promise
are, in the narrative in Samuel, spoken to David, promising to him the
eternal establishment of his house, his kingdom, and his throne, in the
Chronicle they are referred to the seed of David, i.e., the Messiah, and
promise to Him His establishment for ever in the house and kingdom of
God, and the duration of His throne for ever. That בּיתי here does not
signify the congregation of the Lord, the people of Israel, as Berth.
thinks it must be translated, is clear as the sun; for בּית, immediately
preceding, denotes the temple of Jahve, and בּיתי manifestly refers back
to לי בּית ([Ch1 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#012)), while such a
designation of the congregation of Israel or of the people as "house of
Jahve" is unheard of in the Old Testament. The house of Jahve stands in
the same relation to the kingdom of Jahve as a king's palace to his
kingdom. The house which David's seed will build to the Lord is the
house of the Lord in his kingdom: in this house and kingdom the Lord
will establish Him for ever; His kingdom shall never cease; His rule
shall never be extinguished; and He himself, consequently, shall live
for ever. It scarcely need be said that such things can be spoken only
of the Messiah. The words are therefore merely a further development of
the saying, "I will be to him a Father, and I will not take my mercy
away from him, and will establish his kingdom for ever," and tell us
clearly and definitely what is implicitly contained in the promise, that
David's house, kingdom, and throne will endure for ever (Sam.), viz.,
that the house and kingdom of David will be established for ever only
under the Messiah. That this interpretation is correct is proved by the
fact that the divergences of the text of the chronicler from the
parallel narrative cannot otherwise be explained; Thenius and Berth. not
having made even an attempt to show how בּבּיתי והעמדתּיהוּ could have
arisen out of בּיתך ונאמן. The other differences between the texts in
the verses in question, לי (Chron.) for לשׁמי, את־כּסאו for ממלכתּו
כּסּא את ([Ch1 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#012), cf. [Sa2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013)), and לפניך היה מאשׁר instead of
וגו אשׁר שׁאוּל מעם ([Ch1 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#013), cf.
[Sa2 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#015)), are only variations in
expression which do not affect the sense. With reference to the last of
them, indeed, Berth. has declared against Thenius, that the chronicler's
text is thoroughly natural, and bears marks of being more authentic than
that of 2 Sam 7.

In the prayer of thanksgiving contained in [Ch1
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#016) to 27 we meet with the following
divergences from the parallel text, which are of importance for their
effect on the sense.

[1 Chronicles 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch1 17:17</span></span>

Instead of the words האדם תּורת וזאת ([Sa2
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#019)), the Chronicle has המּעלה האדם
כּתור וּראיתני, and sawest me (or, that thou sawest me) after the manner
of men; תּור being a contraction of תּורה = תּורה. ראה, to see, may
denote to visit (cf. [Sa2 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#005); [Kg2
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#029)), or look upon in the sense of
regard, respicere. But the word המּעלה remains obscure in any case, for
elsewhere it occurs only as a substantive, in the significations, "the
act of going up" (or drawing up) ([Ezr
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009)), "that which goes up" ([Eze
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005)), "the step;" while for the
signification "height" (locus superior) only this passage is adduced by
Gesenius in Thes. But even had the word this signification, the word
המּעלה could not signify in loco excelso = in coelis in its present
connection; and further, even were this possible, the translation et me
intuitus es more hominum in coelis gives no tolerable sense. But neither
can המעלה be the vocative of address, and a predicate of God, "Thou
height, Jahve God," as Hgstb. Christol. i. p. 378 trans., takes it, with
many older commentators. The passage [Psa
92:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#009), "Thou art מרום, height,
sublimity for ever, Jahve," is not sufficient to prove that in our verse
המּעלה is predicated of God. Without doubt, המּעלה should go with וגו
ראיתני, and appears to correspond to the למרחוק of the preceding clause,
in the signification: as regards the elevation, in reference to the
going upwards, i.e., the exaltation of my race (seed) on high. The
thought would then be this: After the manner of men, so condescendingly
and graciously, as men have intercourse with each other, hast Thou
looked upon or visited me in reference to the elevation of myself or my
race, - the text of the Chronicle giving an explanation of the parallel
narrative.

(Note: This interpretation of this extremely difficult word corresponds
in sense to the not less obscure words in 2nd Samuel, and gives us, with
any alteration of the text, a more fitting thought than the alterations
in the reading proposed by the moderns. Ewald and Berth. would alter
וראיתני into והראיתני (hiph.), and המעלה into למעלה, in order to get the
meaning, "Thou hast caused me to see like the series of men upwards,"
i.e., the line of men who stretch from David outward into the far future
in unbroken series, which Thenius rightly calls a thoroughly modern
idea. Bttcher's attempt at explanation is much more artificial. He
proposes, in N. k. Aehrenlese, iii. S. 225, to read למעלה...וּראיתני,
and translates: "so that I saw myself, as the series of men who follow
upwards shall see me, i.e., so that I could see myself as posterity will
see me, at the head of a continuous family of rulers:" where the main
idea has to be supplied.)

The divergence in [Ch1 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#018), את־עבדּך
לכבוד אליך instead of אליך לדבּר ([Sa2
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#020)), which cannot be an explanation
or interpretation of Samuel's text, is less difficult of explanation.
The words in Samuel, "What can David say more unto Thee?" have in this
connection the very easily understood signification, What more can I say
of the promise given me? and needed no explanation. When, instead of
this, we read in the Chronicle, "What more can Thy servant add to Thee
in regard to the honour to Thy servant?" an unprejudiced criticism must
hold this text for the original, because it is the more difficult. It is
the more difficult, not only on account of the omission of לדבּר, which
indeed is not absolutely necessary, though serving to explain יוסיף, but
mainly on account of the unusual construction of the nomen כבוד with
את־עבדּך, honour towards Thy servant. The construction יהוה את דּעה is
not quite analogous, for כבוד is not a nomen actionis like דּעה; את־ כבד
is rather connected with the practice which begins to obtain in the
later language of employing את as a general casus obliquus, instead of
any more definite preposition (Ew. 277, d, S. 683f., der 7 Aufl.), and
is to be translated: "honour concerning Thy servant." The assertion that
את־עבדּך is to be erased as a later gloss which has crept into the text,
cuts the knots, but does not untie them. That the lxx have not these
words, only proves that these translators did not know what to make of
them, and so just omitted them, as they have omitted the first clause of
[Ch1 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#019). In [Ch1
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#019) also there is no valid ground
for altering the עבדּך בּעבוּר of the Chronicle to make it correspond to
דּברך בּעבוּר in Samuel; for the words, "for Thy servant's sake," i.e.,
because Thou hast chosen Thy servant, give a quite suitable sense; cf.
the discussion on [Sa2 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#021). In the
second half of the verse, however, the more extended phrases of 2nd
Samuel are greatly contracted.

[1 Chronicles 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch1 17:21</span></span>

The combining of ונוראות גּדלּות with שׁם לך לשׂוּם as one sentence, "to
make Thee a name with great and fearful deeds," is made clearer in 2nd
Samuel by the interpolation of לכם ולעשׂות, "and for you doing great and
fearful things." This explanation, however, does not justify us in
supposing that ולעשׂות has been dropped out of the Chronicle. The words
ונוראות גּדלּות are either to be subordinated in a loose connection to
the clause, to define the way in which God has made Himself a name (cf.
Ew. 283), or connected with שׂוּם in a pregnant sense: "to make Thee a
name, (doing) great and fearful things." But, on the other hand, the
converse expression in Samuel, "fearful things for Thy land, before Thy
people which Thou redeemedst to Thee from Egypt (from) the nations and
their gods," is explained in Chronicles by the interpolation of לגרשׁ:
"fearful things, to drive out before Thy people, which ... nations." The
divergences cannot be explained by the hypothesis that both texts are
mutilated, as is sufficiently shown by the contradictions into which
Thenius and Bertheau have fallen in their attempts so to explain them.

All the remaining divergences of one text from the other are only
variations of the expression, such as involuntarily arise in the
endeavour to give a clear and intelligible narrative, without making a
literal copy of the authority made use of. Among these we include even
להתפּלּל עבדּך מצא, "Thy servant hath found to pray" (1 Chr. 1725), as
compared with להתפּלּל את־לבּו עבדּך מצא, "Thy servant hath found his
heart," i.e., found courage, to pray ([Sa2
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#028)); where it is impossible to
decide whether the author of the books of Samuel has added את־לבּו as an
explanation, or the author of the Chronicle has omitted it because the
phrase "to find his heart" occurs only in this single passage of the Old
Testament. להת עבדּך מצא signifies, Thy servant has reached the point of
directing this prayer to Thee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 18](ch1018)

</div>
