<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2017)  [Next](ch2019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 18:1</span></span>

Jehoshaphat's marriage alliance with Ahab, and his campaign with Ahab
against the Syrians at Ramoth in Gilead. - [Ch2
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#001). Jehoshaphat came into connection
by marriage with Ahab through his son Joram taking Athaliah, a daughter
of Ahab, to wife ([Ch2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#006)); an event
which did not take place on the visit made by Jehoshaphat to Ahab in his
palace at Samaria, and recorded in [Ch2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#002), but which had preceded that by
about nine years. That visit falls in the beginning of the year in which
Ahab was mortally wounded at Ramoth, and died, i.e., the seventeenth
year of Jehoshaphat's reign. But at that time Ahaziah, the son of Joram
and Athaliah, was already from eight to nine years old, since thirteen
years later he became king at the age of twenty-two; [Kg2
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#026), cf. with the chronol. table to 1
Kings 12. The marriage connection is mentioned in order to account for
Jehoshaphat's visit to Samaria ([Ch2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#002)), and his alliance with Ahab in
the war against the Syrians; but it is also introduced by a reference to
Jehoshaphat's riches and his royal splendour, repeated from [Ch2
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#005). In the opinion of many
commentators, this is stated to account for Ahab's willingness to
connect his family by marriage with that of Jehoshaphat. This opinion
might be tenable were it Ahab's entering upon a marriage connection with
Jehoshaphat which is spoken of; but for Jehoshaphat, of whom it is
related that he entered into a marriage connection with Ahab, his own
great wealth could not be a motive for his action in that matter. If we
consider, first, that this marriage connection was very hurtful to the
kingdom of Judah and the royal house of David, since Athaliah not only
introduced the Phoenician idolatry into the kingdom, but also at the
death of Ahaziah extirpated all the royal seed of the house of David,
only the infant Joash of all the royal children being saved by the
princess, a sister of Ahaziah, who was married to the high priest
Jehoiada ([Ch2 22:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#010)); and, second,
that Jehoshaphat was sharply censured by the prophet for his alliance
with the criminal Ahab ([Ch2 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#002).),
and had, moreover, all but forfeited his life in the war ([Ch2
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#034).), - we see that the author of
the Chronicle can only have regarded the marriage connection between
Jehoshaphat and Ahab as a mistake. By introducing this account of it by
a second reference to Jehoshaphat's riches and power, he must therefore
have intended to hint that Jehoshaphat had no need to enter into this
relationship with the idolatrous house of Ahab, but had acted very
inconsiderately in doing so. Schmidt has correctly stated the contents
of the verse thus: Josaphatus cetera dives et gloriosus infelicem
adfinitatem cum Achabo, rege Israelis, contrahit. With which side the
proposals for thus connecting the two royal houses originated we are not
anywhere informed. Even if the conjecture of Ramb., that Ahab proposed
it to Jehoshaphat, be not well founded, yet so much is beyond doubt,
namely, that Ahab not only desired the alliance, but also promoted it by
every means in his power, since it must have been of great importance to
him to gain in Jehoshaphat a strong ally against the hostile pressure of
the Syrians. Jehoshaphat probably entered upon the alliance bono animo
et spe firmandae inter duo regna pacis (Ramb.), without much thought of
the dangers which a connection of this sort with the idolatrous Ahab and
with Jezebel might bring upon his kingdom.

[2 Chronicles 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 18:2</span></span>

The campaign undertaken along with Ahab against the Syrians at Ramoth in
Gilead, with its origin, course, and results for Ahab, is narrated in 1
Kings (in the history of Ahab) in agreement with our narrative, only the
introduction to the war being different here. In [Kg1
22:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#001) it is remarked, in connection
with the preceding wars of Ahab with the Syrians, that after there had
been no war for three years between Aram and Israel, in the third year
Jehoshaphat king of Judah came up to the king of Israel; and the latter,
when he and his servants had determined to snatch away from the Syrians
the city Ramoth in Gilead, which belonged to Israel, called upon
Jehoshaphat to march with him to the war against Ramoth. In the
Chronicle the more exact statement, "in the third year," which is
intelligible only in connection with the earlier history of Ahab, is
exchanged for the indefinite שׁנים לקץ, "at the end of years;" and
mention is made of the festal entertainment which Ahab bestowed upon his
guest and his train (עמּו אשׁר העם), to show the pains which Ahab took
to induce King Jehoshaphat to take part in the proposed campaign. He
killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, ויסיתהוּ ,ecnadn, and
enticed, seduced him to go up with him to Ramoth. הסית, to incite,
entice to anything ([Jdg 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#014)),
frequently to evil; cf. [Deu 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#007),
etc. עלה, to advance upon a land or a city in a warlike sense. The
account which follows of the preparations for the campaign by inquiring
of prophets, and of the war itself, vv. 4-34, is in almost verbal
agreement with 1 Kings 22:5-35. Referring to 1 Kings for the commentary
on the substance of the narrative, we will here only group together
briefly the divergences. Instead of 400 men who were prophets, [Ch2
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#005), in [Kg1
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#005) we have about 400 men. It is a
statement in round numbers, founded not upon exact enumeration, but upon
an approximate estimate. Instead of אהדּל אם...הנלך, [Ch2
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#005), in Kings, [Kg1
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#006), we have אהדּל אם...האלך, both
verbs being in the same number; and so too in [Ch2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#014), where in Kings. [Kg1
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#015), both verbs stand in the plural,
notwithstanding that the answer which follows, והצלח עלה, is addressed
to Ahab alone, not to both the kings, while in the Chronicle the answer
is given in the plural to both the kings, והצליחוּ עלוּ. in [Ch2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#007), "he prophesies me nothing good,
but all his days (i.e., so long as he has been a prophet) evil," the
meaning is intensified by the כּל־ימיו, which is not found in [Kg1
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#008). In [Ch2
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#009), the ויושׁבים, which is
introduced before the בּגרן, "and sitting upon the threshing-floor," is
due to difference of style, for it is quite superfluous for the
signification. In [Ch2 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#015), the
ambiguous words of Micah,' and Jahve will give into the hand of the
king" ([Kg1 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#015)), are given in a
more definite form: "and they (the enemy) shall be given into your
hand." In [Ch2 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#019), in the first
כּכה אמר זה, the אמר after the preceding ויּאמר is not only superfluous,
but improper, and has probably come into the text by a copyist's error.
We should therefore read only בּכה זה, corresponding to the כּכה זה of
[Kg1 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020) : "Then spake one after
this manner, and the other spake after another manner." In [Ch2
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#023), the indefinite אי־זה of [Kg1
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#024), is elucidated by הדּרך זה אי,
"is that the manner" (cf. [Kg1 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#012);
[Kg2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#008))., and the verb. עבר follows
without the relative pronoun, as in the passages cited. In [Ch2
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#030), only הרכב שׂרי of the king are
mentioned, without any statement of the number, which is given in [Kg1
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#031), with a backward reference to
the former war ([Kg1 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#024)). In [Ch2
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#031), after the words, "and
Jehoshaphat cried out," the higher cause of Jehoshaphat's rescue is
pointed out in the words, "and Jahve helped him, and God drove them from
him," which are not found in [Kg1
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#032); but by this religious
reflection the actual course of the event is in no way altered.
Bertheau's remark, therefore, that "the words disturb the clear
connection of the events," is quite unwarrantable. Finally, in [Ch2
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#034), מעמיד היה, he was holding his
position, i.e., he held himself standing upright, the Hiph. is more
expressive than the Hoph. מעמד ([Kg1
22:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#035)), since it expresses more
definitely the fact that he held himself upright by his own strength.
With Ahab's death, which took place in the evening at the time of the
going down of the sun, the author of the Chronicle concludes his account
of this war, and proceeds in [Ch2
19:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001) to narrate the further course
of Jehoshaphat's reign. In [Kg1
22:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#036), the return of the defeated
army, and the details as to Ahab's death and burial, are recorded; but
these did not fit into the plan of the Chronicle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 19](ch2019)

</div>
