<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2024)  [Next](ch2026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 25:1</span></span>

The statement as to the duration and spirit of the reign agrees with
[Kg2 14:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001), except that in [Ch2
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#002) the estimation of the spirit of
the reign according to the standard of David, "only not as his ancestor
David, but altogether as his father Joash did," which we find in the
book of Kings, is replaced by "only not with a perfect heart;" and the
standing formula, "only the high places were not removed," etc., is
omitted.

[2 Chronicles 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 25:5</span></span>

The succeeding section, [Ch2 25:5-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005),
enlarges upon Amaziah's preparations for war with Edom, which had
revolted under Joram of Judah, [Kg2
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#022); upon the victory over the
Edomites in the Valley of Salt, and on the results of this war; - on all
which we have in [Kg2 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007) only this
short note: "he smote Edom in the valley of Salt 10,000 men, and took
Selah in war, and called its name Joktheel unto this day." But the more
exact statements of the Chronicle as to the preparations and the results
of this war and victory are important for Amaziah's later war with Kings
Joash of Israel, which is narrated in [Ch2
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017). of our chapter, because in them
lie the causes of that war, so fatal to Amaziah; so that the history of
Amaziah is essentially supplemented by those statements of the Chronicle
which are not found in 2 Kings.

[Ch2 25:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005)

The preparations for the war against Edom, and the victory over the
Edomites in the Valley of Salt. - [Ch2
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005). Amaziah assembled Judah, i.e.,
the men in his kingdom capable of bearing arms, and set them up (ordered
them) according to the princes of thousands and hundreds, of all Judah
and Benjamin, and passed them in review, i.e., caused a census to be
taken of the men liable to military service from twenty years old and
upward. They found 300,000 warriors "bearing spear and target" (cf. [Ch2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007)); a relatively small number, not
merely in comparison with the numbers under Jehoshaphat, [Ch2
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#014)., which are manifestly too
large, but also with the numberings made by other kings, e.g., Asa, [Ch2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007). By Joram's unfortunate wars,
[Ch2 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#017), those of Ahaziah, and
especially by the defeat which Joash sustained from the Syrians, [Ch2
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#023), the number of men in Judah fit
for war may have been very much reduced. Amaziah accordingly sought to
strengthen his army against the Edomites, according to [Ch2
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#006), by having an auxiliary corps of
100,000 men from Israel (of the ten tribes) for 100 talents of silver,
i.e., he took them into his pay. But a prophet advised him not to take
the Israelitish host with him, because Jahve was not with Israel, viz.,
on account of their defection from Jahve by the introduction of the
calf-worship. To Israel there is added, (with) all the sons of Ephraim,
to guard against any misunderstanding.

[Ch2 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#008)

Amaziah is to go alone, and show himself valiant in war, and the Lord
will help him to conquer. This is without doubt the thought in [Ch2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#008), which, however, does not seem to
be contained in the traditional Masoretic text. האל יכשׁילך can hardly,
after the preceding imperatives - do, be strong for battle - be
otherwise translated than by, "and God will cause thee to stumble before
the enemy." But this is quite unsuitable. Clericus, therefore, would
take the words ironically: sin minus, tu vadito, etc.; i.e., if thou
dost not follow my advice, and takest the Israelites with thee to the
war, go, show thyself strong for the war, God will soon cause thee to
stumble. But אם כּי can never signify sin minus. Others, as Schmidt and
Ramb., translate: Rather do thou go alone (without the Israelitish
auxiliaries), and be valiant, alioquin enim, si illos tecum duxeris,
corruere te faciet Deus; or, May God make thee fall before the enemy (De
Wette). But the supplying of alioquin, which is only hidden by De
Wette's translation, cannot be grammatically justified. This
interpretation of the יכשׁילך would be possible only if the negation לא
אם כּי stood in the preceding clause and יכשׁילך was joined to it by ו.
The traditional text is clearly erroneous, and we must, with Ewald and
Berth., supply a לא or ולא before יכשׁילך: God thou (alone), do, be
valiant for battle, and God will not let thee come to ruin.

(Note: Even the old translators could make nothing of the present text,
and expressed the first clause of the verse as they thought best. lxx,
ὅτι ἐὰν ὑπολάβης κατασχῦσαι ἐν τούτοις; Vulg., quod si putes in robore
exercitus bella consistere; after which Luth., "denn so du komest das du
eine knheit beweisest im streit, wird Gott dich fallen lassen fr deinen
Feinden.")

After this we have very fittingly the reason assigned: "for with God
there is power to help, and to cause to fall."

[Ch2 25:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#009)

Amaziah had regard to this exhortation of the prophet, and asked him
only what he should do for the 100 talents of silver which he had paid
the Israelite auxiliary corps; to which the prophet answered that Jahve
could give him more than that sum. Amaziah thereupon dismissed the hired
Ephraimite mercenaries. יבדּילם, he separated them (sc., from his army
prepared for battle), viz., the band, that they might go to their place,
i.e., might return home. The ל before הגּדוּד is nota accus., and
להגּדוּד is in apposition to the suffix in יבדּילם. But the auxiliaries
thus dismissed returned home full of wrath against Judah, and afterwards
fell upon the border cities of Judah, wasting and plundering ([Ch2
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#013)). Their anger probably arose
from the fact that by their dismissal the opportunity of making a rich
booty in war was taken away.

[Ch2 25:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#011)

But Amaziah courageously led his people into the Valley of Salt, and
smote the Edomites. התחזק, as in [Ch2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008), refers back to חזק, [Ch2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#008) : he showed himself strong,
according to the word of the prophet. As to the Valley of Salt, see on
[Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013) and [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012). Besides the 10,000 slain in the
battle, the men of Judah took 10,000 other Edomites prisoners, whom they
cast from the top of a rock. This statement is wanting in [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007), where, instead of it, the
capture of the city Sela (Petra) is mentioned. The conjecture of
Thenius, that this last statement of the Chronicle has been derived from
a text of the Kings which had become illegible at this place, has
already been rejected as untenable by Bertheau. Except the word סלע, the
two texts have nothing in common with each other; but it does suggest
itself that הסּלע ראשׁ, the top of the rock (which has become famous by
this event), is to be looked for in the neighbourhood of the city Selah,
as the war was ended only by the capture of Selah. Besides the battle in
the Valley of Salt there were still further battles; and in the numbers
10,000, manifestly the whole of the prisoners taken in the war are
comprehended, who, as irreconcilable enemies of Judah, were not made
slaves, but were slain by being thrown down from a perpendicular rock.

[Ch2 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#013)

The Ephraimite host dismissed by Amaziah fell plundering upon the cities
of Judah, and smote of them (the inhabitants of these cities) 3000, and
carried away great booty. They would seem to have made this devastating
attack on their way home; but to this idea, which at first suggests
itself, the more definite designation of the plundered cities, "from
Samaria to Bethhoron," does not correspond, for these words can scarcely
be otherwise understood than as denoting that Samaria was the
starting-point of the foray, and not the limit up to which the plundered
cities reached. For this reason Berth. thinks that this attack upon the
northern cities of Judah was probably carried out only at a later
period, when Amaziah and his army were in Edom. The latter is certainly
the more probable supposition; but the course of events can hardly have
been, that the Ephraimite auxiliary corps, after Amaziah had dismissed
it, returned home to Samaria, and then later, when Amaziah had marched
into the Valley of Salt, made this attack upon the cities of Judah,
starting from Samaria. It is more probable that the dismissal of this
auxiliary corps, which Amaziah had certainly obtained on hire from King
Joash, happened after they had been gathered together in Samaria, and
had advanced to the frontier of Judah. Then, roused to anger by their
dismissal, they did not at once separate and return home; but, Amaziah
having meanwhile taken the field against the Edomites with his army,
made an attack upon the northern frontier cities of Judah as far as
Bethhoron, plundering as they went, and only after this plundering did
they return home. As to Bethhoron, now Beit-Ur, see on [Ch1
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#024).

[Ch2 25:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014)

Amaziah's idolatry. - [Ch2 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014). On
his return from smiting the Edomites, i.e., from the war in which he had
smitten the Edomites, Amaziah brought the gods (images) of the sons of
Seir (the inhabitants of Mount Seir) with him, and set them up as gods,
giving them religious adoration.

(Note: This statement, which is not found in 2 Kings 14, may, in the
opinion of Berth., perhaps not rest upon a definite tradition, but be
merely the application of a principle which generally was found to act
in the history of Israel to a particular case; i.e., it may be a
clothing in historical garments of the principle that divine punishment
came upon the idolatrous king, because it does not agree with the
statement of [Kg2 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#003). In that
passage it is said of Amaziah: He did what was right in the eyes of
Jahve, only not as David; altogether as his father Joash had done, did
he. But Joash allowed his princes, after Jehoiada's death, to worship
idols and Asheras, and had caused the prophet Zechariah, who reproved
this idolatry, to be stoned. These are facts which, it is true, are
narrated only in the Chronicle, but which are admitted by Bertheau
himself to be historical. Now if Amaziah did altogether the same as his
father Joash, who allowed idolatry, etc., it is hard indeed to see
wherein the inconsistency of our account of Amaziah's idolatry with the
character assigned to this king in [Kg2
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#003) consists. Bertheau has omitted to
give us any more definite information on this point.)

In order to turn him away from this sin, which would certainly kindle
Jahve's wrath, a prophet said to Amaziah, "Why dost thou seek the gods
of the people, who have not delivered their people out of your hand?"
The prophet keeps in view the motive which had induced the king to set
up and worship the Edomite idols, viz., the belief of all polytheists,
that in order to make a people subject, one must seek to win over their
gods (cf. on this belief that remarks on [Num
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#017)), and exposes the folly of this
belief by pointing out the impotence of the Edomite idols, which Amaziah
himself had learnt to know.

[Ch2 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#016)

The king, however, in his blindness puts aside this earnest warning with
proud words: "Have we made thee a counsellor of the king? Forbear, why
should they smite thee?" נתנּוּך is spoken collectively: We, the king,
and the members of the council. And the prophet ceased, only answering
the king thus: "I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because
thou hast done this (introduced Edomite idols), and hast not hearkened
unto my counsel." The prophet calls his warning "counsel," referring to
the king's word, that he was not appointed a counsellor to the king.

[2 Chronicles 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 25:17</span></span>

The war with Joash, king of Israel. - Instead of following the counsel
of the prophet, Amaziah consulted (sc., with his public officials or
courtiers), and challenged King Joash of Israel to war. The challenge,
and the war which followed, are also narrated in [Kg2
14:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#008) in agreement with our account,
and have been already commented upon at that place, where we have also
considered the occasion of this war, so fatal to Amaziah and the kingdom
of Judah, on account of which has been handed down to us only in the
supplementary narrative of the Chronicle. לך in [Ch2
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017) for לכה, come, as in [Num
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#013) and [Jdg
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#013). - In [Ch2
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#020) the chronicler explains
Amaziah's refusal to hear the warning of Joash before the war with him,
by a reference to the divine determination: "For it (came) of God (that
Amaziah still went to war), that He might deliver them (the men of
Judah) into the hand, because they had sought the gods of Edom." בּיד
נתן, to give into the power of the enemy. - In [Ch2
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#023), הפּונה שׁער is a manifest error
for הפּנּה ([Kg2 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013)). Were הפּונה,
the gate that turns itself, faces (in some direction), correct, the
direction would have to be given towards which it turned, e.g., [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003). - וגו וכל־הזּהב, [Ch2
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#024), still depends upon תּפשׂ, [Ch2
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#023) : and (took away) all the gold,
etc. In [Kg2 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#014), ולקח is supplied.

[2 Chronicles 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch2 25:25</span></span>

The end of Amaziah's reign; cf. [Kg2
14:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017). - Although conquered and
taken prisoner by Joash, Amaziah did not lose the throne. For Joash,
contented with the carrying away of the treasures of the temple and of
the palace, and the taking of hostages, set him again at liberty, so
that he continued to reign, and outlived Joash by about fifteen years.

[Ch2 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#026)

On the book of the kings of Judah and Israel, see the Introduction.

[Ch2 25:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#027)

On the conspiracy against Amaziah, his death, etc., see the commentary
on [Kg2 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017). יהוּדה בּעיר, in the
city of Judah, is surprising, since everywhere else "the city of David"
is mentioned as the burial-place, and even in our passage all the
ancient versions have "in the city of David." יהוּדה would therefore
seem to be an orthographical error for דויד, occasioned by the
immediately following יהוּדה.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 26](ch2026)

</div>
