<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2014)  [Next](ch2016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 15:1</span></span>

The prophet Azariah's exhortation to faithful cleaving to the Lord, and
the solemn renewal of the covenant. - [Ch2
15:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001). The prophet's speech. The
prophet Azariah, the son of Oded, is mentioned only here. The conjecture
of some of the older theologians, that עודד was the same person as עדּו
([Ch2 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015); [Ch2
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029)), has no tenable foundation.
Azariah went to meet the king and people returning from the war (לפני
יצא, he went forth in the presence of Asa, i.e., coming before him; cf.
[Ch2 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#009); [Ch1
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#017); [Ch1
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#008)). "Jahve was with you (has given
you the victory), because ye were with Him (held to Him)." Hence the
general lesson is drawn: If ye seek Him, He will be found of you (cf.
[Jer 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#013)); and if ye forsake Him, He
will forsake you (cf. [Ch2 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020); [Ch2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005)). To impress the people deeply
with this truth, Azariah draws a powerful picture of the times when a
people is forsaken by God, when peace and security in social intercourse
disappear, and the terrors of civil war prevail. Opinions as to the
reference intended in this portrayal of the dreadful results of
defection from God have been from antiquity very much divided. Tremell.
and Grot., following the Targ., take the words to refer to the condition
of the kingdom of the ten tribes at that time; others think they refer
to the past, either to the immediately preceding period of the kingdom
of Judah, to the times of the defection under Rehoboam and Abijah,
before Asa had suppressed idolatry (Syr., Arab., Raschi), or to the more
distant past, the anarchic period of the judges, from Joshua's death,
and that of the high priest Phinehas, until Eli and Samuel's reformation
(so especially Vitringa, de synag. vet. p. 335ff.). Finally, still
others (Luther, Clericus, Budd., etc.) interpret the words as prophetic,
as descriptive of the future, and make them refer either to the unquiet
times under the later idolatrous kings, to the times of the Assyrian or
Chaldean exile (Kimchi), or to the condition of the Jews since the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans up till the present day. Of these
three views, the first, that which takes the reference to be to the
present, i.e., the state of the kingdom of the ten tribes at that time,
is decidedly erroneous; for during the first thirty years of the
existence of that kingdom no such anarchic state of things existed as is
portrayed in vv. 5 and 6, and still less could a return of the ten
tribes to the Lord at that time be spoken of ([Ch2
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#004)). It is more difficult to decide
between the two other main views. The grounds which Vitr., Ramb., Berth.
adduce in support of the reference to the times of the judges are not
convincing; for the contents and form ([Ch2
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#004)) do not prove that here something
is asserted which has been confirmed by history, and still less is it
manifest ([Ch2 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005)) that past times
are pointed to. Whether the statement about the return to Jahve in the
times of trouble ([Ch2 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#004)) refers to
the past or to the future, depends upon whether the past or future is
spoken of in [Ch2 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#003). But the
unquiet condition of things portrayed in [Ch2
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005) corresponds partly to various
times in the period of the judges; and if, with Vitr., we compare the
general characteristics of the religious condition of the times of the
judges ([Jdg 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010).), we might
certainly say that Israel in those times was without אמת אלהי, as it
again and again forsook Jahve and served the Baals. And moreover,
several examples of the oppression of Israel portrayed in [Ch2
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005) and [Ch2
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#006) may be adduced from the time of
the judges. Yet the words in [Ch2
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#006), even when their rhetorical
character is taken into account, are too strong for the anarchic state
of things during the period of the judges, and the internal struggles of
that time ([Jdg 12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001) and 2 Chron
20). And consequently, although Vitr. and Ramb. think that a reference
to experiences already past, and oppressions already lived through,
would have made a much deeper impression than pointing forward to future
periods of oppression, yet Ramb. himself remarks, nihilominus tamen in
saeculis Asae imperium antegressis vix ullum tempus post ingressum in
terram Canaan et constitutam rempubl. Israel. posse ostendi, cui omnia
criteria hujus orationis propheticae omni ex parte et secundum omnia
pondera verbis insita conveniant. But, without doubt, the omission of
any definite statement of the time in [Ch2
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#003) is decisive against the exclusive
reference of this speech to the past, and to the period of the judges.
The verse contains no verb, so that the words may just as well refer to
the past as to the future. The prophet has not stated the time
definitely, because he was giving utterance to truths which have force
at all times,

(Note: As Ramb. therefore rightly remarks, "Vatem videri consulto
abstinuisse a determinatione temporis, ut vela sensui quam amplissime
panderentur, verbaque omnibus temporum periodis adplicari possent, in
quibus criteria hic recensita adpareant.")

and which Israel had had experience of already in the time of the
judges, but would have much deeper experience of in the future.

We must take the words in this general sense, and supply neither a
preterite nor a future in [Ch2 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#003),
neither fuerant nor erunt, but must express the first clause by the
present in English: "Many days are for Israel (i.e., Israel lives many
days) without the true God, and without teaching priests, and without
law." רבּים ימים is not accus. of time (Berth.), but the subject of the
sentence; and אלה ללא is not subject - "during many days there was to
the people Israel no true God" (Berth.), - but predicate, while ל
expresses the condition into which anything comes, and לא forms part of
the following noun: Days for Israel for having not a true God. ללא
differs from בּלא, "without," just as ל differs from בּ; the latter
expressing the being in a condition, the former the coming into it. On
אמת אלהי, cf. [Jer 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010). אמת כּהן is
not to be limited to the high priest, for it refers to the priests in
general, whose office it was to teach the people law and justice ([Lev
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#010); [Deu
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010)). The accent is upon the
predicates אמת and אמת. Israel had indeed Elohim, but not the true God,
and also priests, but not priests who attended to their office, who
watched over the fulfilment of the law; and so they had no תּורה,
notwithstanding the book of the law composed by Moses.

[2 Chronicles 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 15:5</span></span>

"And in these times is no peace to those going out or to those coming
in." Free peaceful intercommunication is interfered with (cf. [Jdg
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006); [Jdg
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002)), but great terrors upon all
inhabitants of the lands (הערצות are, according to the usage of the
chronicler, the various districts of the land of Israel).

[2 Chronicles 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 15:6</span></span>

"And one people is dashed in pieces by the other, and one city by the
other; for God confounds them by all manner of adversity." המם denotes
confusion, which God brings about in order to destroy His enemies ([Exo
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024); [Jos
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010); [Jdg
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#015)). Days when they were without the
true God, without teaching prophets, and without law, Israel had already
experienced in the times of defection after Joshua (cf. [Jdg
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011).), but will experience them in
the future still oftener and more enduringly under the idolatrous kings
in the Assyrian and Babylonian exile, and still even now in its
dispersion among all nations. That this saying refers to the future is
also suggested by the fact that Hosea ([Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004)) utters, with a manifest reference
to [Ch2 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#003) of our speech, a threat
that the ten tribes will be brought into a similar condition (cf. [Hos
9:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003)); and even Moses proclaimed to
the people that the punishment of defection from the Lord would be
dispersion among the heathen, where Israel would be compelled to serve
idols of wood and stone ([Deu 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#027).,
[Deu 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#036), [Deu
28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064)), i.e., would be without the
true God. That Israel would, in such oppression, turn to its God, would
seek Him, and that the Lord would be found of them, is a thought also
expressed by Moses, the truth of which Israel had not only had repeated
experience of during the time of the judges, but also would again often
experience in the future (cf. [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005); [Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001); [Eze
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#024).; [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025).). בּצּר־לו refers back to [Deu
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#030); the expression in [Ch2
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#004) is founded upon [Deu
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029) (cf. [Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)). - Of the oppression in the
times of defection portrayed in [Ch2
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005)., Israel had also had in the time
of the judges repeated experience (cf. [Jdg
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)), most of all under the Midianite
yoke ([Jdg 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002)); but such times often
returned, as the employment of the very words of the first hemistich of
[Ch2 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005) in [Zac
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#010), in reference to the events of
the post-exilic time, shows; and not only the prophet Amos ([Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)) sees רבּות מהוּמות, great
confusions, where all is in an indistinguishable whirl in the Samaria of
his time, but they repeated themselves at all times when the defection
prevailed, and godlessness degenerated into revolution and civil war.
Azariah portrays the terrors of such times in strong colours ([Ch2
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#006)): "Dashed to pieces is people by
people, and city by city." The war of the tribes of Israel against
Benjamin (Judg 20:f.), and the struggle of the Gileadites under Jephthah
with Ephraim ([Jdg 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#004).), were civil
wars; but they were only mild preludes of the bellum omnium contra omnes
depicted by Azariah, which only commenced with the dissolution of both
kingdoms, and was announced by the later prophets as the beginning of
the judgment upon rebellious Israel (e.g., [Isa
9:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#017)), and upon all peoples and
kingdoms hostile to God ([Zac 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#013);
[Mat 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007)). With הממם אלהים כּי cf.
רבּה יי מהוּמת, [Zac 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#013). To this
portrayal of the dread results of defection from the Lord, Azariah adds
([Ch2 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#007)) the exhortation, "Be ye
strong (vigorous), and show yourselves not slack, languid" (cf. [Zep
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#016); [Neh
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#009)); i.e., in this connection,
proceed courageously and vigorously to keep yourselves true to the Lord,
to exterminate all idolatry; then you shall obtain a great reward: cf.
on these words, [Jer 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#016).

[2 Chronicles 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 15:8</span></span>

Completion of the reform in worship, and the renewal of the covenant. -
[Ch2 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008). The speech and prophecy of
the prophet strengthened the king to carry out the work he had begun,
viz., the extirpation of idolatry from the whole land. In [Ch2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008) the words הנּניא עדד are
surprising, not only because the prophet is called in [Ch2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001), not Oded, but Azariah the son of
Oded, but also on account of the preceding הנּבוּאה in the absolute
state, which cannot stand, without more ado, for the stat. constr.
נבוּאת (cf. [Ch2 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029)). The view of
Cler. and Ew., that by an orthographical error בּן עזריהוּ has been
dropped out, does not remove the difficulty, for it leaves the stat.
absol. הנּבוּאה .lo unexplained. This is also the case with the attempt
to explain the name Oded in [Ch2 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008)
by transposing the words Azariah ben Oded, [Ch2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001), so as to obtain Oded ben Azariah
(Movers); and there seems to be no other solution of the difficulty than
to strike out the words Oded the prophet from the text as a gloss which
has crept into it (Berth.), or to suppose that there is a considerable
hiatus in the text caused by the dropping out of the words בּן עזריהוּ
דּבּר אשׁר.

(Note: C. P. Caspari, der Syrisch-ephraimitische Krieg, Christian. 1849,
S. 51, explains the absol. הנּבוּאה by an ellipse, as in [Isa
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014); [Isa
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011), "the prophecy (that) of Oded,"
but answers the question why Oded is used in [Ch2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008) instead of Azarjahu ben Oded by
various conjectures, none of which can be looked upon as probable.)

התחזק corresponds to חזקוּ. Asa complied with the exhortation, and
removed (ויּעבר, as in [Kg1 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#012)) all
abominations (idols) from the whole land, and from the cities which he
had taken from Mount Ephraim: these are the cities which Asa's father
Abijah had conquered, [Ch2 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019). "And
he renewed the altar before the porch," i.e., the altar of
burnt-offering, which might stand in need of repairs sixty years after
the building of the temple. The Vulg. is incorrect in translating
dedicavit, and Berth. in supposing that the renovation refers only to a
purification of it from defilement by idolatry. חדּשׁ is everywhere to
renew, repair, restaurare; cf. [Ch2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#004). - But in order to give internal
stability to the reform he had begun, Asa prepared a great sacrificial
festival, to which he invited the people out of all the kingdom, and
induced them to renew the covenant with the Lord. [Ch2
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009). He gathered together the whole
of Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers out of Ephraim, Manasseh, and
Simeon, who dwelt among them. Strangers, i.e., Israelites from the ten
tribes, had come over as early as Rehoboam's reign to the kingdom of
Judah ([Ch2 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#016)); these immigrations
increased under Asa when it was seen that Jahve was with him, and had
given him a great victory over the Cushites. It is surprising that
Simeon should be mentioned among the tribes from which Israelites went
over to the kingdom of Judah, since Simeon had received his heritage in
the southern district of the tribal domain of Judah, so that at the
division of the kingdom it would not well separate itself from Judah,
and join with the tribes who had revolted from the house of David. The
grouping together of Simeon, Ephraim, and Manasseh, both in our verse
and in [Ch2 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#006), can consequently
scarcely be otherwise explained than by the supposition, either from the
cities assigned to them under Joshua into districts in the northern
kingdom (Berth.), or that the Simeonites, though politically united with
Judah, yet in religious matters were not so, but abstained from taking
part in the Jahve-worship in Jerusalem, and had set up in Beersheba a
worship of their own similar to that in Bethel and Dan. In such a case,
the more earnest and thoughtful people from Simeon, as well as from
Ephraim and Manasseh, may have gone to Jerusalem to the sacrificial
festival prepared by Asa. In favour of this last supposition we may
adduce the fact that the prophet Amos, [Amo
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#005); [Amo
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004); [Amo
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014), mentions Beersheba, along with
Bethel and Gilgal, as a place to which pilgrimages were made by the
idolatrous Israelites.

[2 Chronicles 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 15:10</span></span>

At this festival, which was held on the third month of the fifteenth
year of Asa's reign, they offered of the booty, i.e., of the cattle
captured in the war against the Cushites ([Ch2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014)), 700 oxen and 7000 sheep.
הביאוּ מן־השּׁלל defines the ויּזבּחוּ more closely: they sacrificed,
viz., from the booty they offered. From this it seems to follow that the
sacrificial festival was held soon after the return from the war against
the Cushites. The attack of the Cushite Zerah upon Judah can only have
occurred in the eleventh year of Asa, according to [Ch2
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001); but it is not stated how long
the war lasted, nor when Asa returned to Jerusalem ([Ch2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014)) after conquering the enemy and
plundering the towns of the south land. But Asa may quite well have
remained longer in the south after the Cushites had been driven back, in
order again firmly to establish his rule there; and on his return to
Jerusalem, in consequence of the exhortation of the prophet Azariah, may
have straightway determined to hold a sacrificial festival at which the
whole people should renew the covenant with the Lord, and have set apart
and reserved a portion of the captured cattle for this purpose.

[2 Chronicles 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 15:12</span></span>

And they entered into the covenant, i.e., they renewed the covenant,
bound themselves by a promise on oath (שׁבוּעה, [Ch2
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#014)) to hold the covenant, viz., to
worship Jahve the God of the fathers with their whole heart and soul;
cf. [Deu 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029). With בּבּרית בּוא, cf.
[Jer 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#010).

[2 Chronicles 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 15:13</span></span>

To attest the sincerity of their return to the Lord, they determined at
the same time to punish defection from Jahve on the part of any one,
without respect to age or sex, with death, according to the command in
[Deu 17:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002). ליהוה דרשׁ לא, not to
worship Jahve, is substantially the same as to serve other gods, [Deu
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#003). This they swore aloud and
solemnly, בּתרוּעה, with joyful shouting and the sound of trumpets and
horns.

[2 Chronicles 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 15:15</span></span>

This return to the Lord brought joy to all Judah, i.e., to the whole
kingdom, because they had sworn with all their heart, and sought the
Lord בכל־רצונם, with perfect willingness and alacrity. Therefore Jahve
was found of them, and gave them rest round about. - In [Ch2
15:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#016), in conclusion, everything
which still remained to be said of Asa's efforts to promote the
Jahve-worship is gathered up. Even the queen-mother Maachah was deposed
by him from the dignity of ruler because she had made herself an image
of Asherah; yet he did not succeed in wholly removing the altars on the
high places from the land, etc. These statements are also to be found in
[Kg1 15:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013), and are commented upon
at that place. Only in the Chronicle we have אסא אם instead of אמּו
(Kings), because there Maachah had just been named ([Ch2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#010)); and to the statement as to the
abolition of idolatry, ירק, crushed, is added, and in [Ch2
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#017) מיּשׂראל; while, on the other
hand, after שׁלם, יהוה עם is omitted, as not being necessary to the
expression of the meaning.

[2 Chronicles 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 15:19</span></span>

[Ch2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#019) is different from [Kg1
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#016). In the latter passage it is
said: war was between Asa and Baasha the king of Israel כּל־ימיהם, i.e.,
so long as both reigned contemporaneously; while in the Chronicle it is
said: war was not until the thirty-fifth year of Asa's reign. This
discrepancy is partly got rid of by taking מלחמה in the book of Kings to
denote the latent hostility or inimical attitude of the two kingdoms
towards each other, and in the Chronicle to denote a war openly
declared. The date, until the thirty-fifth year, causes a greater
difficulty; but this has been explained in [Ch2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001) by the supposition that in the
thirty-sixth year of Asa's reign war broke out between Asa and Baasha,
when the meaning of our 16th verse would be: It did not come to war with
Baasha until the thirty-sixth year of Asa's rule. For further remarks on
this, see on [Ch2 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 16](ch2016)

</div>
