<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2013)  [Next](ch2015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 14:0</span></span>

Asa's Reign - 2 Chronicles 14-16

In 1 Kings 15:9-24 it is merely recorded of Asa, that he reigned
forty-one years, did that which was right as David did, removed from the
land all the idols which his fathers had made, and, although the high
places were not removed, was devoted to the Lord during his whole life,
and laid up in the temple treasury all that had been consecrated by his
father and himself. Then it is related that when Baasha marched against
him, and began to fortify Ramah, he induced the Syrian king Benhadad, by
sending to him the treasures of the temple and of his palace, to break
faith with Baasha, and to make an inroad upon and smite the northern
portion of the land; that Baasha was thereby compelled to abandon the
building of Ramah, and to fall back to Tirzah, and that thereupon Asa
caused the fortifications of Ramah to be pulled down, and the cities
Geba and Benjamin and Mizpah to be fortified with the materials; and,
finally, it is recorded that Asa in his old age became diseased in his
feet, and died. The Chronicle also characterizes Asa as a pious king,
who did that which was right, and removed the high places and
sun-pillars in the land; but gives, as to other matters, a much more
detailed account of his reign of forty-one years. It states that in the
first years, as the land had rest, he built fortified cities in Judah,
and had an army fit for war ([Ch2
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)); that thereupon he marched
against the Cushite Zerah, who was then advancing upon Judah with an
innumerable host, prayed for help to the Lord, who then smote the
Cushites, so that they fled; and that Asa pursued them to Gerar, and
returned with great booty ([Ch2
14:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008)). Then we learn that the
prophet Azariah, the son of Oded, came to meet him, who, pointing to the
victory which the Lord had granted them, called upon the king and the
people to remain stedfast in their fidelity to the Lord; that Asa
thereupon took courage, extirpated all the still remaining idolatrous
abominations from the land, and in the fifteenth year of his reign held
with the people a great sacrificial feast in Jerusalem, renewed the
covenant with the Lord, crushed out all the remains of former idolatry,
although the high places were not destroyed, and also deposited in the
temple treasury all that had been consecrated by his father and himself
(2 Chron 15). Thereafter Baasha's inroad upon Judah and the alliance
with Ben-hadad of Syria are narrated ([Ch2
16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001)), as in the book of Kings; but
it is also added that the prophet Hanani censured his seeking help from
the king of Syria, and was thereupon put into the prison-house by Asa
([Ch2 16:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007)); and then we have an
account of the end of his reign, in which several additions to the
account in 1 Kings are communicated ([Ch2
16:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#011)).

[2 Chronicles 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 14:1</span></span>

[Ch2 14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)

Asa's efforts for the abolition of idolatry and the establishment of the
kingdom. - [Ch2 14:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001). The good and
right in God's eyes which Asa did is further defined in [Ch2
14:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#002). He abolished all the objects
of the idolatrous worship. The "altars of the strangers" are altars
consecrated to foreign gods; from them the בּמות, high places, are
distinguished-these latter being illegal places of sacrifice connected
with the worship of Jahve (see on [Kg1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#014)). The מצּבוה are the statues or
monumental columns consecrated to Baal, and אשׁרים the wooden idols,
tree-trunks, or trees, which were consecrated to Astarte (see on [Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023) and [Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021)). Asa at the same time commanded
the people to worship Jahve, the God of the fathers, and to follow the
law.

[Ch2 14:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#004)

He removed from all the cities of Judah the altars of the high places,
and the חמּנים, sun-pillars, pillars or statues consecrated to Baal as
sun-god, which were erected near or upon the altars of Baal ([Ch2
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#004); see on [Lev
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030)). In consequence of this the
kingdom had rest לפניו, before him, i.e., under his oversight (cf. [Num
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#022)). This ten-years' quiet ([Ch2
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)) which God granted him, Asa
employed in building fortresses in Judah ([Ch2
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#005)). "We will build these cities,
and surround them with walls and towers, gates and bolts." It is not
said what the cities were, but they were at any rate others than Geba
and Mizpah, which he caused to be built after the war with Baasha ([Ch2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#006)). "The land is still before us,"
i.e., open, free from enemies, so that we may freely move about, and
build therein according to our pleasure. For the phraseology, cf. [Gen
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#009). The repetition of דּרשׁנוּ, [Ch2
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#006), is impassioned speech. "They
built and had success;" they built with effect, without meeting with any
hindrances.

[Ch2 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007)

Asa had also a well-equipped, well-armed army. The men of Judah were
armed with a large shield and lance (cf. [Ch1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#024)), the Benjamites with a small
shield and bow (cf. [Ch1 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#040)). The
numbers are great; of Judah 300,000, of Benjamin 280,000 men. Since in
these numbers the whole population capable of bearing arms is included,
300,000 men does not appear too large for Judah, but 280,000 is a very
large number for Benjamin, and is founded probably on an overestimate.

[2 Chronicles 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 14:8</span></span>

The victory over the Cushite Zerah. - [Ch2
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008). "And there went forth against
them Zerah." אליהם for עליהם refers to Asa's warriors mentioned in [Ch2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007). The number of the men in Judah
capable of bearing arms is mentioned only to show that Asa set his hope
of victory over the innumerable host of the Cushites not on the strength
of his army, but on the all-powerful help of the Lord ([Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010)). The Cushite זרח is usually
identified with the second king of the 22nd (Bubastitic) dynasty,
Osorchon I; while Brugsch, hist. de l'Eg. i. p. 298, on the contrary,
has raised objections, and holds Zerah to be an Ethiopian and not an
Egyptian prince, who in the reign of Takeloth I, about 944 b.c.,
probably marched through Egypt as a conqueror (cf. G. Rsch in Herz.'s
Realenc. xviii. S. 460). The statement as to Zerah's army, that it
numbered 1,000,000 warriors and 300 war-chariots, rests upon a rough
estimate, in which 1000 times 1000 expresses the idea of the greatest
possible number. The Cushites pressed forward to Mareshah, i.e.,
Marissa, between Hebron and Ashdod (see on [Ch2
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#008)).

[Ch2 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009)

Thither Asa marched to meet them, and drew up his army in battle array
in the valley Zephathah, near Mareshah. The valley Zephathah is not, as
Robins., Pal. sub voce, thinks, to be identified with Tel es Safieh, but
must lie nearer Mareshah, to the west or north-west of Marsch.

[Ch2 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010)

Then he called upon the Lord his God for help. וגו עמּך אין we
translate, with Berth., "None is with Thee (on עמּך, cf. [Ch2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#006); [Psa
73:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#025)) to help between a mighty one
and a weak," i.e., no other than Thou can help in an unequal battle,
i.e., help the weaker side; while the Vulg., on the contrary, after the
analogy of [Sa1 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006), translates, "non
est apud te ulla distantia, utrum in paucis auxilieris an in pluribus;"
and the older commentators (Schmidt, Ramb.) give the meaning thus:
"perinde est tibi potentiori vel imbecilliori opem ferre." But in [Sa1
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016) the wording is different, so
that that passage cannot be a standard for us here. "In Thy name (i.e.,
trusting in Thy help) are we come against this multitude" (not "have we
fallen upon this multitude"). וגו יעצר אל, "Let not a mortal retain
strength with Thee" (עצר = כּח עצר, [Ch2
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#020); [Ch1
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014)), i.e., let not weak men
accomplish anything with Thee, show Thy power or omnipotence over weak
men.

[Ch2 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#011)

God heard this prayer. Jahve drove the Cushites into flight before Asa,
scil. by His mighty help.

[Ch2 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#012)

Asa, with his people, pursued to Gerar, the old ancient Philistine city,
whose ruins Rowlands has discovered in the Khirbet el Gerar, in the Wady
Jorf el Gerar (the torrent of Gerar), three leagues south-south-east of
Gaza (see on [Gen 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)). "And there
fell of the Cushites, so that to them was not revival," i.e., so many
that they could not make a stand and again collect themselves, ut eis
vivificatio i. e. copias restaurandi ratio non esset, as older
commentators, in Annott. uberior. ad h. l., have already rightly
interpreted it. The words are expressions for complete defeat. Berth.
translates incorrectly: "until to them was nothing living;" for לאין
does not stand for לאין עד, but ל serves to subordinate the clause, "so
that no one," where in the older language אין alone would have been
sufficient, as in [Ch2 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#025); [Ch1
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#004), cf. Ew. 315, c; and מחיה
denotes, not "a living thing," but only "preservation of life,
vivification, revival, maintenance." For they were broken before Jahve
and before His host. מחנהוּ, i.e., Asa's army is called Jahve's, because
Jahve fought in and with it against the enemy. There is no reason to
suppose, with some older commentators, that there is any reference to an
angelic host or heavenly camp ([Gen
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002).). And they (Asa and his people)
brought back very much booty.

[Ch2 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#013)

"They smote all the cities round about Gerar," which, as we must
conclude from this, had made common cause with the Cushites, being
inhabited by Philistines; for the fear of Jahve had fallen upon them.
יהוה פּחד יהוה . here, and in [Ch2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#010); [Ch2
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#029), as in [Sa1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#007), the fear of the omnipotence
displayed by Jahve in the annihilation of the innumerable hostile army.
In these cities Judah found much booty.

[Ch2 14:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014)

They also smote the tents of the herds of the wandering tribes of that
district, and carried away many sheep and camels as booty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 15](ch2015)

</div>
