<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan000)  [Next](dan002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

Historico-Biographical Introduction

When Nebuchadnezzar first besieged Jerusalem he not only took away the
holy vessels of the temple, but also commanded that several Israelitish
youths of noble lineage, among whom was Daniel, should be carried to
Babylon and there educated in the science and wisdom of the Chaldeans
for service in his court, which they entered upon when their education
was completed. This narrative, in which the stedfast attachment of
Daniel and his three friends to the religion of their fathers, and the
blessings which flowed to them from this fidelity ([Dan
1:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008)), are particularly set forth,
forms the historical introduction to the following book, whilst it shows
how Daniel reached the place of influence which he held, a place which
was appointed for him according to the divine counsel, during the
Babylonish exile, for the preservation and development of the Old
Testament kingdom of God. It concludes ([Dan
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021)) with the remark, that Daniel
continued to occupy this place till the first year of Cyrus.

[Daniel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 1:1</span></span>

Of this expedition of Nebuchadnezzar against Jerusalem it is related in
the second book of Kings ([Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001)):
"In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim
became his servant three years; then he turned and rebelled against
him;" and in the second book of Chronicles ([Ch2
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006)): "Against him came up
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters to carry him to
Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar also carried off the vessels of the house of the
Lord to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon." That both of
these statements refer to the same expedition of Nebuchadnezzar against
Jehoiakim mentioned here, appears not only from the statement of the
book of Chronicles agreeing with [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002) of this chapter, namely, that
Nebuchadnezzar took away a part of the sacred vessels of the temple to
Babylon, and there put them in the temple of his god, but also from the
circumstance that, beyond all doubt, during the reign of Jehoiakim where
was not a second siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. It is true,
indeed, that when Jehoiakim threw off the yoke at the end of three
years' subjection, Nebuchadnezzar sent Chaldean, Aramaean, Moabitish,
and Ammonitish hosts against him for the purpose of bringing him into
subjection, but Jerusalem was not again laid siege to by these hosts
till the death of Jehoiakim. Not till his son Jehoiachin ascended the
throne did the servants of Nebuchadnezzar again come up against
Jerusalem and besiege it. When, during the siege, Nebuchadnezzar himself
came up, Jehoiachin surrendered to him after three months, and was,
along with the chief men of his kingdom, and the strength of the
population of Jerusalem and Judah, and the treasures of the royal palace
and of the temple, carried down to Babylon ([Kg2
24:2-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002)). The year, however, in which
Nebuchadnezzar, in the reign of Jehoiakim, first took Jerusalem and
carried away a part of the treasures of the temple to Babylon, is stated
neither in the second book of Kings nor in Chronicles, but may be pretty
certainly determined by the statements of Jeremiah ([Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002); [Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)., [Jer
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001).). According to [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002), Nebuchadnezzar smote the
Egyptian king Pharaoh-Necho with his army at Carchemish in the fourth
year of the reign of Jehoiakim. That same year is spoken of ([Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)) as the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and is represented by Jeremiah not
only as a critical period for the kingdom of Judah; but also, by the
prediction that the Lord would bring His servant Nebuchadnezzar against
Judah and against its inhabitants, and against all the nations round
about, that He would make Judah a desolation, and that these nations
would serve the king of Babylon seventy years ([Jer
25:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#002)), he without doubt represents
it as the beginning of the seventy years of Babylonish exile: In this
the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the prophet was also commanded ([Jer
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001).) to write in a book all the
words which the Lord had spoken unto him against Israel, and against
Judah, and against all the nations, from the day in which He had spoken
to him in the time of Josiah even till then, that the house of Judah
might hear all the evil which He purposed to do unto them, and might
return every man from his evil way. Jeremiah obeyed this command, and
caused these predictions, written in the roll of a book, to be read by
Baruch to the people in the temple; for he himself was a prisoner, and
therefore could not go to the temple.

The first capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar cannot therefore have
taken place in the third, but must have been in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim, i.e., in the year 606 b.c. This, however, appears to stand in
opposition to the statement of the first verse of this chapter: "In the
third year of the reign of Jehoiakim בּא Nebuchadnezzar to Jerusalem."
The modern critics accordingly number this statement among the errors
which must disprove the genuineness of this book (see above, p. 508f.).
The apparent opposition between the language of Daniel ([Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)) that Nebuchadnezzar undertook his
first expedition against Jerusalem in the third year of Jehoiakim, and
the affirmation of Jeremiah, according to which not only was
Pharaoh-Necho slain by Nebuchadnezzar at the Euphrates in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim, but also in this same year Nebuchadnezzar's invasion
of Judea is for the first time announced, cannot be resolved either by
the hypothesis of a different mode of reckoning the years of the reign
of Jehoiakim and of Nebuchadnezzar, nor by the supposition that
Jerusalem had been already taken by Nebuchadnezzar before the battle of
Carchemish, in the third year of Jehoiakim. The first supposition is set
aside by the circumstance that there is no certain analogy for it.

(Note: The old attempt to reconcile the difference in this way has
already been shown by Hengstenberg (Beit. z. Einl. in d. A. T. p. 53) to
be untenable; and the supposition of Klief. (p. 65f.), that Jehoiakim
entered on his reign near the end of a year, and that Jeremiah reckons
the year of his reign according to the calendar year, but that Daniel
reckons it from the day of his ascending the throne, by which it is made
out that there is no actual difference, is wholly overthrown by the
circumstance that in the sacred Scriptures there is no analogy for the
reckoning of the year of a king's reign according to the day of the
month on which he began to reign. On this supposition we might reconcile
the apparent difference only if no other plan of reconciliation were
possible. But such is not the actual state of the case.)

The latter supposition is irreconcilable with Jer. 25 and 36.

(Note: Following the example of Hofmann (die 70 Jahre Jer. p. 13ff.),
Hvernick (Neue Krit. Unterss. ber d. B. Daniel, p. 52ff.), Zndel (Krit.
Unterss. p. 20ff.), and others have decided in favour of it.)

If Jeremiah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim announced that because Judah
did not hearken unto his warnings addressed to them "from the thirteenth
year of Josiah even unto this day," that is, for the space of three and
twenty years, nor yet to the admonitions of all the other prophets ([Jer
25:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#003)) whom the Lord had sent unto
them, therefore the Lord would now send His servant Nebuchadnezzar with
all the people of the north against the land and against the inhabitants
thereof, and against all these nations round about, utterly to destroy
the land and make it desolate, etc. - then it must be affirmed that he
publicly made known the invasion of Judah by the Chaldeans as an event
which had not yet taken place, and therefore that the supposition that
Jerusalem had already in the preceding year been taken by
Nebuchadnezzar, and that Jehoiakim had been brought under his
subjection, is entirely excluded. It is true that in Daniel 25 Jeremiah
prophesies a judgment of "perpetual desolations against Jerusalem and
against all the nations," but it is as unwarrantable to apply, as Klief.
does, this prophecy only "to the total destruction of Jerusalem and of
Judah, which took place in the eleventh year of Zedekiah," as with older
interpreters only to the first expedition of Nebuchadnezzar against
Jehoiakim, [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001) and [Ch2
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006). In the words of threatening
uttered by the prophet there are included all the expeditions of
Nebuchadnezzar against Jerusalem and Judah, from his first against
Jehoiakim to the final destruction of Jerusalem under Zedekiah; so that
we cannot say that it is not applicable to the first siege of Jerusalem
under Jehoiakim, but to the final destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, as
this whole prophecy is only a comprehensive intensified summary of all
the words of God hitherto spoken by the mouth of the prophet. To
strengthen the impression produced by this comprehensive word of God, he
was commanded in that same year ([Jer
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001).), as already mentioned, to write
out in the roll of a book all the words hitherto spoken by him, that it
might be seen whether or not the several words gathered together into a
whole might not exert an influence over the people which the separate
words had failed to do.

Moreover a destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans before the
overthrow of the Egyptian power on the Euphrates, which took place in
the fourth year of Jehoiakim, cannot at all be thought of. King
Jehoiakim was "put into bands" by Pharaoh-Necho and made a tributary
vassal to him ([Kg2 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033).), and all
the land from the river of Egypt even unto the Euphrates was brought
under his sway; therefore Nebuchadnezzar could not desolate Judah and
Jerusalem before Pharaoh-Necho was slain. Neither could Nebuchadnezzar
pass in the presence of the Egyptian host stationed in the stronghold of
Carchemish, on the Euphrates, and advance toward Judah, leaving behind
him the city of Babylon as a prize to so powerful an enemy, nor would
Necho, supposing that Nebuchadnezzar had done this, have quietly allowed
his enemy to carry on his operations, and march against his vassal
Jehoiakim, without following in the rear of Egypt's powerful foe.

(Note: With the above compare my Lehrb. der Einl. 131, and my Commentary
on [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001). With this Kran. agrees
(p. 17f.), and in addition remarks: "In any case Necho would at once
have regarded with jealousy every invasion of the Chaldean into the
region beyond the Euphrates, and would least of all have suffered him to
make an extensive western expedition for the purpose of conquering
Judea, which was under the sway of Egypt.")

The statement in the first verse may indeed, literally taken, be
interpreted as meaning that Nebuchadnezzar came up against Jerusalem and
took in in the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim, because בּוא
frequently means to come to a place. But it is not necessary always so
to interpret the word, because בּוא means not only to come, but also to
go, to march to a place. The assertion, that in this verse בּוא is to be
interpreted (Hv. N. Kr. U. p. 61, Ew., and others) as meaning to come to
a place, and not to march to it, is as incorrect as the assertion that
the translation of בּא by he marched is inadmissible or quite
impossible, because עלה is generally used of the march of an army
(Staeh., Znd.). The word בּוא, from the first book of the Canon (cf.
[Gen 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005)) to the last, the book of
Daniel not excepted (cf. e.g., [Dan
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#013), [Dan
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#017), [Dan
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#029), etc.), is used of military
expeditions; and regarding the very general opinion, that בּוא, in the
sense of to march, to go to a place, occurs less frequently, Kran. (p.
21) has rightly remarked, that "it stands always and naturally in this
sense whenever the movement has its point of departure from the place of
him who observes it, thinks of it, or makes a communication regarding
it." Therefore, e.g., it is used "always in a personal verbal command
with reference to the movement, not yet undertaken, where naturally the
thought as to the beginning or point of departure passes into the
foreground; as e.g., in [Gen 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#017);
[Exo 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#011); 7:26; [Exo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001); [Exo
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001); [Num
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006); [Sa1
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#019); [Kg2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#005). In [Jon
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#003) it is used of the ship that was
about to go to Tarshish; and again, in the words עמּהם לבוא, ibid., it
is used when speaking of the conclusion of the journey." "On the
contrary, if the speaker or narrator is at the terminus ad quem of the
movement spoken of, then of course the word בּוא is used in the other
sense of to come, to approach, and the like." Accordingly these words of
Daniel, "Nebuchadnezzar בּוא to Jerusalem," considered in themselves,
may be interpreted without any regard to the point of departure or the
termination of the movement. They may mean "Nebuchadnezzar came to
Jerusalem," or that "he marched to Jerusalem," according as the writer
is regarded as writing in Judah or Jerusalem, or in Babylon at the point
of departure of Nebuchadnezzar's journey. If the book was composed by a
Maccabean Jew in Palestine, then the translation, "he came to
Jerusalem," would be the more correct, because such a writer would
hardly have spoken of a military movement from its eastern point of
departure. The case is altogether different if Daniel, who lived as a
courtier in Babylon from his youth up to old age, wrote this account.
"For him, a Jew advanced in years, naturally the first movement of the
expedition threatening and bringing destruction to his fatherland,
whether it moved directly or by a circuitous route upon the capital,
would be a significant fact, which he had in every respect a better
opportunity of comprehending than his fellow-countrymen living in the
remote west, since this expedition was an event which led to the
catastrophe of the exile. For the Jew writing in Babylon about the
expedition, the fatal commencement of the march of the Chaldean host
would have a mournful significance, which it could not have for a writer
living in Jerusalem."

In this way Kran. has thoroughly vindicated the rendering of בּא, "he
marched" to Jerusalem, and also the explanation of the word as referring
to the setting out of the Chaldean army which Hitz., Hofm., Staeh.,
Znd., and others have declared to be opposed to the meaning of the word
and "impossible," and at the same time he has set aside as groundless
the further remark of Hitzig, that the designation of the time also
applies to ויּצר. If בּא is to be understood of an expedition with
reference to its point of departure, then the fixing of its time cannot
of course refer also to the time of the arrival of the expedition at its
termination and the siege then ensuing. The time of its arrival before
Jerusalem, as well as the beginning, duration, and end of the siege, is
not defined, and only its result, the taking of Jerusalem, is, according
to the object of the author, of sufficient importance to be briefly
announced. The period of the taking of the city can only be determined
from dates elsewhere given. Thus from the passages in Jeremiah already
referred to, it appears that this happened in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim, in which year Nebuchadnezzar overcame the army of Necho king
of Egypt at the Euphrates ([Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)),
and took all the land which the king of Egypt had subdued, from the
river of Egypt to the Euphrates, so that Pharaoh-Necho came no more out
of his land ([Kg2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007)). With this
agrees Berosus in the fragments of his Chaldean history preserved by
Josephus (Ant. x. 11. 1, and c. Ap. i. 19). His words, as found in the
latter passage, are these: "When his (Nebuc.) father Nabopolassar heard
that the satrap whom he had set over Egypt and over the parts of
Coelesyria and Phoenicia had revolted from him, he was unable to bear
the annoyance any longer, but committing a part of his army to his son
Nabuchodonosor, who was then a youth, he sent him against the rebel.
Nabuchodonosor encountered him in battle and overcame him, and brought
the land again under his dominion. It happened that his father
Nabopolassar at this time fell sick and died at the city of Babylon,
after he had reigned twenty-one years (Berosus says twenty-nine years).
But when Nabuchodonosor not long after heard of the death of his father,
he set the affairs of Egypt and of the other countries in order, and
committed the prisoners he had taken from the Jews, the Phoenicians, and
Syrians, and from the nations belonging to Egypt, to some of his
friends, that they might conduct the heavy armed troops with the rest of
the baggage to Babylonia, while he himself hastened with a small escort
through the desert to Babylon. When he came hither, he found that the
public affairs had been managed by the Chaldeans, and that the principal
persons among them had preserved the kingdom for him. He now obtained
possession of all his father's dominions, and gave directions that the
captives should be placed as colonies in the most favourably situated
districts of Babylonia," etc. This fragment illustrates in an excellent
manner the statements made in the Bible, in case one be disposed to
estimate the account of the revolt of the satrap placed over Egypt and
the countries lying round Coelesyria and Phoenicia as only the
expression of boastfulness on the part of the Babylonish historian,
claiming that all the countries of the earth of right belonged to the
monarch of Babylon; and it also shows that the rebel satrap could be
none other than Pharaoh-Necho. For Berosus confirms not only the fact,
as declared in [Kg2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007), that
Pharaoh-Necho in the last year of Nabopolassar, after the battle at
Megiddo, had subdued Judah, Phoenicia, and Coelesyria, i.e., "all the
land from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates," but he also
bears witness to the fact that Nebuchadnezzar, after he had slain
Pharaoh-Necho ([Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)) "by the
river Euphrates in Carchemish," made Coelesyria, Phoenicia, and Judah
tributary to the Chaldean empire, and consequently that he took
Jerusalem not before but after the battle at Carchemish, in prosecution
of the victory he had obtained over the Egyptians.

This does not, however, it must be confessed, prove that Jerusalem had
already in the fourth year of Jehoiakim come under the dominion of
Nebuchadnezzar. Therefore Hitz. and others conclude from [Jer
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009) that Nebuchadnezzar's assault
upon Jerusalem was in the ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakim as
yet only in prospect, because in that month Jeremiah prophesied of the
Chaldean invasion, and the extraordinary fast then appointed had as its
object the manifestation of repentance, so that thereby the wrath of God
might be averted. This Kran. endeavours to prove from [Kg2
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027), cf. [Jer
52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031). But in the ninth month of the
fifth year of Jehoiakim, Jeremiah caused to be rehearsed to the people
in the court of the temple his former prophecies, written by Baruch in a
book according to the commandment of the Lord, and pronounced the
threatening against Jehoiakim because he had cut to pieces this book and
had cast it into the fire, [Jer 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#029).
This threatening, that God would bring upon the seed and upon the
servants of Jehoiakim, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, all the
evil which He had pronounced against them ([Jer
36:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#031)), does not exclude the previous
capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, but announces only the carrying
out of the threatened judgment in the destruction of Jerusalem and of
the kingdom of Judah to be as yet imminent.

The extraordinary fast of the people also, which was appointed for the
ninth month, was not ordained with the view of averting the destruction
of Judah and Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, which was then expected, after
the battle at Carchemish; for although fasts were sometimes appointed or
kept for the purpose of turning away threatened judgment or punishment
(e.g., [Sa2 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015).; [Kg1
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027); [Est
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001); [Est
3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001) :16), yet, in general, fasts
were more frequently appointed to preserve the penitential remembrance
of punishments and chastisements which had been already endured: cf.
e.g., [Zac 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#005); [Ezr
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#006).; [Neh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#004); [Sa1
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013); [Sa2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#012), etc. To ascertain, therefore,
what was the object of this fast which was appointed, we must keep in
view the character of Jehoiakim and his relation to this fast. The
godless Jehoiakim, as he is represented in [Kg2
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#037); [Ch2
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#005), and [Jer
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013)., was not the man who would have
ordained a fast (or allowed it if the priests had wished to appoint it)
to humble himself and his people before God, and by repentance and
prayer to turn away the threatened judgment. Before he could ordain a
fast for such a purpose, Jehoiakim must hear and observe the word of the
prophet, and in that case he would not have been so enraged at the
reading of the prophecies of Jeremiah as to have cut the book to pieces
and cast it into the fire. If the fast took place previous to the
arrival of the Chaldeans before Jerusalem, then neither the intention of
the king nor his conduct in regard to it can be comprehended. On the
other hand, as Znd. p. 21, and Klief. p. 57, have shown, both the
ordaining of a general fast, and the anger of the king at the reading of
the prophecies of Jeremiah in the presence of the people in the temple,
are well explained, if the fast is regarded as designed to keep in
remembrance the day of the year on which Nebuchadnezzar took Jerusalem.
As Jehoiakim bore with difficulty the yoke of the Chaldean oppression,
and from the first meditated on a revolt, for after three years he did
actually revolt, he instituted the fast "to stir up the feelings of the
people against the state of vassalage into which they had been brought"
(Klief.), "and to call forth a religious enthusiasm among them to resist
the oppressor" (Znd.). This opposition could only, however, result in
the destruction of the people and the kingdom. Jeremiah therefore had
his prophecies read to the people in the temple on that day by Baruch
"as a counterbalance to the desire of the king," and announced to them
that Nebuchadnezzar would come again to subdue the land and to destroy
from out of it both man and beast. "Therefore the king was angry, and
destroyed the book, because he would not have the excitement of the
people to be so hindered; and therefore also the princes were afraid
([Jer 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#016)) when they heard that the
book of these prophecies was publicly read" (Klief.).

The words of [Kg2 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027), cf. [Jer
52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031), do not contradict this
conclusion from [Jer 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009), even though
that drawn by Kran., p. 18, from this passage were adopted, viz., that
since almost thirty-seven whole years had passed from the carrying away
of Jehoiachin to the end of the forty-three years of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, but Jehoiachin had reigned only for a few months, the
beginning of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar must be dated in the sixth of
the eleven years' reign of Jehoiakim, the predecessor of Jehoiachin. For
since, according to the testimony of Berosus, Nebuchadnezzar conducted
the war against Hither Asia, in which he slew king Necho at Carchemish,
and as a further consequence of this victory took Jerusalem, before the
death of his father, in the capacity of a commander-in-chief clothed
with royal power, and when in Hither Asia, as it seems, and on the
confines of Egypt, he then for the first time heard tidings of his
father's death, and therefore hastened by the shortest road to Babylon
to assume the crown and lay claim to all his father's dominions, - then
it follows that his forty-three years' reign begins after the battle of
Carchemish and the capture of Jerusalem under Jehoiakim, and might
possibly have begun in the sixth year of Jehoiakim, some five months
after the ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakim ([Jer
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009)). Against this supposition the
circumstance that Nebuchadnezzar, as stated in [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002); [Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001), and also [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001), was called king of Babylon before
he had actually ascended the throne is no valid objection, inasmuch as
this title is explained as a prolepsis which would be easily understood
by the Jews in Palestine. Nabopolassar came into no contact at all with
Judah; the Jews therefore knew scarcely anything of his reign and his
death; and the year of Nebuchadnezzar's approach to Jerusalem would be
regarded in a general way both by Jeremiah and his contemporaries as the
first year of his reign, and the commander of the Chaldean army as the
king of Babylon, no matter whether on account of his being actual
co-regent with his aged and infirm father, or merely because he was
clothed with royal power as the chief commander of the army.

(Note: Thus not only Hgstb. Beitr. i. p. 63, Hv., Klief., Kran., etc.,
but also v. Lengerke, Daniel. p. 3, and Hitz. Daniel. p. 3. The latter,
e.g., remarks: "The designation as king does not furnish any obvious
objection, for Nebuchadnezzar, the commander-in-chief of the army, is to
the Jewish writers (thus [Jer 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)) a
king when he first comes under their notice. They appear to have had no
knowledge whatever of his father.")

In this sense Daniel ([Dan 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)) names
him who was afterwards king, at a time when he was not yet the possessor
of the throne, the king of Babylon; for he was in effect the king, so
far as the kingdom of Judah was concerned, when he undertook the first
expedition against it.

But the reckoning of Kran. is also not exact. Nebuchadnezzar's ascending
the throne and the beginning of his reign would only happen in the sixth
year of Jehoiakim if either the three months of Jehoiachin (37 years'
imprisonment of Jehoiachin + 1 year's reign + 5 years of Jehoiakim = 43
years of Nebuchadnezzar) are to be reckoned as 1 year, or at least the
11 years of Jehoiakim as 11 full years, so that 5 3/4 years of
Jehoiakim's reign must be added to the 37 years of Jehoiachin's
imprisonment and the 3 months of his reign so as to make up the 43 years
of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar. Thus Jehoiakim must have reigned 5 1/4
years at the time when Nebuchadnezzar ascended the throne. Whereas if
Jehoiakim's reign extended only to 10 1/2 years, which were reckoned as
11 years in the books of the Kings, according to the general method of
recording the length of the reign of kings, then Nebuchadnezzar's
ascending the throne took place in the fifth years of Jehoiakim's reign,
or, at the furthest, after he had reigned 4 3/4 years. This latter
reckoning, whereby the first year of Nebuchadnezzar's reign is made to
coincide with the fifth year of Jehoiakim's, is demanded by those
passages in which the years of the reign of the kings of Judah are made
parallel with the years of Nebuchadnezzar's reign; viz., [Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012), where it is stated that
Jehoiachin was taken prisoner and carried away captive in the eighth
year of Nebuchadnezzar; also [Jer
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001), where the tenth years of
Zedekiah corresponds with the eighteenth of Nebuchadnezzar; and finally,
[Jer 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#005), [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012), and [Kg2
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#002), [Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008), where the eleventh year of
Zedekiah corresponds with the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.
According to all these passages, the death of Jehoiakim, or the end of
his reign, happened either in the eighth year, or at all events in the
end of the seventh year, of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, for Jehoiachin
reigned only three months; so that Nebuchadnezzar reigned six full
years, and perhaps a few months longer, as contemporary with Jehoiakim,
and consequently he must have mounted the throne in the fifth of the
eleven years of Jehoiakim's reign.

(Note: The synchronistic statements in the passages, [Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012); [Kg2
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#002), [Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008); [Jer
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001) and [Jer
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#005), [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012), might indeed be interpreted as
meaning, that in them the years of Nebuchadnezzar's reign are reckoned
from the time when his father entrusted to him the chief command of the
army at the breaking out of the war with Necho (see my Commentary on
[Kg2 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012)); but in that case the
years of Nebuchadnezzar's reign would amount to 44 1/4 years, viz., 37
years of Jehoiachin's imprisonment, 3 months of his reign, and 7 years
of Jehoiakim's reign. And according to this reckoning, it would also
result from the passages referred to, that the beginning of his 43
years' reign happened in the fifth year of Jehoiakim.)

The above discussion has at the same time also furnished us with the
means of explaining the apparent contradiction which has been found
between [Dan 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001). and [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)., and which has been brought
forward as an historical error in argument against the genuineness of
the book. According to [Dan 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003).,
Nebuchadnezzar after the capture of Jerusalem commanded that young
Israelites of noble birth should be carried away to Babylon, and there
educated for the space of three years in the literature and wisdom of
the Chaldeans; and, according to [Dan
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018), after the expiry of the
appointed time, they were brought in before the king that they might be
employed in his service. But these three years of instruction, according
to [Dan 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)., expired in the second
year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, when Daniel and his companions were
ranked among the wise men of Babylon, and Daniel interpreted to the king
his dream, which his Chaldean magi were unable to do ([Dan
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#013)., 19ff.). If we observe that
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed his dream "in the second year of his reign," and
that he entered on his reign some time after the destruction of
Jerusalem and the captivity of Jehoiakim, them we can understand how the
three years appointed for the education of Daniel and his companions
came to an end in the second year of his reign; for if Nebuchadnezzar
began to reign in the fifth year of Jehoiakim, then in the seventh year
of Jehoiakim three years had passed since the destruction of Jerusalem,
which took place in the fourth year of this king. For the carrying away
of the Israelitish youths followed, without doubt, immediately after the
subjugation of Jehoiakim, so that a whole year or more of their period
of education had passed before Nebuchadnezzar mounted the throne. This
conclusion is not set aside by what Berosus affirms, that
Nebuchadnezzar, after he heard of the death of his father, committed the
captives he had taken from the Jews to the care of some of his friends
that they might be brought after him, while he himself hastened over the
desert to Babylon; for that statement refers to the great transport of
prisoners who were carried away for the colonization of Central Asia. As
little does the consideration that a twofold method of reckoning the
year of Nebuchadnezzar's government by Daniel is improbable militate
against this reconciliation of the discrepancy, for no such twofold
method of reckoning exists. In Daniel 1 the year of Nebuchadnezzar's
reign is not given, but Nebuchadnezzar is only named as being king;

(Note: If, on the contrary, Bleek understands from [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001) that Nebuchadnezzar had become
king of Babylon in the third year of Jehoiakim at Jerusalem, whilst,
"perhaps only with the design of making the pretended opposition between
[Dan 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001) and [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001) truly evident, he understands the
appositional designation בבל מלך as a more definite determination of the
meaning of the verb בּא, this idea finds recommendation neither in the
position of the words, nor in the expression, [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003), nor in the accents." Kranichfeld,
p. 19.)

while in [Dan 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001) mention is made not
merely of the second year of Nebuchadnezzar, but of the second year of
his reign, from which it appears that the historian here reckons from
the actual commencement of his reign. Also, as Klief., p. 67, has well
remarked, one may "easily discover the ground on which Daniel in [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001) followed a different mode of
reckoning from that adopted in [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001). In Daniel 1 Daniel had to do with
Israelitish circumstances and persons, and therefore followed, in making
reference to Nebuchadnezzar, the general Israelitish mode of
contemplation. He reckons his years according to the years of the
Israelitish kings, and sees in him already the king; on the contrary, in
Daniel 2 Daniel treats of the relations of the world-power, and he
reckons here accurately the year of Nebuchadnezzar, the bearer of the
world-power, from the day in which, having actually obtained the
possession of the world-power, he became king of Babylon."

If we now, in conclusion, briefly review the results of the preceding
discussions, it will be manifest that the following is the course of
events: - Necho the king of Egypt, after he had made Jehoiakim his
vassal king, went forth on an expedition against the Assyrian kingdom as
far as the Euphrates. Meanwhile, however, with the dissolution of the
Assyrian kingdom by the fall of Nineveh, the part of that kingdom lying
on this side of the Tigris had come under the dominion of the Chaldeans,
and the old and enfeebled king Nabopolassar gave to his son
Nebuchadnezzar the chief command of the army, with the commission to
check the advance of the Egyptians, and to rescue from them the
countries they had occupied and bring them again under the Chaldean
rule. In consequence of this, Nebuchadnezzar took the field against
Hither Asia in the third year of the reign of Jehioakim, and in the
first month of the fourth year of Jehoiakim slew Pharaoh-Necho at
Carchemish and pursued his army to the confines of Egypt, and in the
ninth month of the same year took Jerusalem and made king Jehoiakim his
subject. While Nebuchadnezzar was busied in Hither Asia with the
subjugation of the countries that had been conquered by Pharaoh-Necho,
he received the tidings of the death of his father Nabopolassar in
Babylon, and hastened forward with a small guard by the nearest way
through the desert to Babylon in order to assume the government, giving
directions that the army, along with the whole band of prisoners, should
follow him by slow marches. But as soon as the Chaldean army had left
Judea and returned to Babylon, Jehoiakim sought how he might throw off
the Chaldean yoke, and three years after his subjugation he revolted,
probably at a time when Nebuchadnezzar was engaged in establishing his
dominion in the East, so that he could not immediately punish this
revolt, but contented himself meanwhile with sending against Jehoiakim
the armies of Chaldeans, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites, whom he had
left behind on the confines of Judah. They were unable, however, to
vanquish him as long as he lived. It was only after his son Jehoiachin
had ascended the throne that Nebuchadnezzar, as commander of the army,
returned with a powerful host to Jerusalem and besieged the city. While
the city was being besieged, Nebuchadnezzar came in person to
superintend the war. Jehoiachin with his mother, and his chief officers
from the city, went out to surrender themselves to the king of Babylon.
But Nebuchadnezzar took him as a prisoner, and commanded that the golden
vessels of the temple and the treasures of the royal palace should be
taken away, and he carried the king with the great men of the kingdom,
the men of war, the smiths and craftsmen, as prisoners to Babylon, and
made his vassal Mattaniah, Jehoiachin's uncle, king in Jerusalem, under
the name of Zedekiah (2 Kings 28:8-17). This happened in the eighth year
of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar ([Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012)), and thus about six years after
Daniel had interpreted his dream (Daniel 2), and had been promoted by
him to the rank of president of the wise men in Babylon.

The name נבוּכדנאצּר is written in [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001) with ,א as it is uniformly in
Jeremiah, e.g., [Jer 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006), [Jer
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#008),[Jer
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#020); [Jer
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#003), [Jer
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#011), [Jer
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#012); [Jer
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#001), [Jer
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#003), and in the books of the Kings
and Chronicles, as [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001), [Kg2
24:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010); [Kg2
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001); [Ch2
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006), [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010),[Ch2
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#013); whereas in [Dan
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018) it is written without the ', as
it is also in [Dan 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001), [Dan
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028), [Dan
2:46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046); [Dan
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001), [Dan
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005)., and [Ezr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007); [Ezr
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#012), [Ezr
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014); [Est
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#006). From this circumstance Hitzig
concludes that the statement in Daniel is derived from [Kg2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001), because the manner of writing
the name with the is not peculiar to this book (and is not the latest
form), but is that of [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001). Both
statements are incorrect. The writings without the אcannot on this
account be taken as the latest form, because it is not found in the
Chronicles, and that with the אis not peculiar to the second book of
Kings, but is the standing form, along with the more national Babylonian
form נבוּכדראצּר (with r), in [Jer
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002), [Jer
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007); [Jer
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001); [Jer
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#011); [Jer
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#011); [Eze
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007); [Eze
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#018); [Eze
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#010), which, according to Mnant
(Grammaire Assyrienne, 1868, p. 327), is written in Babylonian
inscriptions Nabukudurriusur (אצר כדר נבו, i.e., Nebo coronam servat),
the inscription of Behistan having the form Nabukudratschara.
Megastehenes and Berosus, in Polyhistor, write the name Ναβουκοδρόσορος.
The writing Nebuchadnezar, with n and without the ,א appears to be the
Aramean form, since it prevails in the Chaldean portions of Daniel and
Ezra, and accounts for the Masoretic pronunciation of the word (the צּ
with Dagesch forte). On other forms of the name, cf. Niebuhr, Gesch.
Assurs, p. 41f.

[Daniel 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 1:2</span></span>

"The Lord gave Jehoiakim into his hands" corresponds with the words in
[Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001), "he became his servant,"
and with [Ch2 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006), "and he bound him
in fetters." "And part of the vessels of the house of God." מקצת without
the Dag. forte, meaning properly from the end of extremity, is
abbreviated from קצה עד מקּצה, cf. [Jer
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#033); [Gen
47:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#021); [Exo
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#028), and shows that "that which was
found from end to end contributed its share; meaning that a great part
of the whole was taken, although קצת of itself never means a part"
(Kran.). As to the statement of the text, cf. [Ch2
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007). These vessels he brought
(commanded to be brought) into the land of Shinar, i.e., Babylonia ([Gen
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)), into the temple of his god,
i.e., Bel, and indeed into the treasure-house of this temple. Thus we
understand the meaning of the two latter clauses of [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002), while Hitz. and Kran., with many
older interpreters, refer the suffix in יביאם to Jehoiakim, and also to
the vessels, on account of the express contrast in the following words,
ואת־הכּלים (Kran.), and because, if it is not stated here, it is nowhere
else mentioned that Nebuchadnezzar carried away men also (Hitz.). But
the latter fact is expressly affirmed in [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003), and not only supposed, as Hitz.
alleges, and it was not necessary that it should be expressed in [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002). The application of the suffix to
Jehoiakim or the Jewish youths who were carried captive is excluded by
the connection of יביאם with אלהיו בּית, into the house of his god. But
the assertion that בּית, house, here means country, is not proved from
[Hos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001); [Hos
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015), nor is warranted by such
passages as [Exo 29:45](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#045); [Num
35:34](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#034); [Eze
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#027), etc., where mention is made of
God's dwelling in the land. For God's dwelling in the land is founded on
the fact of His gracious presence in the temple of the land, and even in
these passages the word land does not stand for the word house. Equally
unfounded is the further remark, that if by the expression אלהיו בּית
the temple is to be understood, the preposition אל would stand before
it, for which [Zac 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013); [Isa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023); [Gen
45:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#025) are appealed to. But such
passages have been referred to without observing that in them the
preposition אל stands only before living objects, where it is necessary,
but not before inanimate objects, such as בּית, where the special object
of the motion is with sufficient distinctness denoted by the accusative.
The words following, ואת־הכּלים, fall in not as adversative, but
explicative: and indeed (or, namely) the vessels brought he into the
treasure-house of his god - as booty. The carrying away of a part of the
vessels of the temple and a number of the distinguished Jewish youth to
Babylon, that they might be there trained for service at the royal
court, was a sign and pledge of the subjugation of Judah and its God
under the dominion of the kings and the gods of Babylon. Both are here,
however, mentioned with this design, that it might be known that Daniel
and his three friends, of whom this book gives further account, were
among these youths, and that the holy vessels were afterwards fatal
(Daniel 5) to the house of the Babylonian king.

[Daniel 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 1:3</span></span>

The name אשׁפּנז, sounding like the Old Persian Ap, a horse, has not yet
received any satisfactory or generally adopted explanation. The man so
named was the chief marshal of the court of Nebuchadnezzar. סריסים רב
(the word רב used for שׂר, [Dan 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007),
[Dan 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009), belongs to the later usage
of the language, cf. [Jer 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003)) means
chief commander of the eunuchs, i.e., overseer of the srail, the Kislar
Aga, and then in a wider sense minister of the royal palace, chief of
all the officers; since סריס frequently, with a departure from its
fundamental meaning, designates only a courtier, chamberlain, attendant
on the king, as in [Gen 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036). The
meaning of להביא, more definitely determined by the context, is to lead,
i.e., into the land of Shinar, to Babylon. In ישׂראל בּני, Israel is the
theocratic name of the chosen people, and is not to be explained, as
Hitz. does, as meaning that Benjamin and Levi, and many belonging to
other tribes, yet formed part of the kingdom of Judah. וּמן ... וּמזּרע,
as well of the seed ... as also. פּרתּמים is the Zend. frathema, Sanscr.
prathama, i.e., persons of distinction, magnates. ילדים, the object to
להביא, designates youths of from fifteen to twenty years of age. Among
the Persians the education of boys by the παιδάγωγαι βασίλειοι began,
according to Plato (Alcib. i. 37), in their fourteenth year, and
according to Xenophon (Cyrop. i. 2), the ἔφηβοι were in their
seventeenth year capable of entering into the service of the king. In
choosing the young men, the master of the eunuchs was commanded to have
regard to bodily perfection and beauty as well as to mental endowments.
Freedom from blemish and personal beauty were looked upon as a
characteristic of moral and intellectual nobility; cf. Curtius, xvii. 5,
29. מאוּם, blemish, is written with an , as in [Job
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#007).

[Dan 1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004)

משׂכּיל, skilful, intelligent in all wisdom, i.e., in the subjects of
Chaldean wisdom (cf. [Dan 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017)), is to
be understood of the ability to apply themselves to the study of wisdom.
In like manner the other mental requisites here mentioned are to be
understood. דעת ידעי, having knowledge, showing understanding; מדּע
מביני, possessing a faculty for knowledge, a strength of judgment. בּהם
כּוח ואשׁר, in whom was strength, i.e., who had the fitness in bodily
and mental endowments appropriately to stand in the palace of the king,
and as servants to attend to his commands. וּללמּדם (to teach them) is
co-ordinate with להביא (to bring) in [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003), and depends on ויּאמר (and he
spake). For this service they must be instructed and trained in the
learning and language of the Chaldeans. ספר refers to the Chaldee
literature, and in [Dan 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017) כּל־ספר,
and לשׁון to conversation or the power of speaking in that language.
כּשׂדּים, Chaldeans, is the name usually given (1) to the inhabitants of
the Babylonian kingdom founded by Nabopolassar and Nebuchadnezzar, and
(2) in a more restricted sense to the first class of the Babylonish
priests and learned men or magi, and then frequently to the whole body
of the wise men of Babylon; cf. at [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002). In this second meaning the word
is here used. The language of the כּשׂדּים is not, as Ros., Hitz., and
Kran. suppose, the Eastern Aramaic branch of the Semitic language, which
is usually called the Chaldean language; for this tongue, in which the
Chaldean wise men answered Nebuchadnezzar ([Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004).), is called in [Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004), as well as in [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007) and [Isa
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#011), the ארמית, Aramaic (Syriac),
and is therefore different from the language of the כּשׁדּים.

But the question as to what this language used by the Chaldeans was,
depends on the view that may be taken of the much controverted question
as to the origin of the כּשׂדּים, Χαλδαίοι. The oldest historical trace
of the כּשׂדּים lies in the name כּשׂדּים אוּר (Ur of the Chaldees, lxx
χώρα τῶν Χαλδαίων), the place from which Terah the father of Abraham
went forth with his family to Charran in the north of Mesopotamia. The
origin of Abraham from Ur of the Chaldees, when taken in connection with
the fact ([Gen 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#022)) that one of the
sons of Nahor, Abraham's brother, was called כּשׂד (Chesed), whose
descendants would be called כּשׂדּים, appears to speak for the origin of
the כּשׂדּים from Shem. In addition to this also, and in support of the
same opinion, it has been noticed that one of Shem's sons was called
ארפּכשׁד (Arphaxad). But the connection of ארפכשׁד with כּשׂד is
unwarrantable; and that Nahor's son כּשׂד was the father of a race
called כשׂדים, is a supposition which cannot be established. But if a
race actually descended from this כשׂד, then they could be no other than
the Bedouin tribe the כּשׂדּים, which fell upon Job's camels ([Job
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#017)), but not the people of the
Chaldees after whom, in Terah's time, Ur was already named. The sojourn
of the patriarch Abraham in Ur of the Chaldees finally by no means
proves that Terah himself was a Chaldean. He may have been induced also
by the advance of the Chaldeans into Northern Mesopotamia to go forth on
his wanderings.

This much is at all events unquestionable, and is now acknowledged, that
the original inhabitants of Babylonia were of Semitic origin, as the
account of the origin of the nations in Gen 10 shows. According to [Gen
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022), Shem had five sons, Elam,
Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram, whose descendants peopled and gave name
to the following countries: - The descendants of Elam occupied the
country called Elymais, between the Lower Tigris and the mountains of
Iran; of Asshur, Assyria, lying to the north-the hilly country between
the Tigris and the mountain range of Iran; or Arphaxad, the country of
Arrapachitis on the Upper Tigris, on the eastern banks of that river,
where the highlands of Armenia begin to descend. Lud, the father of the
Lydians, is the representative of the Semites who went westward to Asia
Minor; and Aram of the Semites who spread along the middle course of the
Euphrates to the Tigris in the east, and to Syria in the west. From this
M. Duncker (Gesch. des Alterth.) has concluded: "According to this
catalogue of the nations, which shows the extension of the Semitic race
from the mountains of Armenia southward to the Persian Gulf, eastward to
the mountains of Iran, westward into Asia Minor, we follow the Semites
along the course of the two great rivers, the Euphrates and the Tigris,
to the south. Northwards from Arphaxad lie the mountains of the Chasdim,
whom the Greeks call Chaldaei, Carduchi, Gordiaei, whose boundary toward
Armenia was the river Centrites."

"If we find the name of the Chaldeans also on the Lower Euphrates, if in
particular that name designates a region on the western bank of the
Euphrates to its mouth, the extreme limit of the fruitful land watered
by the Euphrates towards the Arabian desert, then we need not doubt that
this name was brought from the Armenian mountains to the Lower
Euphrates, and that it owes its origin to the migration of these
Chaldeans from the mountains. - Berosus uses as interchangeable the
names Chaldea and Babylonia for the whole region between the Lower
Euphrates and the Tigris down to the sea. But it is remarkable that the
original Semitic name of this region, Shinar, is distinct from that of
the Chaldeans; remarkable that the priests in Shinar were specially
called Chaldeans, that in the fragments of Berosus the patriarchs were
already designated Chaldeans of this or that city, and finally that the
native rulers were particularly known by this name. We must from all
this conclude, that there was a double migration fro the north to the
regions on the Lower Euphrates and Tigris; that they were first occupied
by the Elamites, who came down along the Tigris; and that afterwards a
band came down from the mountains of the Chaldeans along the western
bank of the Tigris, that they kept their flocks for a long time in the
region of Nisibis, and faintly that they followed the Euphrates and
obtained superiority over the earlier settlers, who had sprung from the
same stem (?), and spread themselves westward from the mouth of the
Euphrates. The supremacy which was thus established was exercised by the
chiefs of the Chaldeans; they were the ruling family in the kingdom
which they founded by their authority, and whose older form of
civilisation they adopted."

If, according to this, the Chaldeans are certainly not Semites, then it
is not yet decided whether they belonged to the Japhetic race of Aryans,
or, as C. Sax

(Note: In the Abhdl. "on the ancient history of Babylon and the
nationality of the Cushites and the Chaldeans," in the Deutsch. morg.
Ztschr. xxii. pp. 1-68. Here Sac seeks to prove "that the Chaldeans,
identical with the biblical Chasdim, were a tribe ruling from ancient
times from the Persian Gulf to the Black Sea, and particularly in
Babylonia, which at length occupied the southern region from the mouth
of the Euphrates to the Armeneo-Pontine range of mountains, but was in
Babylonia especially represented by the priest caste and the learned."
This idea the author grounds on the identification of the Bible Cushites
with the Scythians of the Greeks and Romans, the evidence for which is
for the most part extremely weak, and consists of arbitrary and violent
combinations, the inconsistency of which is at once manifest, as e.g.,
the identification of the כּשׂדּים with the כּסלחים, [Gen
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014), the conclusions drawn from [Eze
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#010) and [Eze
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005). of the spread of the Cushites
into Arabia and their reception into the Scythian army of the northern
Gog, etc. In general, as Sax presents it, this supposition is untenable,
yet it contains elements of truth which are not to be overlooked.)

has recently endeavoured to make probable, to the Hamitic race of
Cushites, a nation belonging to the Tartaric (Turamic) family of
nations. As to the Aryan origin, besides the relation of the Chaldeans,
the Gordiaei, and the Carduchi to the modern Kurds, whose language
belongs to the Indo-Germanic, and indeed to the Aryan family of
languages, the further circumstance may be referred to: that in Assyria
and Babylonia the elements of the Aryan language are found in very
ancient times. Yet these two facts do not furnish any conclusive
evidence on the point. From the language of the modern Kurds being
related to the Aryan language no certain conclusion can be drawn as to
the language of the ancient Chaldees, Gordiaei, and Carduchi; and the
introduction of Aryan words and appellations into the language of the
Semitic Assyrians and Babylonians is fully explained, partly from the
intercourse which both could not but maintain with Iranians, the Medes
and Persians, who were bordering nations, partly from the dominion
exercised for some time over Babylonia by the Iranian race, which is
affirmed in the fragments of Berosus, according to which the second
dynasty in Babylon after the Flood was the Median. Notwithstanding we
would decide in favour of the Aryan origin of the Chaldeans, did not on
the one side the biblical account of the kingdom which Nimrod the
Cushite founded in Babel and extended over Assyria ([Gen
10:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008)), and on the other the result
to which the researches of the learned into the antiquities of Assyria
regarding the development of culture and of writing in Babylonia,

(Note: The biblical tradition regarding the kingdom founded by Nimrod in
Babel, Duncker (p. 204) has with arbitrary authority set aside, because
it is irreconcilable with his idea of the development of Babylonian
culture. It appears, however, to receive confirmation from recent
researches into the ancient monuments of Babylonia and Assyria, which
have led to the conclusion, that of the three kinds of cuneiform letters
that of the Babylonian bricks is older than the Assyrian, and that the
oldest form originated in an older hieroglyphic writing, of which
isolated examples are found in the valley of the Tigris and in Susiana;
whence it must be concluded that the invention of cuneiform letters did
not take place among the Semites, but among a people of the Tauranian
race which probably had in former times their seat in Susiana, or at the
mouth of the Euphrates and the Tigris on the Persian Gulf. Cf. Spiegel
in Herz.'s Realencyclop., who, after stating this result, remarks: "Thus
the fact is remarkable that a people of the Turko-Tartaric race appear
as the possessors of a high culture, while people of this tribe appear
in the world's history almost always as only destitute of culture, and
in many ways hindering civilisation; so that it cannot but be confessed
that, so far as matters now are, one is almost constrained to imagine
that the state of the case is as follows," and thus he concludes his
history of cuneiform writing: - "Cuneiform writing arose in ancient
times, several thousand years before the birth of Christ, very probably
from an ancient hieroglyphic system of writing, in the region about the
mouths of the Euphrates and the Tigris on the Persian Gulf. It was found
existing by a people of a strange race, belonging neither to the Semites
nor to the Indo-Germans. It was very soon, however, adopted by the
Semites. The oldest monuments of cuneiform writing belong to the extreme
south of the Mesopotamian plain. In the course of time it pressed
northward first to Babylon, where it assumed a more regular form than
among the Assyrians. From Assyria it may have come among the
Indo-Germans first to Armenia; for the specimens of cuneiform writing
found in Armenia are indeed in syllabic writing, but in a decidedly
Indo-Germanic language. How the syllabic writing was changed into
letter-(of the alphabet) writing is as yet obscure. The most recent kind
of cuneiform writing which we know, the Old Persian, is decidedly
letter-writing." Should this view of the development of the cuneiform
style of writing be confirmed by further investigations, then it may be
probable that the Chaldeans were the possessors and cultivators of this
science of writing, and that their language and literature belonged
neither to the Semitic nor yet to the Indo-Germanic or Aryan family of
languages.)

make this view very doubtful.

If, then, for the present no certain answer can be given to the question
as to the origin of the Chaldeans and the nature of their language and
writing, yet this much may be accepted as certain, that the language and
writing of the כּשׂדּים was not Semitic or Aramaic, but that the
Chaldeans had in remote times migrated into Babylonia, and there had
obtained dominion over the Semitic inhabitants of the land, and that
from among this dominant race the Chaldees, the priestly and the learned
cast of the Chaldeans, arose. This caste in Babylon is much older than
the Chaldean monarchy founded by Nebuchadnezzar.

Daniel and his companions were to be educated in the wisdom of the
Chaldean priests and learned men, which was taught in the schools of
Babylon, at Borsippa in Babylonia, and Hipparene in Mesopotamia (Strab.
xvi. 1, and Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 26). [Dan
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005). To this end Nebuchadnezzar
assigned to them for their support provision from the king's household,
following Oriental custom, according to which all officers of the court
were fed from the king's table, as Athen. iv. 10, p. 69, and Plut.
probl. vii. 4, testify regarding the Persians. This appears also ([Kg1
5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002)) to have been the custom in
Israel. בּיומו יום דּבר, the daily portion, cf. [Exo
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#013), [Exo
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#019); [Jer
52:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#034), etc. פּתבּג comes from path, in
Zend. paiti, Sanscr. prati = προτί, πρός, and bag, in Sanscr. bhâga,
portion, provision, cf. [Eze 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#007).
With regard to the composition, cf. The Sanscr. pratibhâgha, a portion
of fruits, flowers, etc., which the Rajah daily requires for his
household; cf. Gildemeister in Lassen's Zeits.f. d. Kunde des Morg. iv.
1, p. 214. פּתבּג therefore means neither ambrosia, nor dainties, but
generally food, victuals, food of flesh and meal in opposition to wine,
drink (משׁתּיו is singular), and vegetables ([Dan
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#012)).

The king also limits the period of their education to three years,
according to the Persian as well as the Chaldean custom. וּלגדּלם does
not depend on ויּאמר ([Dan 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003)), but
is joined with וימן, and is the final infinitive with וexplicative,
meaning, and that he may nourish them. The infinitive is expressed by
the fin. verb יעמדוּ, to stand before (the king). The carrying out of
the king's command is passed over as a matter of course, yet it is
spoken of as obeyed (cf. [Dan 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006).).

[Dan 1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006)

Daniel and his three friends were among the young men who were carried
to Babylon. They were of the sons of Judah, i.e., of the tribe of Judah.
From this it follows that the other youths of noble descent who had been
carried away along with them belonged to other tribes. The name of none
of these is recorded. The names only of Daniel and his three companions
belonging to the same tribe are mentioned, because the history recorded
in this book specially brings them under our notice. As the future
servants of the Chaldean king, they received as a sign of their relation
to him other names, as the kings Eliakim and Mattaniah had their names
changed ([Kg2 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034); [Kg2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017)) by Necho and Nebuchadnezzar
when they made them their vassals. But while these kings had only their
paternal names changed for other Israelitish names which were given to
them by their conquerors, Daniel and his friends received genuine
heathen names in exchange for their own significant names, which were
associated with that of the true God. The names given to them were
formed partly from the names of Babylonish idols, in order that thereby
they might become wholly naturalized, and become estranged at once from
the religion and the country of their fathers.

(Note: "The design of the king was to lead these youths to adopt the
customs of the Chaldeans, that they might have nothing in common with
the chosen people." - Calvin.)

Daniel, i.e., God will judge, received the name Belteshazzar, formed
from Bel, the name of the chief god of the Babylonians. Its meaning has
not yet been determined. Hananiah, i.e., the Lord is gracious, received
the name Shadrach, the origin of which is wholly unknown; Mishael, i.e.,
who is what the Lord is, was called Meshach, a name yet undeciphered;
and Azariah, i.e., the Lord helps, had his name changed into Abednego,
i.e., slave, servant of Nego or Nebo, the name of the second god of the
Babylonians ([Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)), the בbeing
changed by the influence of בin עבד into ג (i.e., Nego instead of Nebo).

[Daniel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 1:8</span></span>

The command of the king, that the young men should be fed with the food
and wine from the king's table, was to Daniel and his friends a test of
their fidelity to the Lord and to His law, like that to which Joseph was
subjected in Egypt, corresponding to the circumstances in which he was
placed, of his fidelity to God ([Gen
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#007).). The partaking of the food
brought to them from the king's table was to them contaminating, because
forbidden by law; not so much because the food was not prepared
according to the Levitical ordinance, or perhaps consisted of the flesh
of animals which to the Israelites were unclean, for in this case the
youths were not under the necessity of refraining from the wine, but the
reason of their rejection of it was, that the heathen at their feasts
offered up in sacrifice to their gods a part of the food and the drink,
and thus consecrated their meals by a religious rite; whereby not only
he who participated in such a meal participated in the worship of idols,
but the meat and the wine as a whole were the meat and the wine of an
idol sacrifice, partaking of which, according to the saying of the
apostle ([Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020).), is the same as
sacrificing to devils. Their abstaining from such food and drink
betrayed no rigorism going beyond the Mosaic law, a tendency which first
showed itself in the time of the Maccabees. What, in this respect, the
pious Jews did in those times, however (1 Macc. 1:62f.; 2 Macc. 5:27),
stands on the ground of the law; and the aversion to eat anything that
was unclean, or to defile themselves at all in heathen lands, did not
for the first time spring up in the time of the Maccabees, nor yet in
the time of the exile, but is found already existing in these
threatenings in [Hos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003)., [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017). Daniel's resolution to refrain
from such unclean food flowed therefore from fidelity to the law, and
from stedfastness to the faith that "man lives not by bread only, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord" ([Deu
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)), and from the assurance that God
would bless the humbler provision which he asks for himself, and would
by means of it make him and his friends as strong and vigorous as the
other youths who did eat the costly provision from the king's table.
Firm in this conviction, he requested the chief chamberlain to free him
and his three friends from the use of the food and drink brought from
the royal table. And the Lord was favourable to him, so that his request
was granted.

[Dan 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#009)

לחסד נתן, to procure favour for any one, cf. [Kg1
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030); [Psa
106:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#046); [Neh
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#011). The statement that God gave
Daniel favour with the chief chamberlain, refers to the fact that he did
not reject the request at once, as one not to be complied with, or as
punishable, but, esteeming the religious conviction out of which it
sprang, pointed only to the danger into which a disregard of the king's
command would bring him, thus revealing the inclination of his heart to
grant the request. This willingness of the prince of the eunuchs was the
effect of divine grace.

[Dan 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#010)

The words למּה אשׁר = שׂלּמּה ([Sol
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)), for why should he see? have the
force of an emphatic denial, as למּה in [Gen
47:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#015), [Gen
47:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#019); [Ch2
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#004), and as למה דּי in [Ezr
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#023), and are equivalent to "he must
not indeed see." זעפים, morose, disagreeable, looking sad, here, a
pitiful look in consequence of inferior food, corresponding to σκυθρωπός
in [Mat 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016). פּני is to be understood
before הילדים, according to the comparatio decurtata frequently found in
Hebrew; cf. [Psa 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008); [Psa
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034), etc. וחיּבתּם with וrelat.
depends on למּה: and ye shall bring into danger, so that ye bring into
danger. את־ראשׁ חיּב, make the head guilty, i.e., make it that one
forfeits his head, his life.

[Dan 1:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#011)

When Daniel knew from the answer of the chief that he would grant the
request if he were only free from personal responsibility in the matter,
he turned himself to the officer who was under the chief chamberlain,
whom they were immediately subject to, and entreated him to make trial
for ten days, permitting them to use vegetables and water instead of the
costly provision and the wine furnished by the king, and to deal further
with them according as the result would be. המּלצר, having the article,
is to be regarded as an appellative, expressing the business of the
calling of the man. The translation, steward or chief cook, is founded
on the explanation of the word as given by Haug (Ewald's bibl. Jahrbb.
v. p. 159f.) from the New Persian word mel, spirituous liquors, wine,
corresponding to the Zendh. madhu (μεθυ), intoxicating drink, and =
צרחara, Sanscr. חiras, the head; hence overseer over the drink,
synonymous with רבשׁקה, [Isa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002). -
נס נא, try, I beseech thee, thy servants, i.e., try it with us, ten
days. Ten, in the decimal system the number of completeness or
conclusion, may, according to circumstances, mean a long time or only a
proportionally short time. Here it is used in the latter sense, because
ten days are sufficient to show the effect of the kind of food on the
appearance. זרעים, food from the vegetable kingdom, vegetables,
leguminous fruit. [Dan 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#013). מראינוּ
is singular, and is used with יראוּ in the plural because two subjects
follow. כּאשׁר תּראה, as thou shalt see, viz., our appearance, i.e., as
thou shalt then find it, act accordingly. In this proposal Daniel
trusted in the help of God, and God did not put his confidence to shame.

(Note: The request is perfectly intelligible from the nature of living
faith, without our having recourse to Calvin's supposition, that Daniel
had received by secret revelation the assurance that such would be the
result if he and his companions were permitted to live on vegetables.
The confidence of living faith which hopes in the presence and help of
God is fundamentally different from the eager expectation of miraculous
interference of a Maccabean Jew, which C. v. Lengerke and other deists
and atheists wish to find here in Daniel.)

The youths throve so visibly on the vegetables and water, that the
steward relieved them wholly from the necessity of eating from the royal
table. [Dan 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#015). בּשׂר בּריאי, fat,
well nourished in flesh, is grammatically united to the suffix of
מראיהם, from which the pronoun is easily supplied in thought. [Dan
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#016). נשׂא, took away = no more gave.

[Daniel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 1:17</span></span>

The progress of the young men in the wisdom of the Chaldeans, and their
appointment to the service of the king.

As God blessed the resolution of Daniel and his three friends that they
would not defile themselves by the food, He also blessed the education
which they received in the literature (ספר, [Dan
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017) as [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004)) and wisdom of the Chaldeans, so
that the whole four made remarkable progress therein. But besides this,
Daniel obtained an insight into all kinds of visions and dreams, i.e.,
he attained great readiness in interpreting visions and dreams. This is
recorded regarding him because of what follows in this book, and is but
a simple statement of the fact, without any trace of vainglory.
Instruction in the wisdom of the Chaldeans was, besides, for Daniel and
his three friends a test of their faith, since the wisdom of the
Chaldeans, from the nature of the case, was closely allied to the
Chaldean idolatry and heathen superstition, which the learners of this
wisdom might easily be led to adopt. But that Daniel and his friends
learned only the Chaldean wisdom without adopting the heathen element
which was mingled with it, is evidenced from the stedfastness in the
faith with which at a later period, at the danger of their lives (cf.
[Dan 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#006)), they stood aloof from all
participation in idolatry, and in regard to Daniel in particular, from
the deep glance into the mysteries of the kingdom of God which lies
before us in his prophecies, and bears witness of the clear separation
between the sacred and the profane. But he needed to be deeply versed in
the Chaldean wisdom, as formerly Moses was in the wisdom of Egypt ([Act
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)), so as to be able to put to
shame the wisdom of this world by the hidden wisdom of God.

[Dan 1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018)

After the expiry of the period of three years the youths were brought
before the king. They were examined by him, and these four were found
more intelligent and discriminating than all the others that had been
educated along with them (מכּלּם, "than all," refers to the other
Israelitish youths, [Dan 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003), that had
been brought to Babylon along with Daniel and his friends), and were
then appointed to his service. יעמדוּ, as in [Dan
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005), of standing as a servant before
his master. The king found them indeed, in all matters of wisdom about
which he examined them, to excel all the wise men in the whole of his
kingdom. Of the two classes of the learned men of Chaldea, who are named
instar omnium in [Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020), see at
[Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002).

[Dan 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021)

In [Dan 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021) the introduction to the
book is concluded with a general statement as to the period of Daniel's
continuance in the office appointed to him by God. The difficulty which
the explanation of ויהי offers is not removed by a change of the reading
into ויחי, since Daniel, according to [Dan
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001), lived beyond the first year of
Cyrus and received divine revelations. עד marks the terminus ad quem in
a wide sense, i.e., it denotes a termination without reference to that
which came after it. The first year of king Cyrus is, according to [Ch2
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022); [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001); [Ezr
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#003), the end of the Babylonish exile,
and the date, "to the first year of king Cyrus," stands in close
relation to the date in [Dan 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001),
Nebuchadnezzar's advance against Jerusalem and the first taking of the
city, which forms the commencement of the exile; so that the statement,
"Daniel continued unto the first year of king Cyrus," means only that he
lived and acted during the whole period of the exile in Babylon, without
reference to the fact that his work continued after the termination of
the exile. Cf. The analogous statement, [Jer
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002)., that Jeremiah prophesied in the
days of Josiah and Jehoiakim to the end of the eleventh year of
Zedekiah, although his book contains prophecies also of a date
subsequent to the taking of Jerusalem. ויהי stands neither for ויחי, he
lived, nor absolutely in the sense of he existed, was present; for
though היה means existere, to be, yet it is never used absolutely in
this sense, as חיּה, to live, but always only so that the "how" or
"where" of the being or existence is either expressly stated, or at
least is implied in the connection. Thus here also the qualification of
the "being" must be supplied from the context. The expression will then
mean, not that he lived at the court, or in Babylon, or in high esteem
with the king, but more generally, in the place to which God had raised
him in Babylon by his wonderful endowments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 2](dan002)

</div>
