<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan007)  [Next](dan009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 8:0</span></span>

Part Second - The Development of the Kingdom of God - Daniel 8-12

This Part contains three revelations which Daniel received during the
reigns of Belshazzar, Darius the Mede, and Cyrus the Persian, regarding
the development of the kingdom of God. After describing in the First
Part the development of the world-power and its relation to the people
and kingdom of God from the days of Nebuchadnezzar, its founder, down to
the time of its final destruction by the perfected kingdom of God, in
this Second Part it is revealed to the prophet how the kingdom of God,
in war against the power and enmity of the rulers of the world, and amid
severe oppressions, is carried forward to final victory and is
perfected.

The first vision, Daniel 8, represents what will happen to the people of
God during the developments of the second and third world-kingdoms. The
second revelation, Daniel 9, gives to the prophet, in answer to his
penitential prayer for the restoration of the ruined holy city and the
desolated sanctuary, disclosures regarding the whole development of the
kingdom of God, from the close of the Babylonish exile to the final
accomplishment of God's plan of salvation. In the last vision, in the
third year of Cyrus, Daniel 10-12, he received yet further and more
special revelations regarding the severe persecutions which await the
people of God for their purification, in the nearer future under
Antiochus Epiphanes, and in the time of the end under the last foe, the
Antichrist.

At Susa, in the province of Elam, Daniel saw in vision ([Dan
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001), [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002)) a ram with two horns, which a
he-goat coming from the west, running over the earth, having a great
horn on his brow, smote and destroyed ([Dan
8:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003)). After that the goat waxed very
mighty, till his great horn was broken; and in its place four notable
horns grew up toward the four winds of heaven, and out of one of them
there came forth a little horn, which directed its might toward the
south and the east and toward the holy land, contended against the host
of heaven, and magnified itself to the Prince of the heavenly host, took
away the daily sacrifice, and desolated the place of the sanctuary ([Dan
8:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008)). He then hears from an angel
how long this sacrilege shall continue ([Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013), [Dan
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014)). Another angel thereafter gives
him an explanation ([Dan 8:15-26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015)) of
the vision; and with a remark ([Dan
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027)) regarding the effect of this
revelation on the mind of Daniel, the chapter closes.

This vision, it is manifest from the definition of the time in [Dan
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001), stands in relation to the vision
of the foregoing chapter, and in its contents is united to it also in so
far as it gives more particular revelations regarding the relations of
the second and third world-kingdoms, which are only briefly set forth in
Daniel 7. But notwithstanding this point of union, this chapter does not
form a mere appendix to the foregoing, but gives a new revelation
regarding a phase in the development of the world-power and its enmity
against the people of God of which nothing is prophesied in Daniel 7.
The opinion that this chapter forms only an appendix to Daniel 7 is
based on the erroneous idea that the fourth world-kingdom, the
Macedonian, and the little horn in Daniel 7 are identical with that
prophesied of in this chapter.

(Note: According to the modern critics (Berth., v. Leng., Hitz., Bleek),
this chapter must have been written shortly before the re-consecration
of the temple, or immediately thereafter, before or immediately after
the death of Antiochus Epiphanes. This supposition is drawn from [Dan
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014), according to which the period of
oppression shall continue 2300 evening-mornings. But, overlooking the
circumstance that these critics cannot agree as to the reckoning of this
period of time, and thus announce the uncertainty of their hypothesis,
the whole of the other contents of the chapter stand in contradiction to
this supposition. It contains no hint whatever of the great victories of
the Maccabees which preceded the consecration of the temple, and first
made it possible, but, on the contrary, speaks of the oppression as
continuing unchanged till the oppressor is himself destroyed ([Dan
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025)), and then it breaks off without
any Messianic view, as one should expect from a parenetic poem of a
Maccabean Jews; so that Bleek finds himself compelled from his own
resources to add "the intimation, that the beginning of the deliverance
destined by God for His people is closely and immediately joined to the
discontinuance of the worship of Jehovah by Antioch. Epiph., and to the
destruction of this prince," in order to give to the vision "a Messianic
character.")

[Daniel 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 8:1</span></span>

The Vision

[Dan 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001), [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002) contain the historical
introduction to this new revelation. This was given to Daniel in the
third year of the reign of Belshazzar, and thus two years after the
vision of the four world-kingdoms ([Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)), but not in a dream as that was,
but while he was awake. The words, I, Daniel, are neither a pleonasm
(Hv.) nor a sign that the writer wished specially to give himself out
for Daniel (Ewald), but expressly denote that Daniel continues to speak
of himself in the first person (Kliefoth). The article in הנראה (that
which appeared) takes place of the relative אשׁר, and the expression is
concise for נראה אשׁר החזון (the vision which appeared); cf. Ewald's
Lehr. 335a. בּתּחלּה (at the first), as in [Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021), in the general signification
earlier, and in [Gen 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003); [Gen
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#021); [Gen
43:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#018), [Gen
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#020); [Isa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026), synonymous with בּראשׁנה (in the
beginning). Here the word points back to Daniel 7, and in [Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021) it refers to [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016) of this chapter.

"In vision," i.e., ἐν πνεύματι, not ἐν σώματι, Daniel was placed in the
city of Susa, in the province of Elam (Elymas). By the words, "I saw in
vision; and it came to pass when I saw," which precede the specification
of the scene of the vision, is indicated the fact that he was in Susa
only in vision, and the misconception is sufficiently guarded against
that Daniel was actually there in the body. This is acknowledge by v.
Leng., Hitzig, Maurer, Hv., Hgstb., Kran., and Kliefoth, against
Bertholdt and Rosenmller, who understand this, in connection with [Dan
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027), as meaning that Daniel was
personally present in Susa to execute the king's business, from which
Bertholdt frames the charge against the pseudo-Daniel, that he was not
conscious that Elam under Nabonned did not belong to Babylon, and that
the royal palace at Susa had as yet no existence. But this accusation
has no historical foundation. We have no accurate information whether
under Belshazzar Elam was added to Babylon or the Chaldean empire. It is
true that not Hengstenberg (Beitr. i. p. 42f.) only has, with older
theologians, concluded from the prophecies of [Jer
49:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034)., compared with [Jer
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#025) and [Eze
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#024), that Nebuchadnezzar subjugated
Susa, but Niebuhr also (Gesch. Assurs, p. 211ff.) seeks from these and
other passages of the O.T. to establish the view, that Nebuchadnezzar,
after the death of Cyaxares (Uwakhshatra), to whom he owed allegiance,
refused to do homage to his successor, and entered on a war against
Media, which resulted in the annexation of Elam to his kingdom. But, on
the contrary, Hvernick has well remarked, that the subjugation of Elam
by Nebuchadnezzar can scarcely harmonize with the fact of the division
of the Assyrian kingdom between the Babylonian king Nabopolassar and the
Median king Cyaxares, whereby the former obtained the western and the
latter the eastern half, and that from these passages of prophecy a
subjugation of Elam by the Chaldeans cannot be concluded. Jeremiah
announces neither in [Jer 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#025) nor in
[Jer 49:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034). a conquest of Elam by
Nebuchadnezzar, but rather in Jer. 49 prophesies the complete
destruction of Elam, or a divine judgment, in language which is much too
strong and elevated for a mere making of it tributary and annexing it to
a new state.

Besides, this passage in no respect requires that Susa and Elam should
be regarded as provinces of the Chaldean kingdom, since the opinion that
Daniel was in Susa engaged in some public business for the Chaldean king
is founded only on a false interpretation of [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002), [Dan
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027). From the prophet's having been
placed in an ecstasy in the city of Susa, there follows nothing further
than that this city was already at the time of the existing Chaldean
kingdom a central-point of Elamitish or Persian power. And the more
definite description of the situation of this city in the words, "which
was in the province of Elam," points decidedly to the time of Daniel, in
which Susa as yet belonged to the province of Elam, while this province
was made a satrapy, Susis, Susiana, now Chusistan, by the kings of
Persia, and Susa became the capital of this province; therefore the
capital Susa is not reckoned as situated in Elam by writers, who after
this time distinguish between Susis (Susiana) and Elymas (Elam), as
Strabo, xvi. 1. 17f., Pliny, hist. nat. vi. 27: Susianen ab Elymaide
disterminat amnis Eulaeus.

Still more groundless is the assertion, that the city of Susa was not in
existence in the time of Daniel, or, as Duncker (Gesch. der Alterth. ii.
p. 913, 3 Auf.) affirms, that Darius first removed the residence or seat
of the king to Susa with the intention that it should become the
permanent residence for him and his successors, the central-point of his
kingdom and of his government, and that Pliny and Aelian say decidedly
that Darius built Susa, the king's city of Persia, and that the
inscriptions confirm this saying. For, to begin with the latter
statement, an inscription found in the ruins of a palace at Susa,
according to the deciphering of Mordtmann (in der D. morgl. Ztschr. xvi.
pp. 123ff.), which Duncker cites as confirming his statement, contains
only these words: "Thus speaks Artaxerxes the great king, the son of
Darius the son of Achmenides Vistapa: This building my
great-great-grandfather Darius erected; afterwards it was improved by
Artaxerxes my grandfather." This inscription thus confirms only the fact
of the building of a palace in Susa by Darius, but nothing further, from
which it is impossible to conclude that Darius first founded the city,
or built the first tower in it. Still less does such an idea lie in the
words of Aelian, nat. animal. i. 59: "Darius was proud of the erection
of a celebrated building which he had raised in Susa." And Pliny also,
taken strictly, speaks only of the elevation of Susa to the rank of
capital of the kingdom by Darius, which does not exclude the opinion
that Susa was before this already a considerable town, and had a royal
castle, in which Cyrus may have resided during several months of the
year (according to Xenophon, Cyrop. viii. 6. 22, Anab. iii. 5. 15; cf.
Brissonius, de regio Pers. princ. p. 88f.).

(Note: Pliny, hist. nat. vi. 27, says regarding Susiana, "In qua vetus
regia Presarum Susa a Dario Hystaspis filio condita," which may be
understood as if he ascribed to Darius the founding of the city of Susa.
But how little weight is to be given to this statement appears from the
similar statement, hist. nat. vi. 14 (17): "Ecbatana caput Mediae
Seleucus rex condidit," which plainly contains an error, since Ecbatana,
under the name of Achmeta, is mentioned ([Ezr
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#002)) in the time of Darius Hystaspes,
in the tower of which the archives of the Persian kings were preserved.)

The founding of Susa, and of the old tower in Susa, reaches back into
pre-historic times. According to Strabo, xv. 2. 3, Susa must have been
built by Tithonos, the father of Memnon. With this the epithet Μεμνόνια
Σοῦσα, which Herod. vii. 151, v. 54, 53, and Aelian, nat. anim. xiii.
18, gives to the town of Susa, stands in unison. For if this proves
nothing more than that in Susa there was a tomb of Memnon (Hv.), yet
would this sufficiently prove that the city or its citadel existed from
ancient times - times so ancient that the mythic Memnon lived and was
buried there.

The city had its name שׁוּשׁן, Lily, from the lilies which grew in great
abundance in that region (Athen. Deipnos. xii. p. 409; Stephan. Byz.,
etc.), and had, according to Strabo, xv. 3. 2, a circuit of 120 (twelve
English miles), and according to others, 200 stadia. Its palace was
called Memnoneion, and was strongly fortified. Here was "the golden
seat;" here also were "the apartments of Darius, which were adorned with
gold," as Aeschylos says (Pers. 3. 4. 159, 160), "the widely-famed
palace," - the περιβόητα βασιλεῖα, as Diod. Sic. xvii. 65, expresses
himself.

The ruins of Susa are not only a wilderness, inhabited by lions and
hyaenas, on the eastern banks of the Shapur, between it and the Dizful,
where three great mountains of ruins, from 80 to 100 feet high, raise
themselves, showing the compass of the city, while eastward smaller
heaps of ruins point out the remains of the city, which to this day bear
the name Schusch; cf. Herz.'s Realenc. xvi. p. 263f., and Duncker,
Gesch. d. Alt. ii. p. 942ff.

The designation of Elam as מדינה, a province, does not refer to a
Chaldean province. עילם, in Greek ̓Ελυμαΐ́ς, formed the western part of
the Persian satrapy of Susis or Susiana, which lay at the foot of the
highlands of Iran, at the beginning of the valley of the Tigris and the
Euphrates between Persia and Babylon, called by the Persians Uvaja, and
by the Greeks Susis or Susiana after the capital, or Cissia after its
inhabitants. It is bounded by the western border mountains of Persia and
the Tigris, and on the south terminates in a arm, swampy and harbourless
coast, which stretches from the mouth of the Tigris to that of the
Aurvaiti (Oroatis). Strabo (xv. 732) says Susiana is inhabited by two
races, the Cissaei and the Elymi; Herodotus (iii. 91, v. 49, vii. 62),
on the contrary, names only the Cissaei as the inhabitants of the
country of the same name. The saying put into circulation by Josephus
(Antt. i. 6. 4, ̓́Ελαμος γὰρ ̓Ελαμαίους Περσῶν ὄντας ἀρχηγέτας
κατέλιπεν), that the Elamites are the primitive race of the Persians,
has no historical foundation. The deep valley of the Tigris and the
Euphrates was the country of the Semites. "The names of the towns and
rivers of the country confirm the statements of Genesis, which names
Elam among the sons of Shem, although the erecting of the Persian royal
residence in Elam, and the long continuance of the Persian rule, could
not but exercise, as it did, an influence on the manners and arts of the
Semitish inhabitants" (Duncker, p. 942).

The further statement, that Daniel in vision was by the river Ulai,
shows that Susa lay on the banks of the river. אוּלי is the Εὐλαῖος,
Eulaeus, of the Greeks and Romans, of which Pliny says, "circuit arcem
Susorum," and which Arrian (Exped. Alex. vii. 7) also mentions as a
navigable river of Susis. On the contrary, Herodotus, i. 188, v. 49, 52,
and Strabo, xv. 3, 4, place Susa on the river Choaspes. These
contradictory statements are reconciled in the simplest manner by the
supposition that Ulai, Eulaeus, was the Semitish, Choaspes the Aryan
(Persian) name of the Kuran, which received the Shapur and Dizful. In
favour of this, we have not only the circumstance that the name Choaspes
is undoubtedly of Persian origin, while, on the other hand, אוּלי is a
word of Semitic formation; but still more, that Herodotus knows nothing
whatever of the Eulaeus, while Ptolemy (vi. 3. 2) does not mention the
Choaspes, but, on the contrary, two sources of the Eulaeus, the one in
Media, the other in Susiana; and that what Herod. i. 188, says of the
Choaspes, that the kings of Persia drink its water only, and caused it
to be carried far after them, is mentioned by Pliny of the Eulus, h. n.
vi. 27, and in 31:3 of the Choaspes and Eulus.

(Note: There is little probability in the supposition that Choaspes is
the modern Kerrah or Kerkha, the Eulus the modern Dizful, as Susa lay
between these two rivers (Ker Porter, Winer, Ruetschi in Herz.'s Realen.
xv. 246), and receives no sufficient support from the bas relief of
Kojundshik discovered by Layard, which represents the siege of a town
lying between two rivers, since the identification of this town with
Susa is a mere conjecture.)

Daniel was in spirit conveyed to Susa, that here in the future royal
citadel of the Persian kingdom he might witness the destruction of this
world-power, as Ezekiel was removed to Jerusalem that he might there see
the judgment of its destruction. The placing of the prophet also on the
river of Ulai is significant, yet it is not to be explained, with
Kranichfeld, from [Dan 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003), [Dan
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#006), "where the kingdom in question
stands in the same relation to the flowing river as the four kingdoms in
[Dan 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002) do to the sea." For the
geographically defined river Ulai has nothing in common with the sea as
a symbol of the nations of the world ([Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002)). The Ulai is rather named as the
place where afterwards the ram and the he-goat pushed against one
another, and the shock followed, deciding the fate of the Persian
kingdom.

As, the, the scene of the vision stands in intimate relation to its
contents, so also the time at which the revelation was made to Daniel.
With the third year of Belshazzar the dynasty of Nebuchadnezzar, the
founder of the Babylonian world-kingdom, was extinguished. In this year
Belshazzar, the son and successor of Nebuchadnezzar, died, and the
sovereignty was transferred to a collateral branch, and finally to an
intruder, under whom that world-kingdom, once so powerful, in a few
years fell to pieces. Shortly before the death of Belshazzar the end of
the Babylonian monarchy was thus to be seen, and the point of time, not
very remote, which must end the Exile with the fall of Babylon. This
point of time was altogether fitted to reveal to the prophet in a vision
what would happen after the overthrow of Babylon, and after the
termination of the Exile.

[Dan 8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003)

The vision. - [Dan 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003). Daniel first
sees one ram, איל, standing by the river. The אחד (one) does not here
stand for the indefinite article, but is a numeral, in contradistinction
to the two horns which the one ram has. The two horns of the ram were
high, but the one was higher than the other, the higher coming up later.
האחת does not mean the first, but the one, and השּׁנית the other; for
the higher grew up last. This is not to be understood as if Daniel first
saw the ram without horns, and then saw the horns grow up, and at length
the one horn become higher than the other (v. Leng., Hitzig); but that
from the first Daniel saw the ram with two horns, but afterwards saw the
one horn grow higher than the other (Kliefoth). The angel ([Dan
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020)) explains the ram with two horns
of the king of Media and Persia. This does not mean that the two horns
are to be understood (with Theodoret) of the two dynasties of Cyrus and
of Darius Hystaspes; but since the ram represents the one kingdom of the
Medes and Persians, so the two horns represent the people of the Medes
and Persians, from the union of which the Medo-Persian kingdom grew up.
Both nations were the horns, i.e., the power of the monarchy; therefore
are they both high. The one horn, which afterwards grew up higher than
the other, represents the Persians, who raised themselves above the
Medians. A ram and goat, as emblems of kings, princes, chiefs, often
occur; cf. [Isa 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009); [Eze
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#017); [Eze
39:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#018); [Jer
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#008); [Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003). In Bundehesch the guardian
spirit of the Persian kingdom appears under the form of a ram with clean
feet and sharp-pointed horns, and, according to Amm. Marcell. xix. 1,
the Persian king, when he stood at the head of his army, bore, instead
of the diadem, the head of a ram (cf. Hv.). The point of resemblance of
this symbol is to be sought, not in the richness (the wool) and in the
aggressive nature (the horns) of the ram (Theod., Venema), but the ram
and the he-goat form, as Hofmann has justly remarked, a contrast to dull
firmness and nimble lightness, as the bear and the panther.

The ram stands by the river and pushes toward the west, north, and
south, but not toward the east. The river is thus not the one flowing on
the east of Susa, for, standing there, the ram pushing toward the west
from Susa would push against the capital of his kingdom, but the one
flowing on the west; and the ram is to be conceived of as standing on
the western bank of this river, from whence he pushed down with his
horns all beasts before him, i.e., subdued all nations and kingdoms to
his power in three regions of the earth. In the west he pushed against
Babylon, Syria, and Asia Minor; in the south, Egypt; in the north, the
Armenian and Scythian nations. These he subdued and incorporated in the
Persian kingdom. He did not push toward the east - not because he could
only push forwards and against that which was nearer, but not, without
changing his position, backwards (Hitzig); nor because the Medo-Persians
themselves came from the east (v. Leng., Kran.); not yet because the
conquests of the Persians did not stretch toward the east (Hv.), for
Cyrus and Darius subdued nations to the east of Persia even as far as to
the Indus; but because, for the unfolding of the Medo-Persian monarchy
as a world-power, its conquests in the east were subordinate, and
therefore are not mentioned. The pushing toward the three world-regions
corresponds to the three ribs in the mouth of the bear, [Dan
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005), and intimates that the
Medo-Persian world-kingdom, in spite of the irresistibility of its arms,
did not, however, extend its power into all the regions of the world.
חיּוח, to push, of beast, [Exo 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#028),
in the Piel figuratively is used of nations, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Psa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006). יעמדוּ is potentialis: could not
stand. The masculine is here used, because חיּות (beasts) represents
kingdoms and nations. כרצנו עשׂה, did according to his will, expresses
arbitrary conduct, a despotic behaviour. הגדּיל, became great. The word
does not mean to become haughty, for בּלבבו, in his heart, is not added
here as it is in [Psa 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#025), but to
magnify the action. It is equivalent to לעשׂות הגדּיל in [Joe
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020) (hath done great things), and
[Psa 126:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002), in the sense of to
become great, powerful; cf. [Dan 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008).

[Dan 8:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005)

After Daniel had for a while contemplated the conduct of the ram, he saw
a he-goat come from the west over the earth, run with furious might
against the two-horned ram, and throw it to the ground and tread upon
it. The he-goat, according to the interpretation of the angel, [Dan
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021), represents the king of Javan
(Greece and Macedonia) - not the person of the king (Gesen.), but the
kingship of Javan; for, according to [Dan
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021), the great horn of the goat
symbolizes the first king, and thus the goat itself cannot represent a
separate king. The goat comes from the west; for Macedonia lay to the
west of Susa or Persia. Its coming over the earth is more definitely
denoted by the expression בּארץ נוגע ואין, and he was not touching the
earth, i.e., as he hastened over it in his flight. This remark
corresponds with the four wings of the leopard, [Dan
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006). The goat had between its eyes
חזוּת קרן; i.e., not a horn of vision, a horn such as a goat naturally
has, but here only in vision (Hofm., Klief.). This interpretation would
render חזוּת an altogether useless addition, since the goat itself, only
seen in vision, is described as it appeared in the vision. For the right
explanation of the expression reference must be made to [Dan
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008), where, instead of horn of vision,
there is used the expression הגּדולה הקרן (the great horn). Accordingly
חזוּת has the meaning of מראה, in the Keri מראה אישׁ, [Sa2
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#021), a man of countenance or sight
(cf. Targ. [Est 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#002)): a horn of sight,
consideration, of considerable greatness; κέρας θεορητόν (lxx,
Theodot.), which Theodoret explains by ἐπίσημον καὶ περίβλεπτον.

The horn was between the eyes, i.e., in the middle of the forehead, the
centre of its whole strength, and represents, according to [Dan
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021), the first king, i.e., the
founder of the Javanic world-kingdom, or the dynasty of this kingdom
represented by him. The he-goat ran up against the ram, the possessor of
the two horns, i.e., the two-horned ram by the river Ulai, in the fire
of his anger, i.e., in the glowing anger which gave him his strength,
and with the greatest fury threw him down. The prophet adds, "And I saw
him come close unto the ram," as giving prominence to the chief matter,
and then further describes its complete destruction. It broke in pieces
both of the horns, which the ram still had, i.e., the power of the Medes
and Persians, the two component elements of the Persian world-kingdom.
This representation proves itself to be genuine prophecy, whilst an
author writing ex eventu would have spoken of the horn representing the
power of the Medes as assailed and overthrown earlier by that other horn
(see under [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008), [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020)). The pushing and trampling down
by the Ulai is explained from the idea of the prophecy, according to
which the power of the ram is destroyed at the central seat of its
might, without reference to the historical course of the victories by
which Alexander the Great completed the subjugation of the Persian
monarchy. In the concluding passage, [Dan
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007), the complete destruction is
described in the words of the fourth verse, to express the idea of
righteous retribution. As the Medo-Persian had crushed the other
kingdoms, so now it also was itself destroyed.

[Daniel 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 8:8</span></span>

The transformation of the Javanic kingdom. - By the kingdom of the ram
the he-goat became very great, powerful (הגדּיל as in [Dan
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004)). But the great horn was broken at
the height of his strength, and four similar horns grew up in its stead,
toward the four regions of heaven. חזוּת is here used adverbially,
conspicuously: there came forth conspicuously four in its place. This
statement does not contradict [Dan
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022) and [Dan
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004), according to which the four
kingdom shave not the power of the one great horn; for the thought is
only this: they represent in themselves a considerable power, without,
however, gaining the power of the one undivided kingdom. The breaking of
the great horn indicates the breaking up of the monarchy of Alexander by
his death. The four horns which grow up in the place of the one great
horn are, according to [Dan 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022), four
kingdoms. These are the dynasties of the Diadochs, of whom there were
indeed five: Antigonus, Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus laid claim to
the title of king; but for the first time after the overthrow of
Antigonus at the battle of Ipsus, 301 b.c., and thus twenty-two years
after the death of Alexander (323 b.c.), they became in reality four
kings, and so divided the kingdom among themselves, that Lysimachus had
Thrace and Bithynia, - Cassander, Macedonia and Greece, - Seleucus,
Syria, Babylonia, and the Eastern countries as far as India, - and
Ptolemy, Egypt, Palestine, and Arabia Petrea. But from the fact that
this first happened after all the descendants of the royal family had
been extirpated, we are not to conclude, with Hvernick, that the
breaking of the great horn did not denote the death of Alexander, but
the extinction of his race or house; a conclusion which derives no valid
support from these words of Justin: "All of them abstained from the use
of the insignia of this (royal) dignity while the sons of their king
survived. So great was their veneration, that although they had royal
wealth and resources, they cared not for the name of kings so long as
there existed a legitimate heir to Alexander" (Hist. xv. 2. 13). If the
breaking of the horn is placed at the point of time when the horn was
powerful, here as well as at [Dan
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004), the reference of the words to
the sudden death of Alexander in the prime of his days, and when in the
very height of his victorious career, cannot be disputed; and by the
breaking of the horn we can only understand Alexander's death, and the
breaking up of the kingdom founded by him, although it was still held
together in a considerable degree for two decenniums by his generals,
till the most imperious and the most powerful amongst them usurped the
rank of kings, and then, after the conquest of Antigonus, a formal
division of the kingdom into the four considerable kingdoms here named
raised them to royal dignity.

The prophetic representation is not a prediction of historical details,
but it gives only the fundamental traces of the development of the
world-kingdoms, and that not in the form of a historiographical
prophecy, but only so that it sketches the ground-thoughts of the
divinely ordained unfolding of these world-kingdoms. This ideal
fundamental thought of the prophecy has so wrought itself out in actual
history, that from the one great kingdom, after the death of the
founder, in the course of time four considerable kingdoms arise. The
number four in the prophetic contemplation comes into view only
according to its symbolical idea as the number of the world in its
extension toward the four regions of heaven, so that thereby only the
thought is declared, that a kingdom embracing the world will fall to
ruins in a plurality of kingdoms toward all the regions of heaven
(Kliefoth). This has been so historically realized, that out of the wars
of the Diadochs for the supremacy four kingdoms arose toward the four
regions of the earth into longer duration, - that of Cassander
(Macedonia) toward the west, that of Seleucus (Babylonia, etc.) toward
the east, that of Lysimachus (Thracia and Bithynia) toward the north,
and finally that of Ptolemy (Egypt) toward the south.

(Note: When, on the other hand, Hitzig seeks to explain the prophetic
representation, here as well as at [Dan
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004), that with or immediately after
the death of Alexander his kingdom was divided, by reference to 1 Macc.
1:6, according to which Alexander himself, shortly before his death,
divided the kingdom among his generals, he thereby not only
misapprehends the ideal character of the prophecy, but does not in the
least degree clear up the matter itself. For the passage in 1 Macc. 1:6,
which not only Arabic and Persian authors repeat, but also Moses v.
Chroene, and even later Greek and Latin historiographers, as Ammian
Marcell., has been explained by Curtius (x. 10. 5) as a fama vana, and
is proved by Wernsdorf (de Fide Librr. Macc. p. 40 f) and Droysen (das
Test. Alex. 3te Beilage, zu Gesch. des Hellen. i.) to be without
foundation (cf. Grimm, K. ex. Hdb. zu 1 Macc. 1:6). This may have been
originally put into circulation by the partisans of the Hellenic kings,
in order to legitimatize their sovereignty in the eyes of the people, as
Grimm conjectures; yet the confirmation which the book of Daniel appears
to give to it contributed to its wide diffusion by Oriental and
Byzantine authors, and the author of the first book of the Maccabees had
without doubt the book of Daniel before his eyes in the representation
he gives.)

[Daniel 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 8:9</span></span>

The interpretation of the vision.

[Dan 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009)

Without following the development of the four horns further, the
prophecy passes over to the little horn, which grew up out of one of the
four horns, and gained great significance in relation to the history of
the people of God. The masculine forms מהם and יצא (out of them came)
are to be explained as a constructio ad sensum. אחת (one) after קרן
(horn) is as little superfluous as is the מן in מצּעירה. אחת is a
numeral, one horn, not several; מן is either comparative, less than
little, i.e., very little (Ewald), or, as less than insignificance,
wretchedness, i.e., in an altogether miserable way (Hv.). The one
explanation is more forced than the other, and the idea of wretchedness
is altogether untenable. Yet the מן serves as a circumlocution for the
superlative = perpaucus (Gesen., Win., Aub.), while verbal analogies for
it are wanting. מן signifies from, out of; but it is not to be united
with קרן: one horn of smallness (v. Leng.), in which case מן would be
superfluous, but with the verb יצא: it came up out of littleness, a
parvo, i.e., a parvis initiis (Maur., Hofm., Kran., Klief.). Thus it
corresponds with סלקת זעירה, [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008).
In the words "it arose out of littleness" there lies the idea that it
grew to great power from a small beginning; for it became very great,
i.e., powerful, toward the south, toward the east, and toward the הצּבי
(the splendour, glory), i.e., toward the glorious land. הצּבי = הצּבי
ארץ, [Dan 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016), [Dan
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#041). This designation of the land of
Israel is framed after [Jer 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019) and
[Eze 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006), [Eze
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#015), where this land is called "a
heritage of the greatest glory of nations" (a goodly heritage of the
host of nations, E. V.), "a glory of all lands," i.e., the most glorious
land which a people can possess. The expression is synonymous with חמדּה
ארץ ("pleasant land"), [Jer 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019); [Zac
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#014); [Psa
106:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#024). Canaan was so designate don
account of its great fruitfulness as a land flowing with milk and honey;
cf. [Eze 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006).

The one of the four horns from which the little horn grew up is the
Syrian monarchy, and the horn growing up out of it is the king Antiochus
Epiphanes, as Josephus (Ant. x. 11. 7) and all interpreters acknowledge,
on the ground of 1 Macc. 1:10. The south, against which he became great,
is Egypt (cf. [Dan 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005) and 1 Macc.
1:16ff.). The east is not Asia (Kranichfeld), but Babylon, and
particularly Elymas and Armenia, 1 Macc. 1:31, 37; 3:31, 37; 6:1-4,
according to which he subdued Elymas and overcame Artaxias, king of
Armenia (App. Syr. c. 45, 46; Polyb. xxxi. 11). Besides the south and
the east, Canaan, the holy land, as lying between, is named as the third
land, as in [Isa 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#023). it is named as
third, between Egypt and Assyria; but הצּבי ואל ("and toward the
glorious land") is not, with Kranichfeld, to be regarded as an
exegetical addition to המּזרח ואל ("and toward the east"). Palestine lay
neither to the east of Daniel, nor geographically to the east of the
kingdom denoted by the little horn, because the text gives no support to
the identifying of this kingdom with the Javanic, the horn operating
from the west.

[Dan 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010)

As this horn became great in extent toward the south and toward the
east, so also it grew up in height even unto the host of heaven, and
some of them it cast down, i.e., some of the stars, to the earth. The
host of heaven is here, as in [Jer
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#022), the whole body of the stars of
heaven, the constellations, and of the stars is epexegetical of of the
host. Daniel in the vision sees the horn grow so great in height, that
it reaches even to the heavens, can reach the heavenly bodies with the
hand, and throws some of the stars (מן is partitive) down to the earth
and tramples upon them, destroys them with scorn. The words of the
angel, [Jer 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#024), show that by the
stars we are to understand the people of the saints, the people of God.
The stars cast down to the earth are, according to this, neither the
Levites (Grotius), nor the viri illustres in Israel (Glass.), nor the
chief rulers of the Jews in church and state (Dathe). If the people of
the saints generally are compared to the host of heaven, the stars, then
the separate stars cannot be the ecclesiastical or civil chiefs, but the
members of this nation in common. But by "the people of the saints" is
to be understood (since the little horn denotes Antiochus Epiphanes) the
people of God in the Old Covenant, the people of Israel. They are named
the people of the saints by virtue of their being called to be an holy
nation ([Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)), because "they had
the revelation of God and God Himself dwelling among them, altogether
irrespective of the subjective degrees of sanctification in individuals"
(Kliefoth). But the comparing of them with the host of the stars does
not arise from Jewish national pride, nor does it mean that Daniel
thought only of the truly faithful in Israel (Theod., Hv.), or that the
pseudo-Daniel thought that with the death of Antiochus the Messiah would
appear, and that then Israel, after the extermination of the godless,
would become a people of pure holiness. The comparison rather has its
roots in this, that God, the King of Israel, is called the God of hosts,
and by the צבאות (hosts) are generally to be understood the stars or the
angels; but the tribes of Israel also, who were led by God out of Egypt,
are called "the hosts of Jehovah" ([Exo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004); [Exo
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041)). As in heaven the angels and
stars, so on earth the sons of Israel form the host of God; and as the
angels on account of the glory of their nature are called קדושׁים (holy
ones), so the Israelites by virtue of their being chosen to be the holy
nation of God, forming the kingdom of heaven in this world. As God, the
King of this people, has His throne in heaven, so there also Israel have
their true home, and are in the eyes of God regarded as like unto the
stars. This comparison serves, then, to characterize the insolence of
Antiochus as a wickedness against Heaven and the heavenly order of
things. Cf. 2 Macc. 9:10.

(Note: The deep practical explanation of Calvin deserves attention: -
"Although the church often lies prostrate in the world and is trodden
under foot, yet is it always precious before God. Hence the prophet
adorns the church with this remarkable praise, not to obtain for it
great dignity in the sight of men, but because God has separated it from
the world and provided for it a sure inheritance in heaven. Although the
sons of God are pilgrims on the earth, and have scarcely any place in
it, because they are as castaways, yet they are nevertheless citizens of
heaven. Hence we derive this useful lesson, that we should bear it
patiently when we are thrown prostrate on the ground, and are despised
by tyrants and contemners of God. In the meantime our seat is laid up in
heaven, and God numbers us among the stars, although, as Paul says, we
are as dung and as the offscourings of all things." - Calv. in loc.)

[Dan 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011)

This horn raised its might even to the Prince of the host. הצבא שׂר, the
Prince of the host of heaven, is obviously not the high priest Onias
(Grotius), but the God of heaven and the King of Israel, the Prince of
princes, as He is called in [Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025).
עד הגדּיל (he magnified himself to) is repeated in [Dan
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025) by על יעמוד (he shall stand up
against). Wherein this rising up against God consisted, the second half
of the verse indicates in the statement that the תּמיד (daily sacrifice)
was taken away, and the building of His sanctuary was destroyed. This
verse does not record a part of the vision, but is a further development
of that which was seen in prophetic words. Hence we may not, with
Ebrard, refer its contents to heavenly events, to a putting away of the
sacrifice from before the throne of God and a destruction of the
heavenly sanctuary. On the contrary, Kliefoth has well remarked that it
is "without example in Scripture that men penetrate into heaven to
insult God; what men do against God is done on the earth." התּמיד is
everything in the worship of God which is not used merely temporarily,
but is permanent, as the daily sacrifice, the setting forth of the
shew-bread, and the like. The limitation of it to the daily morning and
evening service in the writings of the Rabbis is unknown in the O.T. The
word much rather comprehends all that is of permanent use in the holy
services of divine worship (Hgst., Hv., Hofm., Kran., Klief.). Thus
interpreted, the prophetic announcement corresponds with history; for,
according to 1 Macc. 1:45, Antiochus gave orders that they should
"forbid burnt-offerings, and sacrifice, and drink-offerings in the
temple; and that they should profane the Sabbath and festival days."

The horn also overthrew the place of the sanctuary of Jehovah. השׁליך,
to cast away, to cast forth, - used of buildings, to lay waste; cf. [Jer
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#018). מכון, properly, that which is
set up, erected; here, as frequently, of the dwelling-place of God, the
temple: so also שׁבתּך מכון (a settled place for thee to dwell in), [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017); [Kg1
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#013). It is used also of the heavenly
dwelling-place of God, [Kg1 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#039), [Kg1
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#043); here, of the temple of
Jerusalem. With regard to the historical fulfilment, cf. The
expressions, "her (Jerusalem's) sanctuary was laid waste like a
wilderness," and "pollute the sanctuary," 1 Macc. 1:39, 46; and "the
sanctuary was trodden down," 1 Macc. 3:45.

[Dan 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012)

The actions of the little horn are definitively comprehended in this
verse, as may be seen from this, that in the first hemistich צבא and
תּמיד are mentioned together. But this hemistich has been very variously
interpreted. We must altogether reject the interpretation of the
Vulgate, "Robur autem datum est contra juge sacrificium propter
peccata," which is reproduced in Luther's translation, "There was given
to him such strength against the daily sacrifice on account of sin;" or
Calvin's, "Et tempus datum est super jugi sacrificio in scelere,"
whereby, after Raschi's example, צבא is interpreted of the statio
militaris, and thence the interpretation tempus or intervallum is
derived. For צבא means neither robur, nor tempus, nor statio militaris,
but only military service, and perhaps military forces. Add to this that
צבא both in [Dan 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010), [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) means host. If we maintain this,
with the majority of interpreters, only two explanations are admissible,
according as we understand צבא of the host of heaven, i.e., of Israel,
or of some other host. The latter interpretation is apparently supported
partly by the absence of the article in צבא, and partly by the
construction of the word as fem. (תּנּתן). Accordingly, Hitzig says that
a Hebrew reader could not understand the words otherwise than as
meaning, "and a warlike expedition was made or conducted against the
daily sacrifice with wickedness" (i.e., the impure service of idols);
while others translate, "and a host placed against he daily sacrifice on
account of sin" (Syr., Grot., Harenb., J. D. Michaelis); or, "a host is
given against the daily sacrifice in wickedness" (Wieseler); or, "given
against that which was continual with the service of idols," i.e., so
that, in the place of the "continual," wickedness, the worship of idols,
is appointed (Hofmann); or, "the power of an army is given to it (the
horn) against the daily sacrifice through wickedness," i.e., by the evil
higher demons (Ebrard). But the latter interpretation is to be rejected
on account of the arbitrary insertion of לו (to it); and against all the
others it is to be remarked, that there is no proof either from [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013), or from [Eze
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#023) or [Eze
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#008), that נתן means to lead out, to
bring forward, to give contrary to or against.

[Daniel 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 8:13</span></span>

In [Dan 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) תּת (to give) is more
closely defined by מרמס (something trodden under foot); but in these
passages in Ezekiel above referred to, it \[the verb נתן\] is connected
with an actual object. Construed with the accus. pers. and על, נתן means
"to place one over anything." This conception in its different shades is
not so much derived from the words of the text as from a reference to
the history; for it is supposed (cf. Grotius, Wies.) that because the
matter spoken of is the wickedness of Antiochus, the entrance of the
Syrian army into Jerusalem and its proceedings (1 Macc. 1:29ff.) must be
set forth. צבא, notwithstanding the want of the article, and
notwithstanding the feminine construction, cannot properly be otherwise
understood in [Dan 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012) than in [Dan
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010), [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013), not of the host of the Syrians,
but only of the people of Israel. The article is wanting also in [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013), where yet, because of its being
taken in connection with קדשׁ, it can only refer to Israel. Besides this
passage, the fem. construction is found also only in [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002), where it signifies the service
of war or vassalage. But this meaning here, where weighty reasons oppose
it, this construction does not require us to adopt, for such a
construction is not infrequent. It is found not merely with names of
nations and races, so far as land and people are nearly related ideas,
but also with other words, such as even עם, people, fem., [Exo
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#016); [Kg1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#007); [Jer
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005); המון, a multitude, [Job
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#034); זרע, seed, i.e., descendants,
[Deu 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021); cf. Ewald's Lehr. 174. But
the want of the article in צבא in [Dan
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012) and in [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) has its reason in this, that that
which is said does not concern the whole host, but only one part of it,
since, according to [Dan 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010), the
hostile horn will cast only some הצבא מן (of the host) to the earth. If,
therefore, there is no sufficient ground for rejecting the application
of the צבא to the people of Israel, it follows that this interpretation
is decidedly required not only by the connection, chiefly by [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013), but also by that which is said
of צבא in [Dan 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012).

"Since in [Dan 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) the inquirer
resumes the contents of [Dan 8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010),
and along with the sanctuary names also the 'host' as the object of the
'treading down,' it is not credible that this 'host' should be different
from that mentioned in [Dan 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012)"
(Klief.). Moreover, תּנּתן can have in this passage only the meaning of
to be given up. התּמיד על can then only be translated because of the
permanent sacrifice, if בּפשׁע (by reason of transgression) is united as
object with תּנּתן in the sense: "was delivered up in transgression."
But apart from this, that נתן in the sense of to give up is construed
with בּיד, and there are wanting certain parallels for its construction
with ב merely, this interpretation, "the host (= Israel) is given up in
wickedness on account of the continual sacrifice," presents an idea not
to be tolerated. We agree, therefore, in general with the interpretation
of Daniel B. Michaelis, Hvernick, v. Lengerke, Maurer, Kranichfeld, and
Kliefoth, and explain the words thus: "and (an) host shall be given up
together with the daily sacrifice, because of transgression." צבא, an
host, i.e., a great company of the host, the people of Israel. ב before
פּשׁע (transgression) in the meaning of ב pretii, on account of (um), or
because of, cf. [Gen 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#028). פּשׁע is
the apostasy of the Israelites from God, the wickedness proceeding from
the פּשׁעים (transgressors), [Dan
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023). The objection that this
interpretation is not appropriate, because פּשׁע is repeated in [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) in union with שׁמם (desolation),
and therefore a wickedness devoted to destruction is characterized
(Klief.), avails nothing, because it in no way follows from this that
the "transgression" must be wickedness seating itself in the place of
the "daily sacrifice," idolatrous worship supplanting the true worship.
But "the transgression" cannot be that which sets itself in the place of
the "daily sacrifice," because התּמיד is not the subject of the
sentence, but is only co-ordinated to the subject. If ב in בּפשׁע is
regarded as the ב pretii, then פשׁע can only be that which would be put
in the place of the צבא. The preposition על before התּמיד means thereon,
after that, also at the same time, or together with, as in [Amo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015); [Hos
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014), etc. תּמיד, as in [Dan
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011), is not merely the daily
sacrifice, but all that had continuance in the Mosaic worship. Finally,
the jussive forms תּנּתן and תּשׁלך d (to be trodden) are to be
observed, since, according to the just observation of Kran., they are
not simply identical with the future, as Ewald (343) thinks, but here,
as in [Dan 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004), [Dan
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#010),[Dan
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016), modify the conception of time
by the presentation of the divine pre-determination or the decree, and
thus express a should, may, or a faculty, a being able, in consequence
of the divine counsel. To the verbs of the second half of the verse קרן
(horn) is easily supplied from the foregoing context as the subject; and
the passage closes with the thought: thus must the horn throw the truth
to the ground, and he shall succeed in this.

(Note: "Successus Antiochi potuit pios omnes turbare, acsi tyrannus ille
esset Deo superior. Ergo oportuit etiam hoc praedici, ne quid novum vel
inopinatum constingeret fidelibus." - Calvin.)

אמת, the objective truth, the word of God, so far as it is embodied in
the worship. As to this matter cf. 1 Macc. 1:43-52, 56, 60.

[Dan 8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013)

In addition to what has been already seen and communicated in the
vision, a further vision unfolds itself, by which there is conveyed to
the prophet disclosures regarding the duration of the oppression of the
people of God by the little horn. Daniel hears a holy one, i.e., an
angel (see under [Dan 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010)), talking.
What he said is not recorded. But while he is talking, another angel
interrupts him with the question as to the duration of the affliction,
and this is done that Daniel may hear the answer. Therefore the first
angel immediately turns himself to Daniel, and, addressing him, makes
known to him the information that was desired.

The אלי (to me), [Dan 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014), is not,
according to the old versions, to be changed into אליו (to him). What
Hitzig says in justification of אליו is of no weight; cf. Kran. The
angel that talked is designated by פּלמוני, quidam, nescio quis, as not
being more particularly definable. The question condenses the contents
of [Dan 8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010) : "Till how long is
the vision, etc.?" החזון is not the action, but the contents of the
vision, the thing seen. The contents of the vision are arranged in the
form of appositions: that which is continual and the desolating
wickedness, for: the vision of that which is continual and of the
desolation. The meaning of this apposition is more particularly defined
by the further passage following asyndetos: to give up the sanctuary as
well as the host to destruction. שׁמם after the definite noun without
the article, which is sometimes wanting ([Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021); [Eze
39:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#027); cf. Ew. 293), does not mean
being benumbed, confounded, but laid waste, fallen into ruin; thus the
wickedness which consists in laying waste. שׁמם cannot be understood
transitively, since שׁמם and משׁמם are placed over against each other in
[Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027).

In the answer, עד is to be interpreted as in the question: till 2300
evening-mornings have been, or have passed, thus: 2300 evening-mornings
long, so (=then) the sanctuary is brought into its right state. צדק
primarily means to be just, whence the meaning is derived to justify,
which is not here suitable, for it must be followed by, from the
defilement of the desolation. The restoration of the temple to its right
condition is, it is true, at the same time a justification of it from
its desolation, and it includes in it the restoration of the permanent
worship.

The interpretation of the period of time, 2300 evening-mornings, named
by the angel is beset with difficulty. And first the verbal import of
בּקר ערב is doubtful. Among recent interpreters, Berth., Hv., v. Leng.,
Maur., and Horm. (Weiss. u. Erf. p. 295) understand by its days
consisting of morning and evening (twenty-four hours); others, as Bleek,
Kirmss, Ewald, Hitzig, Wieseler (who, however, in his treatise, Die 70
Wochen, u.s.w., p. 115ff., defends the first explanation), Kran., and
Delitzsch, are of opinion that evening-morning is particularly reckoned
with reference to the offering of a morning and an evening sacrifice
each day, so that 2300 evening-mornings make only 1150 whole days. But
there is no exegetical foundation for this latter opinion. It is derived
only from a comparison, or rather an identification, of this passage
with [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025); [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011)., and [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); and therewith it is proved that,
according to 1 Macc. 1:54, 59, cf. 4:52, the desolation of the sanctuary
by the worship of idols under Antiochus Epiphanes lasted not longer than
three years and ten days, and that from [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011) it extends only to 1290 days.
But these arguments rest on assertions which must first be justified.
The passages [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025) and [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027) cannot be here taken into
account, because they do not speak of Antiochus Epiphanes, and the 1290
days (1335 days, [Dan 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011).) do not
give 2300 evening-mornings, that we can and may at once identify these
statements with this before us. In [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011) the terminus a quo of the 1290
days is unquestionably the putting away or the removal of the תּמיד
(daily sacrifice), and the giving (placing, raising up) of the
abomination that maketh desolate (i.e., the altar of idol-worship); but
in this verse ([Dan 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014)), on the
contrary, the continuance not only of the taking away of the תּמיד, but
also of the delivering up of the saints and the people to be trodden
under foot, is fixed to 2300 evening-mornings. This oppression continued
longer than the removal of the appointed daily sacrifice. According to 1
Macc. 1:10ff., the violent assaults of Antiochus against the temple and
the Jews who remained faithful to the law began in the 143rd year of the
era of the Seleucidae, but the abomination that maketh desolate, i.e.,
the idol-altar, was first erected on Jehovah's altar of burnt-offering,
according to 1 Macc. 1:54, in the 145th year of the Seleucidae, and the
purification of the temple from this abomination, and its
re-consecration, took place on the 25th day of Kisleu (9th month) of the
year of the Seleucidae 148. According to this, from the beginning of the
desecration of the temple by the plundering of its vessels and its
golden ornaments (1 Macc. 1:20ff.) to its restoration to its right
condition, more than five years passed. The fulfilment, or the
historical reference, of this prophecy accordingly affords, as is
sufficiently manifest, no proper means of ascertaining the import of the
"evening-morning." This must rather be exegetically decided. It occurs
only here, and corresponds to νυχθήμερον, [Co2
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025). But the choice of so unusual a
measure of time, derived from the two chief parts of the day, instead of
the simple measure of time by days, probably originates with reference
to the morning and evening sacrifice, by which the day was to be
consecrated to the Lord, after [Gen
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005), [Gen
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008),[Gen
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#013), etc., where the days of the
creation week are named and reckoned according to the succession of
evening and morning. This separation of the expression into evening and
morning, so that to number them separately and add them together would
make 2300 evening-mornings = 1150 days, is shown to be inadmissible,
both by the asyndeton evening-morning and the usages of the Hebrew
language. That in [Dan 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026) והבּקר
הערב (the evening and the morning) stands for it, does not prove that
the evening ad morning are reckoned separately, but only that
evening-morning is a period of time consisting of evening and morning.
When the Hebrews wish to express separately day and night, the component
parts of a day of a week, then the number of both is expressed. They
say, e.g., forty days and forty nights ([Gen
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004), [Gen
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#012); [Exo
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018); [Kg1
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008)), and three days and three nights
([Jon 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001); [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)), but not eighty or six
days-and-nights, when they wish to speak of forty or three full days. A
Hebrew reader could not possibly understand the period of time 2300
evening-mornings of 2300 half days or 1150 whole days, because evening
and morning at the creation constituted not the half but the whole day.
Still less, in the designation of time, "till 2300 evening-mornings,"
could "evening-mornings" be understood of the evening and morning
sacrifices, and the words be regarded as meaning, that till 1150 evening
sacrifices and 1150 morning sacrifices are discontinued. We must
therefore take the words as they are, i.e., understand them of 2300
whole days.

This exegetical resolution of the matter is not made doubtful by the
remark, that an increasing of the period of oppression to 2300 days,
over against the duration of the oppression limited in [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025) to only three and a half times,
or to 1290 (or 1335 days, [Dan
12:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011)), is very unlikely, since
there is in no respect any reason for this increase over against these
statements (Kran. p. 298). This remark can only be valid as proof if, on
the one side, the three and a half times in [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025) are equal to three and a half
civil years, for which the proof fails, and, on the other side, if the
1290 or the 1335 days in [Dan 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011).
indicate the whole duration of the oppression of Israel by Antiochus.
But if these periods, on the contrary, refer only to the time of the
greatest oppression, the erection of the idol-altar in the temple, this
time cannot be made the measure for the duration of the whole period of
tribulation.

The objection also, that it is more difficult to prove historically an
oppression of the people of God for 2300 days by Antiochus than the 1150
days' duration of this oppression, need not move us to depart from the
exegetically ascertained meaning of the words. The opponents of this
view are indeed at one in this, that the consecration of the temple
after its purification, and after the altar of Jehovah was restored, on
the 25th Kisleu of the 148th year of the Seleucidae, formed the
termination of the period named, but they are at variance as to the
commencement of the period. Delitzsch reckons from the erection of the
idol-altar in the temple on 15th Kisleu in the 145th year of the Sel.,
and thus makes it only three years and ten days, or 1090 to 1105 days.
Hitzig reckons from the taking away of the daily sacrifice, which would
take place somewhat earlier than the setting up of the idol-altar, but
has not furnished proof that this happened tow months earlier. Bleek and
Kirmss reckon from the taking of Jerusalem by Apollonius in the year of
the Sel. 145 (1 Macc. 1:30ff.; 2 Macc. 5:24ff.), misplacing this in the
first month of the year named, but without having any other proof for it
than the agreement of the reckoning.

To this is to be added, that the adoption of the consecration of the
temple as the terminus ad quem is not so well grounded as is supposed.
The words of the text, קדשׁ ונצדּק ("thus is the sanctuary placed in the
right state"), comprehend more than the purification and re-consecration
of the temple. In [Dan 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011), also [Dan
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#017) and [Dan
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031), Daniel uses the word מקדּשׁ for
temple, while on the other hand קדשׁ means all that is holy. Was, then,
the sanctuary, in this comprehensive meaning of the word, placed in its
right state with the consecration of the temple, when after this
occurrence "they that were in the tower (Acra) shut up the Israelites
round about the sanctuary," sought to hinder access to the temple, and,
when Judas Maccabaeus had begun to besiege the tower, the Syrians
approached with a reinforced army, besieged the sanctuary for many days,
and on their departure demolished its strongholds (1 Macc. 6:18ff., 51,
62)? - when, again, under Demetrius Soter of Bacchides, the high priest
Menelaus was deposed, and Alcimus, who was not descended from the family
of a high priest, was advanced to his place, who cruelly persecuted the
pious in Israel? - when the Syrian general Nicanor mocked the priests
who showed to him the burnt-offering for the king, and defiled and
threatened to burn the temple (1 Macc. 7)? And did the trampling upon
Israel cease with the consecration of the temple, when at the building
up of the altar and the restoration of the temple the heathen around
became so furious, that they resolved to destroy all who were of the
race of Jacob amongst them, and began to murder them (1 Macc. 5:1ff.)?
Hvernick therefore, with Bertholdt, places the terminus ad quem of the
2300 days in the victory over Nicanor, by which the power of the Syrians
over Judea was first broken, and the land enjoyed rest, so that it was
resolved to celebrate annually this victory as well as the consecration
of the temple (1 Macc. 7:48-50), according to which the terminus a quo
of the period named would be shortly before the erection of the
abomination of idolatry in the temple.

If we now, however, turn from this supposition, since the text speaks
further of it, to seek the end of the oppression in the restoration of
the legal temple-worship, or in the overthrow of Antiochus Epiphanes,
which the angel brings to view in the interpretation of the vision ([Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026)), so also in these cases the 2300
days are to be calculated. C. v. Leng., Maur., and Wiesel., who regard
the death of Antiochus as the termination, place the beginning of the
2300 days one year before the beginning of violence with which
Antiochus, after his return from the expedition into Egypt in the year
143 Sel., went forth to destroy (1 Macc. 1:20) the Mosaic worship and
law. Only a few weeks or months earlier, in the middle of the year 142
Sel., the point of commencement must be placed, if the consecration of
the temple is held to be the termination. In the year 142 not only was
the pious high priest Onias removed from his office by the godless
Jason, but also Jason himself was forced from the place he had usurped
by Menelaus, who gave Antiochus a greater bribe than he did, and gave
away as presents and sold to the heathen the golden utensils of the
temple, and commanded Onias, who denounced his wickedness, to be
deceitfully murdered (2 Macc. 2:4). Hence we need not, with Hofmann,
regard the deposition of Onias, the date of which cannot be accurately
fixed, but which, 2 Macc. 4:7ff., is brought into connection with the
commencement of the reign of Antiochus, and which probably took place
before the year 142, as the date of the commencement of the 2300 days,
although the laying waste of the sanctuary may be dated from it; since
Jason by royal authority set up a heathen γυμνάσιον with an ἐφηβεῖον,
and by the wickedness of the profane and unpriestly conduct of this man
Greek customs and the adoption of heathenish manners so prevailed, that
the priests ceased to concern themselves about the service of the altar,
but, despising the temple and forgetting the sacrifice, they hastened to
witness the spectacles in the palaestra, which were contrary to the law;
cf. 2 Macc. 4:13ff. with 1 Macc. 1:11-15. The 2300 days are thus, as
well as the 1150 days, historically authenticated.

But it is on the whole questionable whether the number given by the
angel is to be reckoned as an historico-chronological period of time, or
is not rather to be interpreted as symbolical. The analogy of the other
prophetic numbers speaks decidedly for the symbolical interpretation.
The 2300 cannot, it is true, be directly a symbolical number, such as 7,
10, 40, 70, and other numbers are, but yet it can stand in such a
relation to the number seven as to receive a symbolical meaning. The
longer periods of time are usually reckoned not by days, but by weeks,
months, or years; if, therefore, as to the question of the duration of
the 2300 days, we reduce the days to weeks, months, and years, we shall
find six years, three or four months, and some days, and discover that
the oppression of the people by the little horn was to continue not
fully a period of seven years. But the times of God's visitations,
trials, and judgments are so often measured by the number seven, that
this number came to bear stamped on it this signification; see under
[Dan 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013); [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). The number of seven years is
used in the symbolical meaning when, not to mention the cases in [Gen
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#018), [Gen
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#027); [Gen
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#026)., and [Jdg
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001), seven years' famine were laid
upon the land as a punishment for David's sin in numbering the people
([Sa2 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#013)), and when in Elisha's
time Israel was visited with seven years' famine ([Kg2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#001)). Thus the answer of the angel has
this meaning: The time of the predicted oppression of Israel, and of the
desolation of the sanctuary by Antiochus, the little horn, shall not
reach the full duration of a period of divine judgment, shall not last
so long as the severe oppression of Israel by the Midianites, [Jdg
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001), or as the famine which fell upon
Israel in the time of Elisha, and shall not reach to a tenth part of the
time of trial and of sorrow endured by the exiles, and under the weight
of which Israel then mourned.

But if this is the meaning of the angel's message, why does not the
divine messenger use a pure symbolical expression, such as "not full
seven times?" and why does he not simply say, "not quite seven years?"
As to the first of these questions, we answer that the expression
"times" is too indefinite; for the duration of this period of sorrow
must be given more minutely. As to the second question, we know no other
answer that can be given than this, that, on the one side, only the
positive determination of the length of time, measured by days, can
afford full confidence that the domination and the tyranny of the
oppressor shall not continue one day longer than God has before fixed;
but, on the other side, by the measuring of this period by a number
defined according to thousands and hundreds, both the long duration of
the affliction is shown, and the symbolical character of the period
named is indicated. While by the period "evening-morning" every
ambiguity of the expression, and every uncertainty thence arising
regarding the actual length of the time of affliction, is excluded, yet
the number 2300 shows that the period must be defined in round numbers,
measuring only nearly the actual time, in conformity with all genuine
prophecy, which never passes over into the mantic prediction of
historico-chronological data.

If we compare with this the designation of time in [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025), instead of the general idea
there expressed, of "time, times, and half a time," which is not to be
computed as to its duration, we have here a very definite space of time
mentioned. This difference corresponds to the contents of the two
prophecies. The oppression prophesied of in this chapter would visit the
people of Israel at not too distant a time; and its commencement as well
as its termination, announced by God beforehand, was fitted to
strengthen believers in the faith of the truth and fidelity of God for
the time of the great tribulation of the end, the duration of which God
the Lord indeed determined accurately and firmly beforehand, but
according to a measure of time whose extent men cannot calculate in
advance. In this respect the designation of the time of the affliction
which the horn growing up out of the third world-kingdom will bring upon
God's people, becomes a type for the duration of the oppression of the
last enemy of the church of the Lord at the end of the days.

[Daniel 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 8:15</span></span>

The interpretation of the vision - The interpretation of Daniel's
vision, as given by the angel, falls within the vision itself. When
Daniel sought to understand the vision, viz., in his mind, not by prayer
or by asking a question, he saw before him, according to [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), one standing at some distance,
who had the appearance of a man, but was not a man, but a supernatural
being in human likeness. This person resembling a man is ([Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016)) named by the angel, Gabriel,
i.e., man of God. The voice of another, whom Daniel did not see, hearing
only a human voice proceeding from the Ulai, commanded this person to
explain the vision to the prophet (להלּז, i.e., to Daniel). Nothing
further is indicated of the person from whom the voice proceeded than
what may be conjectured from אוּלי בּין (between the Ulai), whence the
voice sounded. These words do not mean "hither from Ulai" (Bertholdt),
but "between the two banks of the Ulai" (Chr. B. Mich., Hv., etc.);
according to which, the being whose voice Daniel heard appears as if
hovering over the waters of the river Ulai. This conjecture is confirmed
by [Dan 12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006), where Daniel sees a
man hovering over the waters of the river of Ulai, who by the majesty of
his appearance and his words shows himself to be a divine being, and is
more minutely described according to the majesty of his appearance in
[Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005). The question, who this man
might be, is first answered in Daniel [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005). Gabriel is not a nomen proprium
but appellativum. The angel who was described as an appearance like a
גּבר (man) is named, for Daniel, Gabriel ("man of God"), that on
subsequent occasions (e.g., [Dan 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021))
he might recognise him again as the same (Hgst., Hofm., Kliefoth). As to
his relation to other angels and archangels, the Scripture gives no
information. If Lengerke and Maurer regard him, after the book of Enoch,
along with Michael, and Raphael, and Uriel whose name does not occur in
Scripture, as one of the four angels that stand before the throne of
God, the Scripture affords no support for it; nor does it countenance
the supposition of Hitzig, that the two angels in [Dan
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015), [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016) are identical with those in [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013), [Dan
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014) - that Gabriel who spake, and the
unknown angel, was the angel of the "rivers and fountains of waters,"
[Rev 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#004).

(Note: Altogether groundless, also, is the identification of them with
the Persian Amschaspands, since neither the doctrine of angels nor the
names of angels of the O.T. are derived from Parsism. The most recent
attempt by Dr. Al. Kohut, in his researches regarding Jewish angelology
and demonology in their dependence on Parsism (Abhand. fr die Kunde des
Morgen. iv. Bc., Nr. 3), to establish this connection, is extremely poor
and superficial. The proof adduced in the first ten pages of his
treatise is confined to these points: that in the writings of the O.T.
after the Exile or during the Exile the appearance of the angels is
altogether different from that presented in the portions written before
the Exile. It is said that, as a rule, the angels in the period first
named take the human form, and bear names corresponding to their
properties - Michael, [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001); Gabriel, [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016); [Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021); and in the book of Tobit, 12:15,
not much later in date (?), Raphael; - now also, in contrast to the
period before the Exile, there is an order in rank among the angels;
Michael, [Dan 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012), is designated as
one of the first angel-princes, and, [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001), as the greatest angel-prince;
moreover, the number of שׂרים (angel-princes) is spoken of as seven,
corresponding to the Persian Amesha-pentas (Tob. 12:15, and Book of
Enoch 90:21). But does this distinction between the pre-exilian and
post-exilian doctrine of angels, even though it were allowed to be as
great as Kohut supposes, furnish a proof for the derivation of the
latter from Parsism? or does this derivation follow from the fact that
the Jews in exile came into intercourse with the Persians and the Medes,
and that about this time the Zend worship flourished? And do the angels
in the post-exilian writings for the first time indeed assume the human
form? Kohut seems to know nothing of the appearance of angels in [Gen
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)., [Jdg
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011)., [Jdg
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#009). Then does the agreement, not of
the doctrine of the O.T., but of the later Jewish apocryphal writings,
Tobit and the Book of Enoch, with regard to the number of angel-princes
and of the Amesha-penta, furnish a sufficient proof of this derivation?
Dr. Kohut does not himself appear to think so, since he regards it as
necessary, in addition to this, which is "perhaps purely accidental," to
furnish an etymological argument. Amesha-penta means "non connivens
sanctus = the holy one not sleeping;" "thus," he says, "it is a mere
Chaldee rendering of the word Amesha-penta, when in [Dan
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010),[Dan
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#014), [Dan
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#020); [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013), the Jewish angel-princes are
called עירין קדּשׁין = holy watchers." But was, then, the Chaldean king
Nebuchadnezzar, to whom in a dream a "holy watcher" appeared, a Jew? and
in what edition of the Bible has Dr. Kohut found in [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) the angel name עיר? Nor is it any
better proof that the demonology of the O.T. is a foreign production,
resulting from the contact of the Jews with the Persians and Medes
during the exile, because in [Zac
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)., [Psa
48:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001) :49; [Ch1
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001), and especially in [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006)., [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001), Satan "is depicted as a
plague-spirit, altogether corresponding to the Persian Agromainjus, the
killing spirit." Such silly talk needs no refutation.)

[Dan 8:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016)

As commanded, the angel goes to the place where Daniel stands. On his
approach Daniel is so filled with terror that he falls on his face,
because as a sinful and mortal man he could not bear the holiness of God
which appeared before him in the pure heavenly being. At the appearance
of God he fears that he must die. Cf. remarks at [Gen
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013) and [Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020). But the angel, in order to
mitigate his alarm, calls him to take heed, for the vision relates to
the time of the end. The address ([Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)), "son of man," stands in
contrast to "man of God" (= Gabriel), and is designed to remind Daniel
of his human weakness (cf. [Psa 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)),
not that he may be humbled (Hvernick), without any occasion for that,
but to inform him that, notwithstanding this, he was deemed worthy of
receiving high divine revelations (Kliefoth). The foundation of the
summons to give heed, "for the vision relates to the time of the end,"
is variously interpreted. Auberlen (p. 87) and Zndel (p. 105ff.)
understand עת־קץ not of the time of the end of all history, but of a
nearer relative end of the prophecy. "Time of the end" is the general
prophetic expression for the time which, as the period of fulfilment,
lies at the end of the existing prophetic horizon - in the present case
the time of Antiochus. Bleek (Jahrb.f. D. Theol. v. p. 57) remarks, on
the contrary, that if the seer was exhorted to special attention because
the vision related to the time of the end, then קץ here, as in [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019); [Dan
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035), [Dan
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040); [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004), also [Dan
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026), without doubt is to be
interpreted of the end of the time of trial and sorrow of the people,
and at the same time of the beginning of the new time of deliverance
vouchsafed by God to His people; and herein lay the intimation, "that
the beginning of the deliverance destined by God for His people (i.e.,
the Messianic time) would connect itself immediately with the cessation
of the suppression of the worship of Jehovah by Antiochus Epiphanes, and
with the destruction of that ruler." From the passages referred to, [Dan
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040) and [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004), it is certainly proved that עתקץ
denotes the time of all suffering, and the completion of the kingdom of
God by the Messiah. It does not, however, follow, either that these
words "are to be understood of the absolute end of all things, of the
time when the Messiah will come to set up His regum gloriae, and of the
time of the last tribulation going before this coming of the Lord"
(Klief.); or that the prophet cherished the idea, that immediately after
the downfall of Antiochus, thus at the close of the 2300 days, the
Messiah would appear, bring the world to an end, and erect the kingdom
of eternity (v. Leng., Hitz., Maur., etc.). The latter conclusion is
not, it is true, refuted by the remark, that the words do not say that
the vision has the time of the end directly for its subject, that the
prophecy will find its fulfilment in the time of the end, but only that
the vision has a relation, a reference, to the time of the end, that
there is a parallelism between the time of Antiochus and the time of
Antichrist, that "that which will happen to Javan and Antiochus shall
repeat itself in, shall be a type of, that which will happen in the time
of the end with the last world-kingdom and the Antichrist arising out of
it" (Kliefoth). For this idea does not lie in the words. That is shown
by the parallel passage, [Dan 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014),
which Kliefoth thus understands - "The vision extends to the days which
are before named הימים אחרית (latter days); it goes over the same events
which will then happen." Accordingly the angel can also here ([Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)) only say, "Give heed, for the
vision relates to the end-time; it gives information of that which shall
happen in the end of time."

[Dan 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019)

The justice of this exposition is placed beyond a doubt by this verse.
Here the angel says in distinct words, "I will show thee what will
happen הזּעם בּאחרית (in the last time of the indignation), for it
relates to the appointed time of the end." Kliefoth indeed thinks that
what the angel, [Dan 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019), says to the
prophet for his comfort is not the same that he had said to him in [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), and which cast him down, and
that [Dan 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019) does not contain
anything so weighty and so overwhelming as [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), but something more cheering and
consoling; that it gives to the vision another aspect, which relieves
Daniel of the sorrow which it had brought upon him on account of its
import with reference to the end. From this view of the contents of [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019) Kliefoth concludes that Daniel,
after he had recovered from his terror in the presence of the heavenly
messenger, and had turned his mind to the contents of the vision, was
thrown to the ground by the thought presented to him by the angel, that
the vision had reference to the end of all things, and that, in order to
raise him up, the angel said something else to him more comforting of
the vision. But this conclusion has no foundation in the text. The
circumstance that Daniel was not again cast to the ground by the
communication of the angel in [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019), is not to be accounted for by
supposing that the angel now made known to him something more consoling;
but it has its foundation in this, that the angel touched the prophet,
who had fallen dismayed to the earth, and placed him again on his feet
([Dan 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018)), and by means of this
touch communicated to him the strength to hear his words. But the
explanation which Kliefoth gives of [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019) the words do not bear. "The last
end of the indignation" must denote the time which will follow after the
expiration of the זעם, i.e., the period of anger of the Babylonian
Exile. But אחרית means, when space is spoken of, that which is farthest
(cf. [Psa 139:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#009)), and when time is
spoken of, the last, the end, the opposite of רשׁית, the end over
against the beginning. If הימים אחרית does not denote such a time was
follows an otherwise fixed termination, but the last time, the end-time
(see under [Dan 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028)), so also, since
זעם is here the time of the revelation of the divine wrath, הזּעם אחרית
ה can only denote the last time, or the end-time, of the revelation of
the divine wrath. This explanation of the words, the only one which the
terms admit of, is also required by the closing words of [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019), קץ למועד כּי (for at the time
appointed the end). According to the example of the Vulg., quoniam habet
tempus finem suum, and Luther's version, "for the end has its appointed
time," Kliefoth translates the words, "for the firmly-ordained, definite
time has its end," and refers this to the time of the Babylonish Exile,
which indeed, as Daniel knew ([Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002)), was fixed by God to seventy
years. But that in the Babylonish Exile will have its fixed end, will
come to an end with the seventy years, the angel needed not to announce
to the prophet, for he did not doubt it, and the putting him in
remembrance of that fact would have afforded him but very poor
consolation regarding the time of the future wrath. This conception of
the words depends on the inaccurate interpretation of the words הזּעם
אחרית, and will consequently fall to the ground along with it. If למועד
(to the appointment) were separated from קץ, and were to be taken by
itself, and to be understood of the time of the זעם, then it ought to
have the article, as in [Dan 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#027),
[Dan 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035). Without the article, as
here, it must be connected with קץ, and them, with החזון supplied as the
subject from the context ([Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)),
is to be translated, as it is by almost all modern interpreters: for the
vision relates to the appointed time of the end. But עתקץ, the time of
the end, and קץ מועד, the appointed time of the end, is not the absolute
end of all things, the time of the setting up of the regnum gloriae, and
the time of the tribulation preceding the return of our Lord; but the
time of the judgment of the world-kingdom and the setting up of the
everlasting kingdom of God by the appearance of the Messiah, the end of
αἰὼν οὕτος and the commencement of the αἰὼν μέλλων, the time of the
הימים אחרית ([Dan 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)), which the
apostle calls ([Co1 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)) τὰ τέλη τῶν
αἰώνων, and speaks of as having then already come.

[Dan 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020)

Since, from the explanation given by the angel in this verse, the vision
relates to the Medo-Persian and the Javanic world-kingdoms, and to the
persecuting kingdom of Antiochus which arose out of the latter, so it
cannot be disputed that here, in prophetic perspective, the time of the
end is seen together with the period of the oppression of the people of
God by Antiochus, and the first appearance of the Messiah with His
return in glory to the final judgment, as the latter is the case also in
[Dan 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)., 44f., and [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). If Kliefoth objects: The coming
of the Messiah may certainly be conceived of as bound up with the end of
all things, and this is done, since both events stand in intimate causal
relation to each other, not seldom in those O.T. prophets who yet do not
distinguish the times; but they also know well that this intimate causal
connection does not include contemporaneousness, that the coming of the
Messiah in the flesh will certainly bring about the end of all things,
but not as an immediate consequence, but after a somewhat lengthened
intervening space, that thus, after the coming of the Messiah, a course
of historical events will further unfold themselves before the end comes
(which Daniel also knew, as Daniel 9 shows), and where the supposition
is this, as in Daniel, there the time before the appearance of Christ in
the flesh cannot be called the time of the end: - then the inference
drawn in these last passages is not confirmed by the contents of the
book of Daniel. For in the last vision (Daniel 10-12) which Daniel saw,
not only the time of oppression of Antiochus and that of the last enemy
are contemplated together as one, but also the whole contents of this
one vision are, [Dan 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014),
transferred to the "end of the days;" for the divine messenger says to
Daniel, "I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people
in the end of the days, for the vision yet relates to the days." And not
only this, but also in [Dan 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035) it
is said of the tribulation brought upon the people of God by Antiochus,
that in it many would fall, to cleanse them and to purify them to the
time of the end, for it is yet for the appointed time. Here, beyond
doubt, the time of the persecution by Antiochus is placed in intimate
union with the time of the end, but, as is to be particularly observed,
not so that the two are spoken of as synchronous. This point is of
importance for the right exposition of the verse before us. If, in [Dan
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035), [Dan
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040), it is twice said laמועד קץ עוד
כּי (the end is yet for the appointed time), and thus does not begin
with the oppression of the people of God by Antiochus, so we may not
conclude from these verses - and in this Kliefoth is perfectly justified
- that Daniel expected the erection of the Messianic kingdom and the end
of all history with the overthrow of Antiochus. If, however, on the
whole, the intimate causal connection of the two periods of tribulation
placed together in Daniel 11 in one vision neither demands nor even
permits us to regard the two as synchronous, so this erroneous
conclusion drawn from these verses before us, in connection with an
incorrect interpretation of [Dan
11:36-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036), is sufficiently obviated,
both by Daniel 2 and 7, according to which the fourth world-kingdom
shall precede the erection of the everlasting kingdom of God and the
manifestation of the Son of man, as also by [Dan
9:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), where - as our exposition
will show - the coming of the Messiah and the perfecting of the kingdom
of God by the overthrow of the last enemy are dependent on one another
in point of time - the coming of the Messiah after seven weeks, the
perfecting of the kingdom of God will follow, but not trill after the
lapse of seventy weeks.

This passage is to be understood according to these distinct revelations
and statements, and not that because in them, according to prophetic
perspective, the oppression of the people of the saints by Antiochus,
the little horn, is seen in one vision with the tribulation of the
end-time, therefore the synchronism or identity of the two is to be
concluded, and the erection of the regnum gloriae and the end of the
world to be placed at the destruction of this little horn. The words,
"the vision relates to the time of the end," thus only declare that the
prophecy has a reference to Messianic times. As to the nature of this
reference, the angel gives some intimation when, having touched the
prophet, who had fallen in amazement to the ground, he raised him up and
enabled him to listen to his words ([Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018)), the intimation that he would
make known to him what would happen in the last time of violence ([Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019)). הזּעם is the wrath of God
against Israel, the punishment which God hung over them on account of
their sins, as in [Isa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005); [Jer
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#017); [Eze
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#024), etc., and here the sufferings
of punishment and discipline which the little horn shall bring over
Israel. The time of this revelation of divine wrath is called אחרית
because it belongs to the הימים אחרית, prepares the Messianic future,
and with its conclusion begins the last age of the world, of which,
however, nothing more particular is here said, for the prophecy breaks
off with the destruction of the little horn. The vision of the eleventh
chapter first supplies more particular disclosures on this point. In
that chapter the great enemy of the saints of God, arising out of the
third world-kingdom, is set forth and represented as the prefiguration
or type of their last enemy at the end of the days. Under the words יהיה
אשׁר (which shall be) the angel understands all that the vision of this
chapter contains, from the rising up of the Medo-Persian world-kingdom
to the time of the destruction of Antiochus Epiphanes, as [Dan
8:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020) show. But when he adds הזּעם
אחרית, he immediately makes prominent that which is the most important
matter in the whole vision, the severe oppression which awaits the
people of Israel in the future for their purification, and repeats, in
justification of that which is said, the conclusion from [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), in which he only exchanges עת
for מועד is the definite time in its duration; קץ מועד thus denotes the
end-time as to its duration. This expression is here chosen with regard
to the circumstance that in [Dan 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014)
the end of the oppression was accurately defined by the declaration of
its continuance. The object of these words also is variously viewed by
interpreters. The meaning is not that the angel wished to console Daniel
with the thought that the judgment of the vision was not yet so near at
hand (Zndel); for, according to [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), Daniel was not terrified by the
contents of the vision, but by the approach of the heavenly being; and
if, according to [Dan 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018), the words
of the angel so increased his terror that he fell down confounded to the
earth, and the angel had to raise him by touching him, yet it is not at
the same time said that the words of the angel of the end-time had so
confounded him, and that the subsequent fuller explanation was somewhat
less overwhelming than the words, [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), something lighter or more
comforting. Even though the statement about the time of the end
contributed to the increase of the terror, yet the contents of [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019) were not fitted to raise up the
prophet, but the whole discourse of the angel was for Daniel so
oppressive that after hearing it, he was for some days sick, [Dan
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027). From Daniel's astonishment we
are not to conclude that the angel in [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017) spoke of the absolute end of all
things, and in [Dan 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019), on the
contrary, of the end of the oppression of the people of Israel by
Antiochus. By the words, "the vision relates to the appointed end-time,"
the angel wished only to point to the importance of his announcement,
and to add emphasis to his call to the prophet to give heed.

[Dan 8:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020)

After the introductory words, we have now in these verses the
explanation of the chief points of the vision.

[Dan 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020) explain [Dan
8:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003). "The kings of Media and Persia"
are the whole number of the Medo-Persian kings as they succeed each
other, i.e., the Medo-Persian monarchy in the whole of its historical
development. To הצּפיר the epithet השּׂעיר, hairy, shaggy, is added to
characterize the animal as an he-goat. The king of Javan (Greece) is the
founder and representative of the Macedo-Grecian world-kingdom, or
rather the royalty of this kingdom, since the great horn of the ram is
forthwith interpreted of Alexander the Great, the first king of this
kingdom. The words והנּשׁבּרת to תּחתּיה ([Dan
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022)) form an absolute
subject-sentence, in which, however, ותּעמדנה is not to be taken
ἐκβατικῶς, it broke in pieces, so that ... (Kran.); for "the statement
of the principal passage may not appear here in the subordinate relative
passage" (Hitzig); but to the statement beginning with the participle
the further definition in the verb. in. with וconsec. is added, without
the relative אשׁר, as is frequently the case (cf. Ewald's Lehr. 351),
which we cannot give with so much brevity, but must express thus: "as
concerning the horn, that it was broken in pieces, and then four stood
up in its place, (this signifies) that four kingdoms shall arise from
the people." מגּוי without the article does not signify from the people
of Javan, for in this case the article would not have been omitted; nor
does it signify from the heathen world, because a direct contrast to
Israel does not lie before us; but indefinitely, from the territory of
the people, or the world of the people, since the prophecy conceives of
the whole world of the people (Vklerwelt) as united under the sceptre of
the king of Javan. יעמדנה is a revived archaism; cf. [Gen
30:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#038); [Sa1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#012); Ewald, 191; Gesen. Gramm. 47. -
בכוחו ולא, but not in his power, not armed with the strength of the
first king, cf. [Dan 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004).

[Dan 8:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023)

[Dan 8:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023) give the interpretation
of the vision of the little horn ([Dan
8:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009)), with a more special
definition of certain elements not made prominent in the vision. The
horn signifies a king who will arise "in the last time of their
kingdom." The suffix to מלכוּתם (of their kingdom) relates to the idea
contained in מלכיּות ni deniat (kings). הפּשׁעים כּהתם, when the
transgressors have made full, scil. the transgression or measure of the
sins. The object wanting to התם is seen from the conception of the
subject. הפּשׁעים, the rebellious, are not the heathen, for פּשׁע
denotes the apostasy from God which is only said of the Israelites, but
not of the heathen; and the word points back to בּפשׁע in [Dan
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012). The king that rises up is
Antiochus Epiphanes (cf. 1 Macc. 1:10ff.). עז־פּנים, hard of
countenance, i.e., impudent, unashamed in trampling down, without fear
of God or man; cf. [Deu 28:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#050). חידות
מבין, understanding mysteries; here sensu malo, concealing his purpose
behind ambiguous words, using dissimulation, forming an artifice,
interpreted in [Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025) by מרמה, cf.
[Dan 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#021). The unfolding of these
qualities is presented in [Dan 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024),
[Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025); in [Dan
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024) of the עז־פּנים. By virtue of the
audacity of his conduct his power will be strengthened, בכחו ולא, but
not by his own might. The contrast here is not: by the power or
permission of God (Ephr., Theodrt., Hv., Hitz., Kran.), reference being
made to תּנּתן (was given) in [Dan
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012), and to תּת (to give) in [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013). This contrast is foreign to the
passage. The context much rather relates to the audacity and the cunning
by which, more than by his power, Antiochus raised himself to might. The
strengthening of the power is limited neither to his reaching the throne
by the overthrow of other pretenders to it (Berth. and others), nor to
the to the following statements, he developed as king against Israel, as
well as against other kingdoms. נפּלאות (wonderful works) is used
adverbially, as in [Job 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#005) : in an
astonishing, wonderful way, he will work destruction. But from this word
it does not follow that the expression בכחו ולא is to be referred to the
power of God, for it does not necessarily mean deeds or things
supernaturally originating from God; and even though it had only this
meaning, yet here they could not be thought of as deeds accomplished in
God's strength, but only as deeds performed by demoniacal strength,
because ישׁחית (shall destroy) cannot be predicated of God in the sense
determined by the context. This destructive work he shall direct against
the mighty and against the people of the saints. עצוּמים does not here
signify many, numerous, many individual Israelites (v. Leng., Maur.,
Kliefoth), partly because in [Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025)
רבּים stands for that, partly because of the קדשׁים עם, by which we are
to understand the people of Israel, not merely the insignificant and
weak, or pious (Kran.). Hence עצוּמים cannot mean the elders of Israel,
much less merely foreign kings (Berth., Dereser), but the mighty
generally, under which perhaps we are specially to think of heathen
rulers.

[Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025)

In [Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025) the cunning and
craftiness of his action and demeanour are depicted. שׂכלו על (through
his craft) is placed first. שׂכל, sagacity, here sensu malo, cunning. On
the ground of this cunning his deceit will be successful. מרמה without
the article means "all kinds of deceit which he designs" (Hitzig). On
that account his heart is raised in haughtiness, so that not only does
he destroy many unexpectedly, but also raises himself against God. In
the רבּים (many) are comprehended "the mighty and the holy people" ([Dan
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024)). בּשׁלוה does not mean in deep
peace, but in careless security, and thus unexpectedly. An historical
proof of this is found in 1 Macc. 1:10. שׂרים שׂר (Prince of princes)
corresponds with אדני האדנים (Lord of lords) in [Psa
136:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#003). It is God; cf. [Dan
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011). But the angel adds, "he shall be
destroyed without hands," i.e., he shall be destroyed not by the hand of
man, but by God.

[Dan 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026)

In [Dan 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026) there follows, in
conclusion, the confirmation of the truth of what is said of the
duration of this oppression for the people of God. Because the time of
it was not seen by Daniel, but was revealed to him in words, נאמר אשׁר
is here used in reference to that which was, or of which it was, said.
But we need not connect this relative sentence with the genitive והבּקר
הערב (the evening and the morning), although this were admissible, but
can make it depend on מראה (vision), since the world-revelation of the
evenings and mornings forms an integral part of the "vision." והבּקר
הערב are to be taken collectively. The confirmation of the truth of this
revelation does not betray the purpose to make the book falsely appear
as if it were old (v. Leng., Hitzig); it much more is fitted to serve
the purpose of strengthening the weakness of the faithful, and giving
them consolation in the hour of trial. For in the statement of the
duration of the afflictions lies not only the fact that they will come
to an end, but at the same time also that this end is determined
beforehand by God; cf. [Dan 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007). In
other places this confirmation serves only to meet doubts, arising from
the weakness of the flesh, as to the realization of revelations of such
weighty import; cf. [Dan 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001); [Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009); [Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005); [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006).

But Daniel must close the prophecy, because it extends into a long time.
סתן is not equivalent to חתם, to seal up, but it means to stop, to
conclude, to hide (cf. [Kg2 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019); [Eze
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003)), but not in the sense of keeping
secret, or because it would be incomprehensible for the nearest times;
for to seal or to shut up has nothing in common with
incomprehensibility, but is used in the sense of keeping. "A document is
sealed up in the original text, and laid up in archives (shut up), that
it may remain preserved for remote times, but not that it may remain
secret, while copies of it remain in public use" (Kliefoth). The meaning
of the command, then, is simply this: "Preserve the revelation, not
because it is not yet to be understood, also not for the purpose of
keeping it secret, but that it may remain preserved for distant times"
(Kliefoth). The reason assigned for the command only agrees with this
interpretation. רבּים לימים (to many days) is not to be identified with
לעת־קץ in [Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), but designates
only a long time; and this indefinite expression is here used because it
was not intended to give exactly again the termination according to [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019), but only to say that the time of
the end was not near.

[Dan 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027)

In [Dan 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027) the influence of this
vision on Daniel is mentioned (cf. [Dan
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028)). It so deeply agitated the
prophet that he was sick certain days, and not till after he had
recovered from this sickness could he attend to the king's business. The
contents of the vision remained fixed in his mind; the scene filled him
with amazement, and no one understood it. Maurer, Hitzig, and
Kranichfeld interpret מבין אין (I understood it not,) supplying the
pronoun of the first person from the connection. But even though the
construction of the words should admit of this supplement, for which a
valid proof is not adduced, yet it would be here unsuitable, and is
derived merely from giving to סתן ([Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026)) the false interpretation of to
conceal. If Daniel had been required to keep the prophecy secret
according to the command in [Dan 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026),
then the remark "no one understood it" would have been altogether
superfluous. But if he was required only to preserve the prophecy, and
it deeply moved him, then those around him must have had knowledge of
it, and the amazement of Daniel would become the greater when not only
he but all others failed to understand it. To refer מבין אין only to
Daniel is forbidden by the comparison with אבין ולא in [Dan
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#008). The fulfilment of this vision
can alone lead to its full understanding.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 9](dan009)

</div>
