<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan002)  [Next](dan004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 3:0</span></span>

Daniel's Three Friends in the Fiery Furnace - Daniel 3:1-30

Nebuchadnezzar commanded a colossal golden image to be set up in the
plain of Dura at Babylon, and summoned all his high officers of state to
be present at its consecration. He caused it to be proclaimed by a
herald, that at a given signal all should fall down before the image and
do it homage, and that whosoever refused to do so would be cast into a
burning fiery furnace ([Dan 3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)).
This ceremony having been ended, it was reported to the king by certain
Chaldeans that Daniel's friends, who had been placed over the province
of Babylon, had not done homage to the image; whereupon, being called to
account by the king, they refused to worship the image because they
could not serve his gods ([Dan
3:8-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#008)). For this opposition to the
king's will they were cast, bound in their clothes, into the burning
fiery furnace. They were uninjured by the fire; and the king perceived
with terror that not three, but four men, were walking unbound and
uninjured in the furnace ([Dan
3:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019)). Then he commanded them to
come out; and when he found them wholly unhurt, he not only praised
their God who had so wonderfully protected them, but also commanded, on
the pain of death, all the people of his kingdom not to despise this God
([Dan 3:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028)).

The lxx and Theodotion have placed the date of this event in the
eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, apparently only because they
associated the erection of this statue with the taking of Jerusalem
under Zedekiah, although that city was not taken and destroyed till the
nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar ([Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008).). But though it is probable that
Nebuchadnezzar, after he had firmly established his world-kingdom by the
overthrow of all his enemies, first felt himself moved to erect this
image as a monument of his great exploits and of his world-power; yet
the destruction of the capital of Judea, which had been already twice
destroyed, can hardly be regarded as having furnished a sufficient
occasion for this. This much, however, is certain, that the event
narrated in this chapter occurred later than that of the 2nd chapter,
since [Dan 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012) and [Dan
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#030) refer to [Dan
2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049); and on the other hand, that they
occurred earlier than the incident of the 4th chapter, in which there
are many things which point to the last half of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, while the history recorded in the chapter before us
appertains more to the middle of his reign, when Nebuchadnezzar stood on
the pinnacle of his greatness. The circumstance that there is no longer
found in the king any trace of the impression which the omnipotence and
infinite wisdom of the God of the Jews, as brought to view in the
interpretation of his dream by Daniel, made upon his mind (Daniel 2),
affords no means of accurately determining the time of the occurrence
here narrated. There is no need for our assuming, with Jerome, a velox
oblivio veritatis, or with Calvin, the lapse of a considerable interval
between the two events. The deportment of Nebuchadnezzar on this
occasion does not stand in opposition to the statements made at the
close of Daniel 2. The command that all who were assembled at the
consecration of the image should all down before it and worship it, is
to be viewed from the standpoint of the heathen king. It had no
reference at all to the oppression of those who worshipped the God of
the Jews, nor to a persecution of the Jews on account of their God. It
only demanded the recognition of the national god, to whom the king
supposed he owed the greatness of his kingdom, as the god of the
kingdom, and was a command which the heathen subjects of Nebuchadnezzar
could execute without any violence to their consciences. The Jews could
not obey it, however, without violating the first precept of their law.
But Nebuchadnezzar did not think on that. Disobedience to his command
appeared to him as culpable rebellion against his majesty. As such also
the conduct of Daniel's friends is represented to him by the Chaldean
informers in [Dan 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012). The words of
the informers, "The Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the
province of Babylon have not regarded thee, O king; they serve not thy
gods," etc., clearly show that they were rightly named ([Dan
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#008)) "accusers of the Jews," and that
by their denunciation of them they wished only to expel the foreigners
from their places of influence; and for this purpose they made use of
the politico-national festival appointed by Nebuchadnezzar as a fitting
opportunity. Hence we can understand Nebuchadnezzar's anger against
those who disregarded his command; and his words, with which he
pronounced sentence against the accused - "who is that God that shall
deliver you out of my hand?" - are, judged of from the religious point
of view of the Israelites, a blaspheming of God, but considered from
Nebuchadnezzar's heathen standpoint, are only an expression of proud
confidence in his own might and in that of his gods, and show nothing
further than that the revelation of the living God in Daniel 2 had not
permanently impressed itself on his heart, but had in course of time
lost much of its influence over him.

The conduct of Nebuchadnezzar toward the Jews, described in this
chapter, is accordingly fundamentally different from the relation
sustained by Antiochus Epiphanes towards Judaism; for he wished entirely
to put an end to the Jewish form of worship. In the conduct of Daniel's
friends who were accused before the king there is also not a single
trace of the religious fanaticism prevalent among the Jews in the age of
the Maccabees, who were persecuted on account of their fidelity to the
law. Far from trusting in the miraculous help of God, they regarded it
as possible that God, whom they served, would not save them, and they
only declare that in no case will they reverence the heathen deities of
the king, and do homage to the image erected by him ([Dan
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016).).

The right apprehension of the historical situation described in this
chapter is at complete variance with the supposition of the modern
critics, that the narrative is unhistorical, and was invented for the
purpose of affording a type for the relation of Antiochus Epiphanes to
Judaism. The remarkable circumstance, that Daniel is not named as having
been present at this festival (and he also would certainly not have done
homage to the image), can of itself alone furnish no argument against
the historical accuracy of the matter, although it cannot be explained
on the supposition made by Hgstb., that Daniel, as president over the
wise men, did not belong to the class of state-officers, nor by the
assertion of Hitz., that Daniel did not belong to the class of chief
officers, since according to [Dan 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049)
he had transferred his office to his friends. Both suppositions are
erroneous; cf. under [Dan 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049). But
many other different possibilities may be thought of to account for the
absence of all mention of Daniel's name. Either he may have been
prevented for some reason from being present on the occasion, or he may
have been present and may have refused to bow down before the image, but
yet may only not have been informed against. In the latter case, the
remark of Calvin, ut abstinuerint a Daniele ad tempus, quem sciebant
magnifieri a Rege, would scarcely suffice, but we must suppose that the
accusers had designed first only the overthrow of the three rulers of
the province of Babylon.

(Note: Kran.'s supposition also (p. 153), that Daniel, as president over
the class of the wise men, claimed the right belonging to him as such,
while in his secular office he could be represented by his Jewish
associates, and thus was withdrawn from the circle of spectators and
from the command laid upon them of falling down before the image, has
little probability; for although it is not said that this command was
laid upon the caste of the wise men, and even though it should be
supposed that the priests were present at this festival as the directors
of the religious ceremonial, and thus were brought under the command to
fall down before the image, yet this can scarcely be supposed of the
whole caste. But Daniel could not in conscience take part in this
idolatrous festival, nor associate himself with the priests, nor as
president of all the Magi withdraw into the background, so as to avoid
the ceremony of doing homage of the image.)

But the circumstance that Daniel, if he were present, did not employ
himself in behalf of his friends, may be explained from the quick
execution of Babylonish justice, provided some higher reason did not
determine him confidently to commit the decision of the matter to the
Lord his God.

(Note: We have already in part noticed the arguments against the
historical accuracy of the narrative presented by the opponents of the
genuineness of the book, such as the giving of Greek names to the
musical instruments, and the conduct of Antiochus Epiphanes in placing
an idol-image on the altar of burnt-offering (pp. 34, 50). All the
others are dealt with in the Exposition. The principal objection adduced
is the miracle, on account of which alone Hitz. thinks himself warranted
in affirming that the narrative has no historical reality.)

[Daniel 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 3:1</span></span>

The erection and consecration of the golden image, and the accusation
brought against Daniel's friends, that they had refused to obey the
king's command to do homage to this image.

[Dan 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)

Nebuchadnezzar commanded a golden image to be erected, of threescore
cubits in height and six cubits in breadth. צלם is properly an image in
human likeness (cf. [Dan 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031)), and
excludes the idea of a mere pillar or an obelisk, for which מצּבה would
have been the appropriate word. Yet from the use of the word צלם it is
not by any means to be concluded that the image was in all respects
perfectly in human form. As to the upper part - the head, countenance,
arms, breast - it may have been in the form of a man, and the lower part
may have been formed like a pillar. This would be altogether in
accordance with the Babylonian art, which delighted in grotesque,
gigantic forms; cf. Hgstb. Beitr. i. p. 96f. The measure, in height
threescore cubits, in breadth six cubits, is easily explained, since in
the human figure the length is to be breadth in the proportion of about
six to one. In the height of threescore cubits the pedestal of the image
may be regarded as included, so that the whole image according to its
principal component part (a potiori) was designated as צלם; although the
passage [Jdg 18:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030), adduced by
Kran., where mention is made of the image alone which was erected by
Micah, without any notice being taken of the pedestal belonging to it
(cf. [Jdg 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#017) and [Jdg
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#018)), furnishes no properly
authentic proof that פּסל in [Jdg
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030) and [Jdg
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031) denotes the image with the
pedestal. The proportion between the height and the breadth justifies,
then, in no respect the rejection of the historical character of the
narrative. Still less does the mass of gold necessary for the
construction of so colossal an image, since, as has been already
mentioned, according to the Hebrew modes of speech, we are not required
to conceive of the figure as having been made of solid gold, and since,
in the great riches of the ancient world, Nebuchadnezzar in his
successful campaigns might certainly accumulate an astonishing amount of
this precious metal. The statements of Herodotus and Diodorus regarding
the Babylonian idol-images,

(Note: According to Herod. i. 183, for the great golden image of Belus,
which was twelve cubits high, and the great golden table standing before
it, the golden steps and the golden chair, only 800 talents of gold were
used; and according to Diod. Sic. ii. 9, the golden statue, forty feet
high, placed in the temple of Belus consisted of 1000 talents of gold,
which would have been not far from sufficient if these objects had been
formed of solid gold. Diod. also expressly says regarding the statue,
that it was made with the hammer, and therefore was not solid. Cf.
Hgstb. Beitr. i. p. 98, and Kran. in loco.)

as well as the description in [Isa
40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019) of the construction of
idol-images, lead us to think of the image as merely overlaid with
plates of gold.

The king commanded this image to be set up in the plain of Dura in the
province of Babylon. The ancients make mention of two places of the name
of Dura, the one at the mouth of the Chaboras where it empties itself
into the Euphrates, not far from Carchemish (Polyb. v. 48; Ammian. Marc.
xxiii. 5, 8, xxiv. 1, 5), the other beyond the Tigris, not far from
Apollonia (Polyb. v. 52; Amm. Marc. xxv. 6, 9). Of these the latter has
most probability in its favour, since the former certainly did not
belong to the province of Babylon, which according to Xenophon extended
36 miles south of Tiphsach (cf. Nieb. Gesch. Assurs, S. 421). The
latter, situated in the district of Sittakene, could certainly be
reckoned as belonging to the province of Babylon, since according to
Strabo, Sittakene, at least in the Old Parthian time, belonged to
Babylon (Nieb. p. 420). But even this place lay quite too far from the
capital of the kingdom to be the place intended. We must, without doubt,
much rather seek for this plain in the neighbourhood of Babylon, where,
according to the statement of Jul. Oppert (Expd. Scientif. en
Msopotamie, i. p. 238ff.), there are at present to be found in the
S.S.E. of the ruins representing the former capital a row of mounds
which bear the name of Dura, at the end of which, along with two larger
mounds, there is a smaller one which is named el Mokattat (=la colline
aligne), which forms a square six metres high, with a basis of fourteen
metres, wholly built en briques crues (Arab. lbn), which shows so
surprising a resemblance to a colossal statue with its pedestal, that
Oppert believes that this little mound is the remains of the golden
statue erected by Nebuchadnezzar.

(Note: "On seeing this mound," Oppert remarks (l. c. p. 239), "one is
immediately struck with the resemblance which it presents to the
pedestal of a colossal statue, as, for example, that of Bavaria near
Mnich, and everything leads to the belief that the statue mentioned in
the book of Daniel ([Dan 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)) was set
up in this place. The fact of the erection by Nebuchadnezzar of a
colossal statue has nothing which can cause astonishment, however recent
may have been the Aramean form of the account of Scripture." Oppert,
moreover, finds no difficulty in the size of the statue, but says
regarding it: "There is nothing incredible in the existence of a statue
sixty cubits high and six cubits broad; moreover the name of the plain
of Dura, in the province (מדינה) of Babylon, agrees also with the actual
conformation of the ruin.")

There is a difference of opinion as to the signification of this image.
According to the common view (cf. e.g., Hgstb. Beitr. i. p. 97),
Nebuchadnezzar wished to erect a statue as an expression of his thanks
to his god Bel for his great victories, and on that account also to
consecrate it with religious ceremonies. On the other hand, Hofm.
(Weiss. u. Erf. i. p. 277) remarks, that the statue was not the image of
a god, because a distinction is made between falling down to it and the
service to his god which Nebuchadnezzar required ([Dan
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012), [Dan
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#014), [Dan
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018)) from his officers of state. This
distinction, however, is not well supported; for in these verses praying
to the gods of Nebuchadnezzar is placed on an equality with falling down
before the image. But on the other hand, the statue is not designated as
the image of a god, or the image of Belus; therefore we agree with
Klief. in his opinion, that the statue was a symbol of the world-power
established by Nebuchadnezzar, so that falling down before it was a
manifestation of reverence not only to the world-power, but also to its
gods; and that therefore the Israelites could not fall down before the
image, because in doing so they would have rendered homage at the same
time also to the god or gods of Nebuchadnezzar, in the image of the
world-power. But the idea of representing the world-power founded by him
as a צלם was probably suggested to Nebuchadnezzar by the tselem seen
(Daniel 2) by him in a dream, whose head of gold his world-kingdom was
described to him as being. We may not, however, with Klief., seek any
sanction for the idea that the significance off the image is in its
size, 6, 10, and six multiplied by ten cubits, because the symbolical
significance of the number 6 as the signature of human activity, to
which the divine completion (7) is wanting, is not a Babylonian idea.
Still less can we, with Z׬ndel (p. 13), explain the absence of Daniel on
this occasion as arising from the political import of the statue,
because the supposition of Daniel's not having been called to be present
is a mere conjecture, and a very improbable conjecture; and the
supposition that Daniel, as being chief of the Magi, would not be
numbered among the secular officers of state, is decidedly erroneous.

[Dan 3:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002)

Nebuchadnezzar commanded all the chief officers of the kingdom to be
present at the solemn dedication of the image. שׁלח, he sent, viz.,
מלאכים or רצים messengers, [Sa1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#007);
[Ch2 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#006), [Ch2
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#010); [Est
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015). Of the great officers of state,
seven classes are named: - 1. אחשׁדּרפּניּא, i.e., administrators of the
Khshatra, in Old Pers. dominion, province, and pâvan in Zend.,
guardians, watchers, in Greek Σατράπης, the chief representatives of the
king in the provinces. 2. סגניּא, Hebr. סגנים, from the Old Pers.
(although not proved) akana, to command (see under [Dan
2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048)), commanders, probably the
military chiefs of the provinces. 3. פּחותא, Hebr. פּחה, פחות, also an
Old Pers. word, whose etymon and meaning have not yet been established
(see under [Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)), denotes the
presidents of the civil government, the guardians of the country; cf.
[Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001), [Hag
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#014); [Neh
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014), [Neh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018). 4. אדרגּזריּא, chief judges,
from the Sem. גזר, to distinguish, and אדר, dignity (cf. אדרמּלך),
properly, chief arbitrators, counsellors of the government. 5. גּדבריּא,
a word of Aryan origin, from גּדבר, identical with גּזבּר, masters of
the treasury, superintendents of the public treasury. 6. דּתבריּא, the
Old Pers. dâta-bara, guardians of the law, lawyers (cf. דּת, law). 7.
תּפתּיּא, Semitic, from Arab. fty IV to give a just sentence, thus
judges in the narrower sense of the word. Finally, all שׁלטני, rulers,
i.e., governors of provinces, prefects, who were subordinate to the
chief governor, cf. [Dan 2:48-49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048).

All these officers were summoned "to come (מתא from אתא, with the
rejection of the initial )א to the dedication of the image." The
objection of v. Leng. and Hitz., that this call would "put a stop to the
government of the country," only shows their ignorance of the
departments of the state-government, and by no means makes the narrative
doubtful. The affairs of the state did not lie so exclusively in the
hands of the presidents of the different branches of the government, as
that their temporary absence should cause a suspension of all the
affairs of government. חנכּה is used of the dedication of a house ([Deu
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)) as well as of the temple ([Kg1
8:63](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#063); [Ch2
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#005); [Ezr
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016)), and here undoubtedly denotes an
act connected with religious usages, by means of which the image, when
the great officers of the kingdom fell down before it, was solemnly
consecrated as the symbol of the world-power and (in the heathen sense)
of its divine glory. This act is described ([Dan
3:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#003)) in so far as the object
contemplated rendered it necessary.

When all the great officers of state were assembled, a herald proclaimed
that as soon as the sound of the music was heard, all who were present
should, on pain of death by being cast into the fire, fall down before
the image and offer homage to it; which they all did as soon as the
signal was given. The form קאמין, [Dan
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#003), corresponds to the sing. קאם
([Dan 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031)) as it is written in Syr.,
but is read קימין. The Masoretes substitute for it in the Talm. The
common form קימין; cf. Frst, Lehrgb. der aram. Idiom. p. 161, and
Luzzatto, Elem. Gram. p. 33. The expression לקבל, [Dan
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#003), and [Ezr
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#016), is founded on קבל, the
semi-vowel of the preceding sound being absorbed, as in the Syr.
l-kebel. On כּרוזא, herald, and on the form לכון, see under [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005). אמרין, they say, for "it is said
to you." The expression of the passive by means of a plural form of the
active used impersonally, either participially or by 3rd pers. perf.
plur., is found in Hebr., but is quite common in Chald.; cf. Ewald,
Lehr. d. hebr. Spr. 128, b, and Winer, Chald. Gram. 49, 3. The
proclamation of the herald refers not only to the officers who were
summoned to the festival, but to all who were present, since besides the
officers there was certainly present a great crowd of people from all
parts of the kingdom, as M. Geier has rightly remarked, so that the
assembly consisted of persons of various races and languages. אמּיּא
denotes tribes of people, as the Hebr. אמּה, אמּות [Gen
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016), denotes the several tribes of
Ishmael, and [Num 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015) the separate
tribes of the Midianites, and is thus not so extensive in its import as
עמּין, peoples. לשּׁניּא, corresponding to הלּשׁות, [Isa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018), designates (vide [Gen
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005), [Gen
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#020), [Gen
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#031)) communities of men of the same
language, and is not a tautology, since the distinctions of nation and
of language are in the course of history frequently found. The placing
together of the three words denotes all nations, however they may have
widely branched off into tribes with different languages, and expresses
the sense that no one in the whole kingdom should be exempted from the
command. It is a mode of expression (cf. [Dan
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#007), [Dan
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029), 31\[4:1\], and [Dan
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#026)\[25\]) specially characterizing
the pathetic style of the herald and the official language of the
world-kingdom, which Daniel also ([Dan
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#019); [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)) makes use of, and which from the
latter passage is transferred to the Apocalypse, and by the union of
these passages in Daniel with [Isa
66:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018) is increased to ἔθνη (גּוים in
Isa.), φυλλαι,́ λαοὶ καὶ γλῶσσαι ([Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009); [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009); [Rev
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#007); [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006); [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)).

In the same passage זמנא בּהּ, [Dan
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#007) (cf. also [Dan
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#008)), is interchanged with בּעדּנא, at
the time ([Dan 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005) and [Dan
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015)); but it is to be distinguished
from בּהּ־שׁעתּא, at the same moment, [Dan
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#006) and [Dan
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015); for שׁעא or שׁעה has in the Bib.
Chald. only the meaning instant, moment, cf. [Dan
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016), [Dan
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030); [Dan
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#005), and acquires the signification
short time, hour, first in the Targ. and Rabbin. In the enumeration also
of the six names of the musical instruments with the addition: and all
kinds of music, the pompous language of the world-ruler and of the
herald of his power is well expressed. Regarding the Greek names of
three of these instruments see p. 507. The great delight of the
Babylonians in music and stringed instruments appears from [Isa
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011) and [Psa
137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003), and is confirmed by the
testimony of Herod. i. 191, and Curtius, [Dan
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#003). קרנא, horn, is the far-sounding
tuba of the ancients, the קרן or שׁופר of the Hebr.; see under [Jos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005). משׁרוקיתא, from שׁרק, to hiss, to
whistle, is the reed-flute, translated by the lxx and Theodot. σύριγξ,
the shepherd's or Pan's pipes, which consisted of several reeds of
different thicknesses and of different lengths bound together, and,
according to a Greek tradition (Pollux, iv. 9, 15), was invented by two
Medes. קיתתס (according to the Kethiv; but the Keri and the Targ. and
Rabbin. give the form קתרס) is the Greek κιθάρα or κίθαρις, harp, for
the Greek ending ις becomes ος in the Aramaic, as in many similar cases;
cf. Ges. Thes. p. 1215. סבּכא, corresponding to the Greek σαμβύκη, but a
Syrian invention, is, according to Athen. iv. p. 175, a four-stringed
instrument, having a sharp, clear tone; cf. Ges. Thes. p. 935. פּסנמּרין
(in [Dan 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#007) written with a טinstead
of תand in [Dan 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#010) and [Dan
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015) pointed with a Tsere under the )ת
is the Greek ψαλτήριον, of which the Greek ending ιον becomes
abbreviated in the Aram. into ין (cf. Ges. Thes. p. 1116). The word has
no etymology in the Semitic. It was an instrument like a harp, which
according to Augustin (on [Psa 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002)
\[32:2\] and [Psa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004) \[42:4) was
distinguished from the cithara in this particular, that while the
strings of the cithara passed over the sounding-board, those of the
psalterium (or organon) were placed under it. Such harps are found on
Egyptian (see Rosellini) and also on Assyrian monuments (cf. Layard,
Ninev. and Bab., Table xiii. 4). סוּמפּניה, in [Dan
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#010) סיפניה, is not derived from ספן,
contignare, but is the Aramaic form of συμφωνία, bag-pipes, which is
called in Italy at the present day sampogna, and derives its Greek name
from the accord of two pipes placed in the bag; cf. Ges. Thes. p. 941.
זמרא signifies, not "song," but musical playing, from reemaz, to play
the strings, ψάλλειν; and because the music of the instrument was
accompanied with song, it means also the song accompanying the music.
The explanation of זמרא by singing stands here in opposition to the זני
כּל, since all sorts of songs could only be sung after one another, but
the herald speaks of the simultaneous rise of the sound. The limiting of
the word also to the playing on a stringed instrument does not fit the
context, inasmuch as wind instruments are also named. Plainly in the
words זמרא זני כּל all the other instruments not particularly named are
comprehended, so that זמרא is to be understood generally of playing on
musical instruments. בּהּ־שׁעתּא, in the same instant. The frequent
pleonastic use in the later Aramaic of the union of the preposition with
a suffix anticipating the following noun, whereby the preposition is
frequently repeated before the noun, as e.g., בּדּניּאל בּהּ, [Dan
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#012), cf. [Dan
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030), has in the Bibl. Chald.
generally a certain emphasis, for the pronominal suffix is manifestly
used demonstratively, in the sense even this, even that.

Homage was commanded to be shown to the image under the pain of death to
those who refused. Since "the dominion of Nebuchadnezzar was founded not
by right, but by the might of conquest" (Klief.), and the homage which
he commanded to be shown to the image was regarded not only as a proof
of subjection under the power of the king, but comprehended in it also
the recognition of his gods as the gods of the kingdom, instances of
refusal were to be expected. In the demand of the king there was
certainly a kind of religious oppression, but by no means, as Bleek, v.
Leng., and other critics maintain, a religious persecution, as among
heathen rulers Antiochus Epiphanes practised it. For so tolerant was
heathenism, that it recognised the gods of the different nations; but
all heathen kings required that the nations subdued by them should also
recognise the gods of their kingdom, which they held to be more powerful
than were the gods of the vanquished nations. A refusal to yield homage
to the gods of the kingdom they regarded as an act of hostility against
the kingdom and its monarch, while every one might at the same time
honour his own national god. This acknowledgement, that the gods of the
kingdom were the more powerful, every heathen could grant; and thus
Nebuchadnezzar demanded nothing in a religious point of view which every
one of his subjects could not yield. To him, therefore, the refusal of
the Jews could not but appear as opposition to the greatness of his
kingdom. But the Jews, or Israelites, could not do homage to the gods of
Nebuchadnezzar without rejecting their faith that Jehovah alone was God,
and that besides Him there were no gods. Therefore Nebuchadnezzar
practised towards them, without, from his polytheistic standpoint,
designing it, an intolerable religious coercion, which, whoever, is
fundamentally different from the persecution of Judaism by Antiochus
Epiphanes, who forbade the Jews on pain of death to serve their God, and
endeavoured utterly to destroy the Jewish religion. - Regarding the
structure of the fiery furnace, see under [Dan
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#022).

[Dan 3:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#008)

The Chaldeans immediately denounced Daniel's three friends as
transgressors of the king's command. דּנה כּל־קבל, therefore, viz.,
because the friends of Daniel who were placed over the province of
Babylon had not, by falling down before the golden image, done it
homage. That they did not do so is not expressly said, but is expressed
in what follows. כּשׂדּאין גּברין are not Chaldeans as astrologers of
magi (כּשׂדּים), but members of the Chaldean nation, in contrast to
יהוּדיא, the Jews. קרבוּ, they came near to the king. דּי קרצי אכל,
literally, to eat the flesh of any one, is in Aramaic the common
expression for to calumniate, to denounce. That which was odious in
their report was, that they used this instance of disobedience to the
king's command on the part of the Jewish officers as an occasion of
removing them from their offices, - that their denunciation of them
arose from their envying the Jews their position of influence, as in
[Dan 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005) (4)f. Therefore they give
prominence to the fact that the king had raised these Jews to places of
rule in the province of Babylon.

With this form of address in [Dan 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#009),
cf. [Dan 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004). טעם שׂים signifies in
[Dan 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012) rationem reddere, to attend
to, to have regard for. In [Dan 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#010),
as frequently, the expression signifies, on the contrary, to give an
opinion, a judgment, i.e., to publish a command. The Keth. לאלהיך ([Dan
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012)), for which the Keri prefers the
sing. form לאלהך, in sound the same as the contracted plur., is to be
maintained as correct; for the Keri here, as in [Dan
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018), supporting itself on לאלהי, [Dan
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#014), rests on the idea that by the
honouring of his god only the doing of homage to the image is meant,
while the not doing homage to the image only gives proof of this, that
they altogether refused to honour the gods of Nebuchadnezzar. This is
placed in the foreground by the accusers, so as to arouse the
indignation of the king. "These Chaldeans," Hitz. remarks quite justly,
"knew the three Jews, who were so placed as to be well known, and at the
same time envied, before this. They had long known that they did not
worship idols; but on this occasion, when their religion made it
necessary for the Jews to disobey the king's command, they make use of
their knowledge."

[Dan 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#013)

That they succeeded in their object, Nebuchadnezzar shows in the command
given in anger and fury to bring the rebels before him. היתיוּ,
notwithstanding its likeness to the Hebr. Hiphil form התיוּ, [Isa
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014), is not the Hebraizing Aphel,
but, as היתית, [Dan 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018), shows, is a
Hebraizing passive from of the Aphel, since the active form is היתיו,
[Dan 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003), and is a passive formation
peculiar to the Bib. Chald, for which in the Targg. Ittaphal is used.

[Daniel 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 3:14</span></span>

The trial of the accused.

[Dan 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#014)

The question הצדא the old translators incorrectly explain by Is it true?
In the justice of the accusation Nebuchadnezzar had no doubt whatever,
and צדא has not this meaning. Also the meaning, scorn, which אּצדי in
Aram. has, and L. de Dieu, Hv., and Kran. make use of, does not appear
to be quite consistent, since Nebuchadnezzar, if he had seen in the
refusal to do homage to the image a despising of his gods, then
certainly he would not have publicly repeated his command, and afforded
to the accused the possibility of escaping the threatened punishment, as
he did ([Dan 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015)). We therefore agree
with Hitz. and Klief., who interpret it, after the Hebr. צדיּה, [Num
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#020)., of malicious resolution, not
merely intention, according to Gesen., Winer, and others. For all the
three could not unintentionally or accidentally have made themselves
guilty of transgression. The form הצדא we regard as a noun form with
הinterrog. prefixed in adverbial cases, and not an Aphel formation:
Scorning, Shadrach, etc., do ye not serve? (Kran.) The affirmative
explanation of the verse, according to which the king would suppose the
motive of the transgression as decided, does not agree with the
alternative which ([Dan 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015)) he
places before the accused. But if הצדא is regarded as a question, there
is no need for our supplying the conjunction דּי before the following
verb, but we may unite the חצדא in one sentence with the following verb:
"are ye of design ... not obeying?" Nebuchadnezzar speaks of his god in
contrast to the God of the Jews.

[Dan 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015)

עתידין taken with the following clause, תּפּלוּן ... דּי, is not a
circumlocution for the future (according to Winer, Chald. Gram. 45, 2).
This does not follow from the use of the simple future in contrast, but
it retains its peculiar meaning ready. The conclusion to the first
clause is omitted, because it is self-evident from the conclusion of the
second, opposed passage: then ye will not be cast into the fiery
furnace. Similar omissions are found in [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032); [Luk
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#009). For the purpose of giving
strength to his threatening, Nebuchadnezzar adds that no god would
deliver them out of his hand. In this Hitz. is not justified in
supposing there is included a blaspheming of Jehovah like that of
Sennacherib, [Isa 37:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#010). The case is
different. Sennacherib raised his gods above Jehovah, the God of the
Jews; Nebuchadnezzar only declares that deliverance out of the fiery
furnace is a work which no god can accomplish, and in this he only
indirectly likens the God of the Jews to the gods of the heathen.

[Dan 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016)

In the answer of the accused, נבוּכדנצּר is not, contrary to the accent,
to be placed in apposition to למלכּא; for, as Kran. has rightly
remarked, an intentional omission of מלכּא in addressing Nebuchadnezzar
is, after [Dan 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018), where מלכּא
occurs in the address, as little likely as that the Athnach is placed
under למלכּא only on account of the apposition going before, to separate
from it the nomen propr.; and an error in the placing of the
distinctivus, judging from the existing accuracy, is untenable. "The
direct address of the king by his name plainly corresponds to the king's
address to the three officers in the preceding words, [Dan
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#014)." We are not to conclude from it,
as Hitz. supposes, "that they address him as a plebeian," but much
rather, as in the corresponding address, [Dan
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#014), are to see in it an evidence of
the deep impression sought to be produced in the person concerned.

פּתגּם is the accus., and is not to be connected with דּנה על: as to
this command (Hv.). If the demonstrative were present only before the
noun, then the noun must stand in the status absol. as [Dan
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#015) (18). פּתגּם, from the Zend.
paiti = πρός, and gâm, to go, properly, "the going to," therefore
message, edict, then generally word (as here) and matter ([Ezr
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#011)), as frequently in the Targ.,
corresponding to the Hebr. דּבר.

[Dan 3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#017)

יכיל denotes the ethical ability, i.e., the ability limited by the
divine holiness and righteousness, not the omnipotence of God as such.
For this the accused did not doubt, nor will they place in question the
divine omnipotence before the heathen king. The conclusion begins after
the Athnach, and הן means, not see! lo! (according to the old versions
and many interpreters), for which Daniel constantly uses אלוּ or ארו,
but it means if, as here the contrast לא והן, and if not ([Dan
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018)), demands. There lies in the
answer, "If our God will save us, then ... and if not, know, O king,
that we will not serve thy gods," neither audacity, nor a superstitious
expectation of some miracle ([Dan
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#017)), nor fanaticism ([Dan
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#018)), as Berth., v. Leng., and Hitz.
maintain, but only the confidence of faith and a humble submission to
the will of God. "The three simply see that their standpoint and that of
the king are altogether different, also that their standpoint can never
be clearly understood by Nebuchadnezzar, and therefore they give up any
attempt to justify themselves. But that which was demanded of them they
could not do, because it would have been altogether contrary to their
faith and their conscience. And then without fanaticism they calmly
decline to answer, and only say, 'Let him do according to his own will;'
thus without superstitiousness committing their deliverance to God"
(Klief.).

[Daniel 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 3:19</span></span>

The judgment pronounced on the accused, their punishment, and their
miraculous deliverance.

After the decided refusal of the accused to worship his gods,
Nebuchadnezzar changed his countenance toward them. Full of anger at
such obstinacy, he commanded that the furnace should be heated seven
times greater than was usual ([Dan
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019)), and that the rebels should be
bound in their clothes by powerful men of his army, and then cast into
the furnace ([Dan 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#020), [Dan
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#021)). The form of his countenance
changed, and his wrath showed itself in the lineaments of his face. The
Kethiv אשׁתּנּו (plur.) refers to the genitive \[אנפּוהי, plur., "of his
countenances"\] as the chief idea, and is not, after the Keri, to be
changed into the sing. למזא for למאזא. On הד־שׁבעה, sevenfold, cf.
Winer, Chald. Gram. 59, 5. חזה דּי על, beyond that which was fit, i.e.,
which was necessary. Seven is used as expressive of an exceedingly great
number, with reference to the religious meaning of the punishment.

[Daniel 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 3:21</span></span>

Of the different parts of clothing named, סרבּלין are not hose, short
stockings, from which Hitz. concludes that the enumeration proceeds from
the inner to the outer clothing. This remark, correct in itself, proves
nothing as to the covering for the legs. This meaning is given to the
word only from the New Persian shalwâr, which in the Arabic is sarâwîl;
cf. Haug in Ew.'s bibl. Jahrbb. v. p. 162. But the word corresponds with
the genuine Semitic word sirbal, which means tunica or indusium; cf.
Ges. Thes.

(Note: The lxx have omitted סרבּלין in their translation. Theodot. has
rendered it by σαράβαρα, and the third-named piece of dress כּרבּלן by
περικνημῖδες, which the lxx have rendered by τιάρας ἐπὶ τῶν κεφαλῶν.
Theodoret explains it: περικνημῖδας δὲ τὰς καλουμένας ἀναξυρίδας λέγει.
These are, according to Herod. vii. 161, the αναχυρίδες, i.e., braccae,
worn by the Persians περὶ τὰ σκέλεα. Regarding Σαράβαρα Theodoret
remarks: ἔστι Περσικῶν περιβολαίων εἴδη. Thus Theodot. and Theodor.
expressly distinguish the σαράβαρα (סרבּלין) from the περικνημῖδες; but
the false interpretation of סרבּלין by breeches has given rise to the
confounding of that word with כּרבּלן, and the identification of the
two, the περικνημῖδες being interpreted of covering for the feet; and
the Vulg. translates the passage: "cum braccis suis et tiaris et
calceamentis et vestibus," while Luther has "cloaks, shoes, and hats."
This confounding of the two words was authorized by the Greek
scholiasts, to which the admission of the Persian shalwâr into the
Arabic saravilu may have contributed. In Suidas we find the right
interpretation along with the false one when he says: Σαράβαρα ἐσθὴς
Περσικὴ ἔνιοι δὲ λέγουσι βρακία. Hesychius, on the other hand, briefly
explains σαράβαρα by βρακία, κνημῖδες, σκελέαι. Hence the word in the
forms sarabara, siravara, saravara or saraballa, sarabela, is commonly
used in the middle ages for hose, and has been transferred into various
modern languages; cf. Gesen. Thes. p. 971.)

p\. 970, and Heb. Lex. s. v. Accordingly, סרבּלין denotes under-clothing
which would be worn next the body as our shirt. פּטישׁיהון, for which
the Keri uses the form פּטשׁיהון, corresponding to the Syriac petšayhūn,
is explained in the Hebr. translation of the Chald. portions of Daniel
by כּתנת, tunica, and is derived from פשׁט, expandit (by the
transposition of the second and third radicals). Thus the Syriac word is
explained by Syr. lexicographers. Theodotion's translation, τιάραι, is
probably only hit upon from the similarity of the sound of the Greek
πέτασος, the covering for the head worn by the ἔφηβοι. כּרבּלן are
mantles, from כּרבּל, R. כּבל, to bind, to lay around, with r
intercalated, which occurs [Ch1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#027)
of the putting around or putting on of the מעיל (upper garment).
לבוּשׁיהון are the other pieces of clothing (Aben Ezra and others), not
mantles. For that לבוּשׁ was specially used of over-clothes (Hitz.)
cannot be proved from [Job 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007) and
[Kg2 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#022). We have here, then, the
threefold clothing which, according to Herodotus, i. 195, the
Babylonians wore, namely, the סרבּלין, the κιθῶν ποδηνεκὴς λίνεος, the
פּטישׁא worn above it, ἄλλον εἰρίνεον κιθῶνα, and the כּרבּלא thrown
above that, χλανίδιον λευκόν; while under the word לבוּשׁיהון the other
articles of clothing, coverings for the feet and the head, are to be
understood.

(Note: With the setting aside of the false interpretation we have
disposed of the objection against the historical character of the
narrative which v. Leng. and Hitz. have founded on the statement of
Herodotus l.c., that the Babylonians wore no hose, but that they were
first worn by the Persians, who adopted them from the Medes.)

The separate articles of clothing, consisting of easily inflammable
material, are doubtlessly mentioned with reference to the miracle that
followed, that even these remained unchanged ([Dan
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#027)) in the fiery furnace. In the
easily inflammable nature of these materials, namely, of the fine κιθῶν
ποδηνεκὴς λίνεος, we have perhaps to seek the reason on account of which
the accused were bound in their clothes, and not, as Theodoret and most
others think, in the haste with which the sentence against them was
carried out.

[Daniel 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 3:22</span></span>

דּי מן (because that), a further explanatory expression added to דּנה
כּל־קבל (wholly for this cause): because the word of the king was sharp,
and in consequence of it (ו), the furnace was heated beyond measure for
that reason. The words אלּך גּבריּא (these mighty men) stand here in the
status absol., and are again taken up in the pronoun המּון after the
verb קטּל. If the three were brought up to the furnace, it must have had
a mouth above, through which the victims could be cast into it. When
heated to an ordinary degree, this could be done without danger to the
men who performed this service; but in the present case the heat of the
fire was so great, that the servants themselves perished by it. This
circumstance also is mentioned to show the greatness of the miracle by
which the three were preserved unhurt in the midst of the furnace. The
same thing is intended by the repetition of the word מכפּתין, bound,
[Dan 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#023), which, moreover, is
purposely placed at the close of the passage to prepare for the contrast
שׁרין, at liberty, free from the bonds, [Dan
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025).

(Note: Between [Dan 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#023) and [Dan
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#024) the lxx have introduced the
Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the three men in the fiery furnace;
and these two hymns are connected together by a narrative which explains
the death of the Chaldeans who threw the three into the furnace, and the
miracle of the deliverance of Daniel's friends. Regarding the apocryphal
origin of these additions, composed in the Greek language, which Luther
in his translation has rightly placed in the Apocrypha, see my Lehr. der
Einl. in d. A. Test. 251.)

[Daniel 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 3:24</span></span>

The king, who sat watching the issue of the matter, looked through the
door into the furnace, and observed that the three who had been cast
into it bound, walked about freed from their bonds and unhurt; and, in
truth, he saw not the three only, but also a fourth, "like to a son of
the gods," beside them. At this sight he was astonished and terrified.
He hastily stood up; and having assured himself by a consultation with
his counsellors that three men had indeed been cast bound into the
furnace, while he saw four walking in the midst of it, he approached the
mouth of the furnace and cried to the three to come forth. They
immediately came out, and were inspected by the assembled officers of
state, and found to be wholly uninjured as to their bodies, their
clothes being unharmed also, and without even the smell of fire upon
them. הדּברין refers, without doubt, to the officers of the kingdom,
ministers or counselors of state standing very near the king, since they
are named in [Dan 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#027) and Daniel 6:8
([Dan 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007)) along with the first three
ranks of officers, and ([Dan 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023)
\[26\]) during Nebuchadnezzar's madness they conducted the affairs of
government. The literal meaning of the word, however, is not quite
obvious. Its derivation from the Chald. דּברין, duces, with the Hebr.
article (Gesen.), which can only be supported by מדברא, [Pro
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014) (Targ.), is decidedly opposed by
the absence of all analogies of the blending into one word of the
article with a noun in the Semitic language. The Alkoran offers no
corresponding analogues, since this word with the article is found only
in the more modern dialects. But the meaning which P. v. Bohlen
(Symbolae ad interp. s. Codicis ex ling. pers. p. 26) has sought from
the Persian word which is translated by simul judex, i.e., socius in
judicio, is opposed not only by the fact that the compensation of the
Mim by the Dagesch, but also the composition and the meaning, has very
little probability.

The fourth whom Nebuchadnezzar saw in the furnace was like in his
appearance, i.e., as commanding veneration, to a son of the gods, i.e.,
to one of the race of the gods. In [Dan
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028) the same personage is called an
angel of God, Nebuchadnezzar there following the religious conceptions
of the Jews, in consequence of the conversation which no doubt he had
with the three who were saved. Here, on the other hand, he speaks in the
spirit and meaning of the Babylonian doctrine of the gods, according to
the theogonic representation of the συζυγία of the gods peculiar to all
Oriental religions, whose existence among the Babylonians the female
divinity Mylitta associated with Bel places beyond a doubt; cf. Hgst.
Beitr. i. p. 159, and Hv., Kran., and Klief. in loc.

Acting on this assumption, which did not call in question the
deliverance of the accused by the miraculous interposition of the Deity,
Nebuchadnezzar approached the door of the furnace and cried to the three
men to come out, addressing them as the servants (worshippers) of the
most high God. This address does not go beyond the circle of heathen
ideas. He does not call the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego the
only true God, but only the most high God, the chief of the gods, just
as the Greeks called their Zeus ὁ ὕψιστος θεός. The Kethiv עלּיא (in
Syr. ̀elāyā̀, to preserve) is here and everywhere in Daniel (v. 32; [Dan
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#014), [Dan
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#021), etc.) pointed by the Masoretes
according to the form עילאה (with )ה prevailing in the Targg. The forms
גשׁם, גּשׁמא, are peculiar to Daniel (v. 27f., [Dan
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030); [Dan
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#021); [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011)). The Targg. have גּוּשׁמא
instead of it.

[Daniel 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 3:28</span></span>

The impression made by this event on Nebuchadnezzar.

The marvellous deliverance of the three from the flames of the furnace
produced such an impression on Nebuchadnezzar, that he changed his
earlier and humbler judgment ([Dan
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015)) regarding the God of the Jews,
and spoke now in praise of the might of this God. For at the same time
he not only openly announced that He had saved ([Dan
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028)) His servants, but also by an
edict, issued to all the peoples of his kingdom, he forbade on pain of
death the doing of any dishonour to the God of the Jews ([Dan
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029)). Nebuchadnezzar, however, did
not turn to the true God. He neither acknowledged Jehovah as the only,
or the alone true God, nor did he command Him to be worshipped. He only
declared Him to be a God who is able to save His servants as no other
could, and merely forbade the despising and reviling of this God.
Whoever speaks שׁלה, that which is erroneous or unjust, against the God
of Shadrach, etc., shall be put to death. שׁלה, from שׁלה, to err, to
commit a fault, is changed in the Keri into שׁלוּ, which occurs in [Dan
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005) and [Ezr
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#022), and in the Targg.; but without
sufficient ground, since with other words both forms are found together,
e.g., ארמלא, vidua, with ארמלוּ, viduitas. According to this, שׁלוּ in
abstr. means the error; שׁלה in concr., the erroneous. Hitz. finds the
command partly too narrow, partly quite unsuitable, because an error, a
simple oversight, should find pardon as soon as possible. But the
distinction between a fault arising from mistake and one arising from a
bad intention does not accord with the edict of an Oriental despot,
which must be in decided terms, so that there may be no room in cases of
transgression for an appeal to a mere oversight. Still less importance
is to be attached to the objection that the carrying out of the command
may have had its difficulties. but by such difficulties the historical
character of the narrative is not brought under suspicion. As the
Chaldeans in this case had watched the Jews and accused them of
disobedience, so also could the Jews scattered throughout the kingdom
bring before the tribunal the heathen who blasphemed their God.

[Dan 3:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029)

Regarding the collocation of the words עם אמּה ו, see under [Dan
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004); and regarding the Nymid@fha and
the threatened punishment, see under [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005). כּדּנה we regard, with the lxx,
Theodot., Vulg., and old interpreters, as a fem. adverbial: οὕτως, ita,
as it occurs in [Dan 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010); [Ezr
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#007), and [Jer
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011). The interpreting it as
masculine, as this God, does not correspond with the heathen
consciousness of God, to which a God perceptible by sight was more
appropriate than a God invisible (Kran.). The history concludes ([Dan
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#030)) with the remark that
Nebuchadnezzar now regarded the three men with the greatest favour. In
what way he manifested his regard for them is not stated, inasmuch as
this is not necessary to the object of the narrative. הצלח with ל, to
give to any one happiness, prosperity, to cause him to be fortunate.

If we attentively consider the import of this narrative in its bearing
on the history of the kingdom of God, we learn how the true worshippers
of the Lord under the dominion of the world-power could and would come
into difficulties, imperilling life, between the demands of the lords of
this world and the duties they owe to God. But we also learn, that if in
these circumstances they remain faithful to their God, they will in a
wonderful manner be protected by Him; while He will reveal His
omnipotence so gloriously, that even the heathen world-rulers will be
constrained to recognise their God and to give Him glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 4](dan004)

</div>
