<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](num036)  [Next](deu001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 0:0</span></span>

The Fifth Book Of Moses(Deuteronomy)

Introduction

Contents, Arrangement, and Character of Deuteronomy

The fifth book of Moses, which is headed הדברים אלה, or briefly דברים,
in the Hebrew Bibles, from the opening words of the book, is called
התּורה משׁנה (repetition legis), or merely משׁנה by the Hellenistic Jews
and some of the Rabbins, with special reference to its contents as
described in [Deu 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018). The
rabbinical explanation of the latter given in Mnster and Fagius is
דראשונים זכרון, "memoria rerum priorum, quae in aliis scribuntur
libris." By some of the Rabbins the book is also called תּוכחות ספר,
liber redargutionum. The first of these titles has become current in the
Christian Church through the rendering given by the lxx and Vulgate, ́,
Deuteronomium; and although it has arisen from an incorrect rendering of
[Deu 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018) (see the exposition of the
passage), it is so far a suitable one, that it describes quite correctly
the leading contents of the book itself. The book of Deuteronomy
contains not so much "a recapitulation of the things commanded and done,
as related in Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers" (Theod.), as "a compendium
and summary of the whole law and wisdom of the people of Israel, wherein
those things which related to the priests and Levites are omitted, and
only such things included as the people generally required to know"
(Luther). Consequently it is not merely a repetition and summary of the
most important laws and events contained in the previous books, still
less a mere "summons to the law and testimony," or a "fresh and
independent lawgiving standing side by side with the earlier one," a
"transformation of the old law to suit the altered circumstances," or
"merely a second book of the law, intended for the people that knew not
the law" (Ewald, Riehm, etc.); but a hortatory description, explanation,
and enforcement of the most essential contents of the covenant
revelation and covenant laws, with emphatic prominence given to the
spiritual principle of the law and its fulfilment, and with a further
development of the ecclesiastical, judicial, political, and civil
organization, which was intended as a permanent foundation for the life
and well-bring of the people in the land of Canaan. There is not the
slightest trace, throughout the whole book, of any intention whatever to
give a new or second law. Whilst the laws as well as the divine promises
and threatenings in the three middle books of the Pentateuch are all
introduced as words of Jehovah to Moses, which he was to make known to
the people, and even where the announcement passes over into the form of
an address, - as, for example, in [Exo
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020)., Lev 26, - are not spoken by
Moses in his own name, but spoken by Jehovah to Israel through Moses;
the book of Deuteronomy, with the exception of ch. 31-34, contains
nothing but words addressed by Moses to the people, with the intention,
as he expressly affirms in [Deu 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005),
of explaining (בּאר) the law to the people. Accordingly he does not
quote those laws, which were given before and are merely repeated here,
nor the further precepts and arrangements that were added to them, such
as those concerning the one site for the worship of God, the prophetic
and regal qualifications, the administration of justice and carrying on
of war, in the categorical language of law; but clothes them, as well as
the other commandments, in the hortatory form of a paternal address,
full of solemn and affectionate admonition, with the addition of such
reminiscences and motives as seemed best adapted to impress their
observance upon the hearts of the people. As the repetition not only of
the decalogue, which God addressed to the people directly from Sinai,
but also of many other laws, which He gave through Moses at Sinai and
during the journey through the desert, had no other object than this, to
make the contents of the covenant legislation intelligible to all the
people, and to impress them upon their hearts; so those laws which are
peculiar to our book are not additions made to this legislation for the
purpose of completing it, but simply furnish such explanations and
illustrations of its meaning as were rendered necessary by the peculiar
relations and forms of the religious, social, and political life of the
nation in the promised land of Canaan. Throughout the whole book, the
law, with its commandments, statutes, and judgments, which Moses laid
"this day" before the people, is never described as either new or
altered; on the contrary, it is only the law of the covenant, which
Jehovah had concluded with His people at Horeb ([Deu
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001).); and the commandments, statutes,
and judgments of this law Moses had received from the Lord upon the
Mount (Sinai), that he might teach Israel to keep them ([Deu
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#031).; comp. [Deu
6:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020)). The details of the book also
bear this out.

The first part of the book, which embraces by far the greater portion of
it, viz., ch. 1-30, consists of three long addresses, which Moses
delivered to all Israel, according to the heading of [Deu
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001), in the land of Moab, on the
first of the eleventh month, in the fortieth year after the exodus from
Egypt. The first of these addresses (ch. 1:6-4:40) is intended to
prepare the way for the exposition and enforcement of the law, which
follow afterwards. Moses calls to their recollection the most important
facts connected with the history of their forty years' wandering in the
desert, under the protection and merciful guidance of the Lord (ch.
1:6-3:29); and to this he attaches the exhortation not to forget the
revelation of the Lord, which they had seen at Horeb, or the words of
the covenant which they had heard, but to bear in mind at all times,
that Jehovah alone was God in heaven and on earth, and to keep His
commandments and rights, that they might enjoy long life and prosperity
in the land of Canaan (ch. 4:1-40). This is followed by the statement in
[Deu 4:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041), that Moses set apart
three cities of refuge in the land to the east of the Jordan for
unintentional manslayers.

The second address (ch. 5-26) is described in the heading in [Deu
4:44-49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#044) as the law, which Moses set
before the children of Israel, and consists of two parts, the one
general and the other particular. In the general part (ch. 5-11), Moses
repeats the ten words of the covenant, which Jehovah spoke to Israel
from Sinai out of the midst of the fire, together with the circumstances
which attended their promulgation (ch. 5), and then expounds the
contents of the first two commandments of the decalogue, that Jehovah
alone is the true and absolute God, and requires love from His people
with all their heart and all their soul, and therefore will not tolerate
the worship of any other god beside Himself (ch. 6). For this reason the
Israelites were not only to form no alliance with the Canaanites after
conquering them, and taking possession of the promised land, but to
exterminate them without quarter, and destroy their altars and idols,
because the Lord had chosen them to be His holy nation from love to
their forefathers, and would keep the covenant of His grace, and bestow
the richest blessings upon them, if they observed His commandments (ch.
7); but when in possession and enjoyment of the riches of this blessed
land, they were to remain for ever mindful of the temptation,
humiliation, and fatherly chastisement which they had experienced at the
hand of their God in the wilderness, that they might not forget the Lord
and His manifestations of mercy in their self-exaltation (ch. 8), but
might constantly remember that they owed their conquest and possession
of Canaan not to their own righteousness, but solely to the compassion
and covenant faithfulness of the Lord, whom they had repeatedly provoked
to anger in the wilderness (ch. 9:1-10:11), and might earnestly strive
to serve the Lord in true fear and love, and to keep His commandments,
that they might inherit the promised blessing, and not be exposed to the
curse which would fall upon transgressors and the worshippers of idols
(ch. 10:12-11:32). To this there is added in the more special part (ch.
12-26), an account of the most important laws which all Israel was to
observe in the land of its inheritance, viz.: (1.) Directions for the
behaviour of Israel towards the Lord God, e.g., as to the presentation
of sacrificial offerings and celebration of sacrificial meals at no
other place than the one chosen by God for the revelation of His name
(ch. 12); as to the destruction of all seducers to idolatry, whether
prophets who rose up with signs and wonders, or the closest
blood-relations, and such towns in the land as should fall away to
idolatry (ch. 13); as to abstinence from the mourning ceremonies of the
heathen, and from unclean food, and the setting apart of tithes for
sacrificial meals and for the poor (ch. 14); as to the observance of the
year of remission, the emancipation of Hebrew slaves in the seventh
year, and the dedication of the first-born of oxen and sheep (ch. 15),
and as to the celebration of the feast of Passover, of Weeks, and of
Tabernacles, by sacrificial meals at the sanctuary (ch. 16:1-17). (2.)
Laws concerning the organization of the theocratic state, and especially
as to the appointment of judges and official persons in every town, and
the trial of idolaters and evil-doers in both the lower and higher forms
(ch. 16:18-17:13); concerning the choice of a king in the future, and
his duties ([Deu 17:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014)); concerning
the rights of priests and Levites ([Deu
18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001)); and concerning false and true
prophets (vv. [Deu 18:9-22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009)). (3.)
Regulations bearing upon the sanctification of human life: viz., legal
instructions as to the establishment of cities of refuge for
unintentional manslayers ([Deu
19:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#001)); as to the maintenance of the
sanctity of the boundaries of landed property, and abstinence from false
charges against a neighbour ([Deu
4:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#014)); as to the conduct of war,
with special reference to the duty of sparing their own fighting men,
and also defenceless enemies and their towns (ch. 20); as to the
expiation of inexplicable murders ([Deu
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)); as to the mild treatment of
women taken in war ([Deu 4:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010)); the
just use of paternal authority ([Deu
4:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)); and the burial of criminals
that had been executed ([Deu 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#022),
[Deu 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#023)). (4.) The duty of paying
affectionate regard to the property of a neighbour, and cherishing a
sacred dread of violating the moral and natural order of the world ([Deu
22:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001)), with various precepts for
the sanctification of the marriage bond (ch. 22:13-23:1), of the
theocratic union as a congregation (ch. 23:2-25), and also of domestic
and social life, in all its manifold relations (chs. 24 and 25); and
lastly, the appointment of prayers of thanksgiving on the presentation
of the first-fruits and tenths of the fruits of the field ([Deu
26:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#001)); together with a closing
admonition ([Deu 4:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016)) to observe
all these laws and rights with all the heart.

The third address (ch. 27-30) has reference to the renewal of the
covenant. This solemn act is introduced with a command to write the law
upon large stones when Canaan should be conquered, and to set up these
stones upon Mount Ebal, to build an altar there; and after presenting
burnt-offerings and slain-offerings, to proclaim in the most solemn
manner both the blessing and curse of the law, the former upon Gerizim,
and the latter upon Ebal (ch. 27). Moses takes occasion from this
command to declare most fully what blessings and curses would come upon
the people, according as they should or should not hearken to the voice
of the Lord (ch. 28). Then follows the renewal of the covenant, which
consisted in the fact that Moses recited once more, in a solemn address
to the whole of the national assembly, all that the Lord had done for
them and to them; and after pointing again to the blessings and curses
of the law, called upon them and adjured them to enter into the covenant
of Jehovah their God, which He had that day concluded with them, and
having before them blessing and cursing, life and death, to make the
choice of life. - The second and much shorter portion of the book (ch.
31-34) contains the close of Moses' life and labours: (a) the
appointment of Joshua to be the leader of Israel into Canaan, and the
handing over of the book of the law, when completed, to the priests, for
them to keep and read to the people at the feast of Tabernacles in the
year of jubilee (Deut 31); (b) the song of Moses (Deut 32:1-47), and the
announcement of his death ([Deu
32:48-52](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#048)); (c) the blessing of Moses
(Deut 33); and (d) the account of his death ([Deu
34:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)).

From this general survey of the contents, it is sufficiently evident
that the exposition of the commandments, statutes, and rights of the law
had no other object than this, to pledge the nation in the most solemn
manner to an inviolable observance, in the land of Canaan, of the
covenant which Jehovah had made with Israel at Horeb ([Deu
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)). To this end Moses not only
repeats the fundamental law of this covenant, the decalogue, but many of
the separate commandments, statutes, and rights of the more expanded
Sinaitic law. These are rarely given in extenso (e.g., the laws of food
in Deut 14), but for the most part simply in brief hints, bringing out
by way of example a few of the more important rules, for the purpose of
linking on some further explanations of the law in its application to
the peculiar circumstances of the land of Canaan. And throughout, as F.
W. Schultz correctly observes, the intention of the book is, "by means
of certain supplementary and auxiliary rules, to ensure the realization
of the laws or institutions of the earlier books, the full validity of
which it presupposes; and that not merely in some fashion or other, but
in its true essence, and according to its higher object and idea,
notwithstanding all the difficulties that might present themselves in
Canaan or elsewhere." Not only are the instructions relating to the
building of the sanctuary, the service of the priests and Levites, and
the laws of sacrifice and purification, passed over without mention as
being already known; but of the festivals and festive celebrations, only
the three annual feasts of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles are
referred to, and that but briefly, for the purpose of commanding the
observance of the sacrificial meals which were to be held at the
sanctuary in connection with these feasts (Deut 16). The tithes and
first-fruits are noticed several times, but only so far as they were to
be applied to common sacrificial meals before the Lord. The appointment
of judges is commanded in all the towns of the land, and rules are given
by which the judicial form of procedure is determined more minutely; but
no rule is laid down as to the election of the judges, simply because
this had been done before. On the ether hand, instructions are given
concerning the king whom the people would one day desire to set over
themselves; concerning the prophets whom the Lord would raise up; and
also concerning any wars that might be waged with other nations than the
Canaanites, the extermination of the latter being enforced once more;
and several things besides. - And if this selection of materials
indicates an intention, not so much to complete the legislation of the
earlier books by the addition of new laws, as to promote its observance
and introduction into the national life, and secure its permanent force;
this intention becomes still more apparent when we consider how Moses,
after repeating the decalogue, not only sums up the essential contents
of all the commandments, statutes, and rights which Jehovah has
commanded, in the one command to love God with all the heart, etc., and
sets forth this commandment as the sum of the whole law, but in all his
expositions of the law, all his exhortations to obedience, and all
threats and promises, aims ever at this one object, to awaken in the
hearts of the people a proper state of mind for the observance of the
commandments of God, viz., a feeling of humility and love and willing
obedience, and to destroy that love for merely outward legality and
pharisaic self-righteousness which is inherent in the natural man, that
the people may circumcise the foreskin of their heart, and enter
heartily into the covenant of their God, and maintain that covenant with
true fidelity.

It is in this peculiar characteristic and design of the legislative
addresses which the book contains, and not in the purpose attributed to
it, of appending a general law for the nation to the legislation of the
previous books, which had reference chiefly to the priests and Levites,

(Note: In opposition to this view of Ed. Riehm, Schultz justly argues
that the book of Deuteronomy is very far from containing everything that
concerned the people and was of great importance to them. It does not
even repeat those laws of the first book of the covenant in Ex 20-23,
which affected most closely the social every-day life of the people. It
contains nothing about circumcision, which certainly could not have been
omitted from the national law-book; no further details as to the
Passover, Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles; it does not even
mention the great day of atonement, on which every Israelite had to fast
on pain of death, nor the feast of trumpets and year of jubilee; and the
Sabbath command is simply introduced quite briefly in and with the
decalogue. Of all the defilements and washings, which were of the
greatest moment, according to the Old Testament view, to every
individual, there is not a single word.)

that we are to seek for that completion of the law which the book of
Deuteronomy supplies. And in this we may find the strongest proof of the
Mosaic origin of this concluding part of the Thorah. What the heading
distinctly states ([Deu 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)), -
viz., that Moses delivered this address to all Israel a short time
before his death in the land of Moab, on the other side of the Jordan,
and therefore on the threshold of the promised land-is confirmed by both
the form and contents of the book. As Hengstenberg has well observed
(Ev. K. Z. 1862, No. 5, pp. 49ff.), "the address of Moses is in perfect
harmony with his situation. He speaks like a dying father to his
children. The words are earnest, inspired, impressive. He looks back
over the whole of the forty years of their wandering in the desert,
reminds the people of all the blessings they have received, of the
ingratitude with which they have so often repaid them, and of the
judgments of God, and the love that continually broke forth behind them;
he explains the laws again and again, and adds what is necessary to
complete them, and is never weary or urging obedience to them in the
warmest and most emphatic words, because the very life of the nation was
bound up with this; he surveys all the storms and conflicts which they
have passed through, and, beholding the future in the past, takes a
survey also of the future history of the nation, and sees, with mingled
sorrow and joy, how the three great features of the past - viz.,
apostasy, punishment, and pardon - continue to repeat themselves in the
future also. - The situation throughout is the time when Israel was
standing on the border of the promised land, and preparing to cross the
Jordan; and there is never any allusion to what formed the centre of the
national life in future times - to Jerusalem and its temple, or to the
Davidic monarchy. The approaching conquest of the land is merely taken
for granted as a whole; the land is dressed throughout in all the charms
of a desired good, and no reference is ever made to the special
circumstances of Israel in the land about to be conquered." To this
there is to be added what makes its appearance on every hand - the most
lively remembrance of Egypt, and the condition of the people when living
there (cf. [Deu 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015); [Deu
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#015); [Deu
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010); [Deu
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#015); [Deu
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#012); [Deu
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#018); [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027), [Deu
28:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#035), [Deu
28:60](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#060)), and an accurate acquaintance
with the very earliest circumstances of the different nations with which
the Israelites came into either friendly or hostile contact in the
Mosaic age (ch. 2); together with many other things that were entirely
changed a short time after the conquest of Canaan by the Israelites.

And just as these addresses, which complete the giving of the law and
bring it to a close, form an integral part of the Thorah, so the
historical account of the finishing of the book of the law, and its
being handed over to the priests, together with the song and blessing of
Moses (ch. 31-33), form a fitting conclusion to the work of Moses, the
lawgiver and mediator of the old covenant; and to this the account of
his death, with which the Pentateuch closes ([Deu
34:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)), is very appropriately
appended.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 1](deu001)

</div>
