<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu012)  [Next](deu014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 13:1</span></span>

The first case. If a prophet, or one who had dreams, should rise up to
summon to the worship of other gods, with signs and wonders which came
to pass, the Israelites were not to hearken to his words, but to put him
to death. The introduction of חלום חלם, "a dreamer of dreams," along
with the prophet, answers the two media of divine revelation, the vision
and the dream, by which, according to [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006), God made known His will. With
regard to the signs and wonders (mopheth, see at [Exo
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)) with which such a prophet might
seek to accredit his higher mission, it is taken for granted that they
come to pass (בּוא); yet for all that, the Israelites were to give no
heed to such a prophet, to walk after other gods. It follows from this,
that the person had not been sent by God, but as a false prophet, and
that the signs and wonders which he gave were not wonders effected by
God, but σημεῖα καὶ τέρατα ψεύδους ("lying sings and wonders," [Th2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)); i.e., not merely seeming
miracles, but miracles wrought in the power of the wicked one, Satan,
the possibility and reality of which even Christ attests ([Mat
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)). - The word לאמר, saying, is
dependent upon the principal verb of the sentence: "if a prophet rise
up...saying, We will go after other gods."

[Deuteronomy 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 13:4</span></span>

God permitted false prophets to rise up with such wonders, to try the
Israelites, whether they loved Him, the Lord their God, with all their
heart. (נסּה as in [Gen 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001).) אהבים
הישׁכם, whether ye are loving, i.e., faithfully maintain your love to
the Lord. It is evident from this, "that however great the importance
attached to signs and wonders, they were not to be regarded among the
Israelites, either as the highest test, or as absolutely decisive, but
that there was a certainty in Israel, which was so much the more certain
and firm than any proof from miracles could be, that it might be most
decidedly opposed to it" (Baumgarten). This certainty, however, was not
"the knowledge of Jehovah," as B. supposes; but as Luther correctly
observes, "the word of God, which had already been received, and
confirmed by its own signs," and which the Israelites were to preserve
and hold fast, without adding or subtracting anything. "In opposition to
such a word, no prophets were to be received, although they rained signs
and wonders; not even an angel from heaven, as Paul says in [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)." The command to hearken to the
prophets whom the Lord would send at a future time ([Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018).), is not at variance with this:
for even their announcements were to be judged according to the standard
of the fixed word of God that had been already given; and so far as they
proclaimed anything new, the fact that what they announced did not occur
was to be the criterion that they had not spoken in the name of the
Lord, but in that of other gods ([Deu
18:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#021)), so that even there the
signs and wonders of the prophets are not made the criteria of their
divine mission.

[Deuteronomy 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 13:5</span></span>

Israel was to adhere firmly to the Lord its God (cf. [Deu
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#004)), and to put to death the prophet
who preached apostasy from Jehovah, the Redeemer of Israel out of the
slave-house of Egypt. להדּיחך, "to force thee from the way in which
Jehovah hath commanded thee to walk." The execution of seducers to
idolatry is enjoined upon the people, i.e., the whole community, not
upon single individuals, but upon the authorities who had to maintain
and administer justice. "So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst
of thee." הרע is neuter, as we may see from [Deu
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007), as comp. with [Deu
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#002). The formula, "so shalt thou put
the evil away from the midst of thee," which occurs again in [Deu
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007), [Deu
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#012); [Deu
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#019); [Deu
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#021); [Deu
22:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#021), [Deu
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#024), and [Deu
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#007) (cf. [Deu
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#013), and [Deu
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#009)), belongs to the hortatory
character of Deuteronomy, in accordance with which a reason is given for
all the commandments, and the observance of them is urged upon the
congregation as a holy affair of the heart, which could not be expected
in the objective legislation of the earlier books.

[Deuteronomy 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 13:7</span></span>

The second case was when the temptation to idolatry proceeded from the
nearest blood-relations and friends. The clause, "son of thy mother," is
not intended to describe the brother as a step-brother, but simply to
bring out the closeness of the fraternal relation; like the description
of the wife as the wife of thy bosom, who lies in thy bosom, rests upon
thy breast (as in [Deu 28:54](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#054); [Mic
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005)), and of the friend as "thy friend
which is as thine own soul," i.e., whom thou lovest as much as thy life
(cf. [Sa1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001), [Sa1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#003)). בּסּתר belongs to יסית: if the
temptation occurred in secret, and therefore the fact might be hidden
from others. The power of love and relationship, which flesh and blood
find it hard to resist, is placed here in contrast with the supposed
higher or divine authority of the seducers. As the persuasion was
already very seductive, from the fact that it proceeded from the nearest
blood-relations and most intimate friends, and was offered in secret, it
might become still more so from the fact that it recommended the worship
of a deity that had nothing in common with the forbidden idols of
Canaan, and the worship of which, therefore, might appear of less
consequence, or commend itself by the charm of peculiarity and novelty.
To prevent this deceptive influence of sin, it is expressly added in
[Deu 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#008) (7), "of the gods nigh unto
thee or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the
other end of the earth," i.e., whatever gods there might be upon the
whole circuit of the earth.

[Deuteronomy 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 13:9</span></span>

To such persuasion Israel was not to yield, nor were they to spare the
tempters. The accumulation of synonyms (pity, spare, conceal) serves to
make the passage more emphatic. כּסּה, to cover, i.e., to keep secret,
conceal. They were to put him to death without pity, viz., to stone him
(cf. [Lev 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002)). That the execution
even in this case was to be carried out by the regular authorities, is
evident from the words, "thy hand shall be first against him to put him
to death, and the hand of all the people afterwards," which presuppose
the judicial procedure prescribed in [Deu
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007), that the witnesses were to cast
the first stones at the person condemned.

[Deuteronomy 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 13:12</span></span>

This was to be done, and all Israel was to hear it and fear, that no
such wickedness should be performed any more in the congregation. The
fear of punishment, which is given here as the ultimate end of the
punishment itself, is not to be regarded as the principle lying at the
foundation of the law, but simply, as Calvin expresses it, as "the
utility and fruit of severity," one reason for carrying out the law,
which is not to be confounded with the so-called deterrent theory, i.e.,
the attempt to deter from crime by the mode of punishing (see my
Archologie, ii. p. 262).

[Deuteronomy 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 13:13</span></span>

The third case is that of a town that had been led away to idolatry. "If
thou shalt hear in one of thy cities." בּאחת, not de una, of one, which
שׁמע with בּ never can mean, and does not mean even in [Job
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014). The thought is not that they
would hear in one city about another, as though one city had the
oversight over another; but there is an inversion in the sentence, "if
thou hear, that in one of thy cities...worthless men have risen up, and
led the inhabitants astray to serve strange gods." לאמר introduces the
substance of what is heard, which follows in [Deu
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#014). יצא merely signifies to rise
up, to go forth. מקּרבּך, out of the midst of the people.

[Deuteronomy 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 13:15</span></span>

Upon this report the people as a whole, of course through their rulers,
were to examine closely into the affair (היטב, an adverb, as in [Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021)), whether the word was
established as truth, i.e., the thing was founded in truth (cf. [Deu
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#004); [Deu
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#020)); and if it really were so, they
were to smite the inhabitants of that town with the edge of the sword
(cf. [Gen 34:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#026)), putting the town and
all that was in it under the ban. "All that is in it" relates to men,
cattle, and the material property of the town, and not to men alone
(Schultz). The clause from "destroying" to "therein" is a more minute
definition of the punishment introduced as a parenthesis; for "the
cattle thereof," which follows, is also governed by "thou shalt smite."
The ban was to be executed in all its severity as upon an idolatrous
city: man and beast were to be put to death without reserves; and its
booty, i.e., whatever was to be found in it as booty-all material goods,
therefore - were to be heaped together in the market, and burned along
with the city itself. ליהוה כּליל (Eng. Ver. "every whit, for the Lord
thy God") signifies "as a whole offering for the Lord" (see [Lev
6:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015)), i.e., it was to be
sanctified to Him entirely by being destroyed. The town was to continue
an eternal hill (or heap of ruins), never to be built up again.

[Deuteronomy 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 13:17</span></span>

To enforce this command still more strongly, it is expressly stated,
that of all that was burned, nothing whatever was to cleave or remain
hanging to the hand of Israel, that the Lord might turn from His wrath
and have compassion upon the nation, i.e., not punish the sin of one
town upon the nation as a whole, but have mercy upon it and multiply it,
- make up the diminution consequent upon the destruction of the
inhabitants of that town, and so fulfil the promise given to the fathers
of the multiplication of their seed.

[Deuteronomy 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 13:18</span></span>

Jehovah would do this if Israel hearkened to His voice, to do what was
right in His eyes. In what way the appropriation of property laid under
the ban brought the wrath of God upon the whole congregation, is shown
by the example of Achan (Josh 7).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 14](deu014)

</div>
