<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu009)  [Next](deu011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 10:1</span></span>

In [Deu 10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001) Moses briefly relates
the success of his earnest intercession. "At that time," of his
intercession, God commanded him to hew out new tables, and prepare an
ark in which to keep them (cf. [Exo
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001).). Here again Moses links
together such things as were substantially connected, without strictly
confining himself to the chronological order, which was already well
known from the historical account, inasmuch as this was not required by
the general object of his address. God had already given directions for
the preparation of the ark of the covenant, before the apostasy of the
nation ([Exo 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010).); but it was not
made till after the tabernacle had been built, and the tables were only
deposited in the ark when the tabernacle was consecrated ([Exo
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#020)).

[Deuteronomy 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 10:6</span></span>

And the Israelites owed to the grace of their God, which was turned
towards them once more, through the intercession of Moses, not only the
restoration of the tables of the covenant as a pledge that the covenant
itself was restored, but also the institution and maintenance of the
high-priesthood and priesthood generally for the purpose of mediation
between them and the Lord.

(Note: Even Clericus pointed out this connection, and paraphrased [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006) and [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007) as follows: "But when, as I have
said, God forgave the Hebrew people, He pardoned my brother Aaron also,
who did not die till the fortieth year after we had come out of Egypt,
and when we were coming round the borders of the Edomites to come
hither. God also showed that He was reconciled towards him by conferring
the priesthood upon him, which is now borne by his son Eleazar according
to the will of God." Clericus has also correctly brought out the fact
that Moses referred to what he had stated in [Deu
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020) as to the wrath of God against
Aaron and his intercession on his behalf, or rather that he mentioned
his intercession on behalf of Aaron in that passage, because he intended
to call more particular attention to the successful result of it in
this. Hengstenberg (Dissertations, vol. ii. pp. 351-2) has since pointed
out briefly, but very conclusively, the connection of thought between
[Deu 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006), [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007), and what goes before and
follows. "Moses," he says, "points out to the people how the Lord had
continued unchangeable in His mercy notwithstanding all their sins.
Although they had rendered themselves unworthy of such goodness by their
worship of the calf, He gave them the ark of the covenant with the new
tables of the law in it ([Deu 10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001)).
He followed up this gift of His grace by instituting the
high-priesthood, and when Aaron died He caused it to be transferred to
his son Eleazar ([Deu 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006), [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007)). He set apart the tribe of Levi
to serve Him and bless the people in His name, and thus to be the
mediators of His mercy ([Deu 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008),
[Deu 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#009)). In short, He omitted
nothing that was requisite to place Israel in full possession of the
dignity of a people of God." There is no ground for regarding [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006), [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007), as a gloss, as Capellus, Dathe,
and Rosenmller do, or [Deu 10:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006) as
"an interpolation of a historical statement concerning the bearers of
the ark of the covenant and the holy persons generally, which has no
connection with Moses' address," as Knobel maintains. The want of any
formal connection is quite in keeping with the spirit of simplicity
which characterizes the early Hebrew diction and historical writings.
"The style of the Hebrews is not to be tried by the rules of
rhetoricians" (Clericus).)

Moses reminds the people of this gracious gift on the part of their God,
by recalling to their memory the time when Aaron died and his son
Eleazar was invested with the high-priesthood in his stead. That he may
transport his hearers the more distinctly to the period in question, he
lets the history itself speak, and quotes from the account of their
journeys the passage which supplied the practical proof of what he
desires to say. Instead of saying: And the high-priesthood also, with
which Aaron was invested by the grace of God notwithstanding his sin at
Sinai, the Lord has still preserved to you; for when Aaron died, He
invested his son with the same honour,

(Note: "In the death of Aaron they might discern the punishment of their
rebellion. But the fact that Eleazar was appointed in his place, was a
sign of the paternal grace of God, who did not suffer them to be
forsaken on that account" (Calvin).)

and also directed you to continue your journey-he proceeds in the
following historical style: "And the children of Israel took their
journey from the wells of the sons of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron
died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son became priest in his
stead. And from thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah
to Jotbath, a land of water-brooks." The allusion to these marches,
together with the events which had taken place at Mosera, taught in very
few words "not only that Aaron was forgiven at the intercession of
Moses, and even honoured with the high-priesthood, the medium of grace
and blessing to the people of God (e.g., at the wells of Bene-jaakan)
until the time of his death; but also that through this same
intercession the high-priesthood was maintained in perpetuity, so that
when Aaron had to die in the wilderness in consequence of a fresh sin
([Num 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012)), it continued
notwithstanding, and by no means diminished in strength, as might have
been feared, since it led the way from the wells to water-brooks, helped
on the journey to Canaan, which was now the object of their immediate
aim, and still sustained their courage and their faith" (Schultz). The
earlier commentators observed the inward connection between the
continuation of the high-priesthood and the water-brooks. J. Gerhard,
for example, observes: "God generally associates material blessings with
spiritual; as long as the ministry of the word and the observance of
divine worship flourish among us, God will also provide for our temporal
necessities."\_

[Deuteronomy 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 10:8</span></span>

In [Deu 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008), Moses returns to the
form of an address again, and refers to the separation of the tribe of
Levi for the holy service, as a manifestation of mercy on the part of
the Lord towards Israel. The expression "at that time" is not to be
understood as relating to the time of Aaron's death in the fortieth year
of the march, in which Knobel finds a contradiction to the other books.
It refers quite generally, as in [Deu
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020) and [Deu
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001), to the time of which Moses is
speaking here, viz., the time when the covenant was restored at Sinai.
The appointment of the tribe of Levi for service at the sanctuary took
place in connection with the election of Aaron and his sons to the
priesthood (Ex 28 and 29), although their call to this service, instead
of the first-born of Israel, was not carried out till the numbering and
mustering of the people ([Num 1:49](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#049).,
[Deu 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#017)., [Deu
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#006).). Moses is speaking here of the
election of the whole of the tribe of Levi, including the priests (Aaron
and his sons), as is very evident from the account of their service. It
is true that the carrying of the ark upon the march through the desert
was the business of the (non-priestly) Levites, viz., the Kohathites
([Num 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004).); but on solemn occasions
the priests had to carry it (cf. [Jos
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#003), [Jos
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#006), [Jos
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#008); [Jos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#006); [Kg1
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#003).). "Standing before the Lord, to
serve Him, and to bless in His name," was exclusively the business of
the priests (cf. [Deu 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#005); [Deu
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#005), and [Num
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023).), whereas the Levites were only
assistants of the priests in their service (see at [Deu
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#007)). This tribe therefore received
no share and possession with the other tribes, as was already laid down
in [Num 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020) with reference to the
priests, and in [Num 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#024) with regard
to all the Levites; to which passages the words "as the Lord thy God
promised him" refer. - Lastly, in [Deu
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#010), [Deu
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#011), Moses sums up the result of his
intercession in the words, "And I stood upon the mount as the first
days, forty days (a resumption of [Deu
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018) and [Deu
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025)); and the Lord hearkened to me
this time also (word for word, as in [Deu
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#019)). "Jehovah would not destroy thee
(Israel)." Therefore He commanded Moses to arise to depart before the
people, i.e., as leader of the people to command and superintend their
removal and march. In form, this command is connected with [Exo
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001); but Moses refers here not only
to that word of the Lord with the limitation added there in [Exo
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#002), but to the ultimate, full, and
unconditional assurance of God, in which the Lord Himself promised to go
with His people and bring them to Canaan ([Exo
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014).).

[Deuteronomy 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 10:12</span></span>

The proof that Israel had no righteousness before God is followed on the
positive side by an expansion of the main law laid down in [Deu
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)., to love God with all the heart,
which is introduced by the words, "and now Israel," sc., now that thou
hast everything without desert or worthiness, purely from forgiving
grace. "What doth the Lord thy God require of thee?" Nothing further
than that thou fearest Him, "to walk in all His ways, and to love Him,
and to serve Him with all the heart and all the soul." אם כּי, unless,
or except that, presupposes a negative clause (cf. [Gen
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#009)), which is implied here in the
previous question, or else to be supplied as the answer. The demand for
fear, love, and reverence towards the Lord, is no doubt very hard for
the natural man to fulfil, and all the harder the deeper it goes into
the heart; but after such manifestations of the love and grace of God,
it only follows as a matter of course. "Fear, love, and obedience would
naturally have taken root of themselves within the heart, if man had not
corrupted his own heart." Love, which is the only thing demanded in [Deu
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005), is here preceded by fear, which
is the only thing mentioned in [Deu
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026) and [Deu
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#024).

(Note: The fear of God is to be united with the love of God; for love
without fear makes men remiss, and fear without love makes them servile
and desperate (J. Gerhard).)

The fear of the Lord, which springs from the knowledge of one's own
unholiness in the presence of the holy God, ought to form the one
leading emotion in the heart prompting to walk in all the ways of the
Lord, and to maintain morality of conduct in its strictest form. This
fear, which first enables us to comprehend the mercy of God, awakens
love, the fruit of which is manifested in serving God with all the heart
and all the soul (see [Deu 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)). "For
thy good," as in [Deu 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#030) and [Deu
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#024).

[Deuteronomy 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 10:14</span></span>

This obligation the Lord had laid upon Israel by the love with which He,
to whom all the heavens and the earth, with everything upon it, belong,
had chosen the patriarchs and their seed out of all nations. By "the
heavens of the heavens," the idea of heaven is perfectly exhausted. This
God, who might have chosen any other nation as well as Israel, or in
fact all nations together, had directed His special love to Israel
alone.

[Deuteronomy 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 10:16</span></span>

Above all, therefore, they were to circumcise the foreskin of their
hearts, i.e., to lay aside all insensibility of heart to impressions
from the love of God (cf. [Lev 26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041);
and on the spiritual signification of circumcision, see [Gen
17:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015)), and not stiffen their necks
any more, i.e., not persist in their obstinacy, or obstinate resistance
to God (cf. [Deu 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#006), [Deu
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#013)). Without circumcision of heart,
true fear of God and true love of God are both impossible. As a reason
for this admonition, Moses adduces in [Deu
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017). the nature and acts of God.
Jehovah as the absolute God and Lord is mighty and terrible towards all,
without respect of person, and at the same time a just Judge and loving
Protector of the helpless and oppressed. From this it follows that the
true God will not tolerate haughtiness and stiffness of neck either
towards Himself or towards other men, but will punish it without
reserve. To set forth emphatically the infinite greatness and might of
God, Moses describes Jehovah the God of Israel as the "God of gods,"
i.e., the supreme God, the essence of all that is divine, of all divine
power and might (cf. [Psa 136:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#002)), -
and as the "Lord of lords," i.e., the supreme, unrestricted Ruler ("the
only Potentate," [Ti1 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)), above all
powers in heaven and on earth, "a great King above all gods" ([Psa
95:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#003)). Compare [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014) and [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016), where these predicates are
transferred to the exalted Son of God, as the Judge and Conqueror of all
dominions and powers that are hostile to God. The predicates which
follow describe the unfolding of the omnipotence of God in the
government of the world, in which Jehovah manifests Himself as the
great, mighty, and terrible God ([Psa
89:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#008)), who does not regard the person
(cf. [Lev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015)), or accept presents
(cf. [Deu 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019)), like a human judge.

[Deuteronomy 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 10:18</span></span>

As such, Jehovah does justice to the defenceless (orphan and widow), and
exercises a loving care towards the stranger in his oppression. For this
reason the Israelites were not to close their hearts egotistically
against the stranger (cf. [Exo 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)).
This would show whether they possessed any love to God, and had
circumcised their hearts (cf. [Jo1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010), [Jo1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#017)).

[Deuteronomy 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 10:20</span></span>

After laying down the fundamental condition of a proper relation towards
God, Moses describes the fear of God, i.e., true reverence of God, in
its threefold manifestation, in deed (serving God), in heart (cleaving
to Him; cf. [Deu 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#004)), and with the
mouth (swearing by His name; cf. [Deu
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)). Such reverence as this Israel
owed to its God; for "He is thy praise, and He is thy God" ([Deu
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#021)). He has given thee strong
inducements to praise. By the great and terrible things which thine eyes
have seen, He has manifested Himself as God to thee. "Terrible things"
are those acts of divine omnipotence, which fill men with fear and
trembling at the majesty of the Almighty (cf. [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011)). אתּך עשׂה, "done with thee,"
i.e., shown to thee (את in the sense of practical help).

[Deuteronomy 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 10:22</span></span>

One marvel among these great and terrible acts of the Lord as to be seen
in Israel itself, which had gone down to Egypt in the persons of its
fathers as a family consisting of seventy souls, and now,
notwithstanding the oppression it suffered there, had grown into an
innumerable nation. So marvellously had the Lord fulfilled His promise
in [Gen 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005). By referring to this
promise, Moses intended no doubt to recall to the recollection of the
people the fact that the bondage of Israel in a foreign land for 400
years had also been foretold ([Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013).). On the seventy souls, see at
[Gen 46:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 11](deu011)

</div>
