<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu008)  [Next](deu010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 9:0</span></span>

Warning Against Self-Righteousness, Founded upon the Recital of Their
Previous Sins - Deuteronomy 9-10:11

Besides the more vulgar pride which entirely forgets God, and attributes
success and prosperity to its own power and exertion, there is one of a
more refined character, which very easily spreads-namely, pride which
acknowledges the blessings of God; but instead of receiving them
gratefully, as unmerited gifts of the grace of the Lord, sees in them
nothing but proofs of its own righteousness and virtue. Moses therefore
warned the Israelites more particularly of this dangerous enemy of the
soul, by first of all declaring without reserve, that the Lord was not
about to give them Canaan because of their own righteousness, but that
He would exterminate the Canaanites for their own wickedness ([Deu
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001)); and then showing them for
their humiliation, by proofs drawn from the immediate past, how they had
brought upon themselves the anger of the Lord, by their apostasy and
rebellion against their God, directly after the conclusion of the
covenant at Sinai; and that in such a way, that it was only by his
earnest intercession that he had been able to prevent the destruction of
the people (Deut 9:7-24), and to secure a further renewal of the pledges
of the covenant (Deut 9:25-10:11).

[Deuteronomy 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 9:1</span></span>

[Deu 9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001)

Warning against a conceit of righteousness, with the occasion for the
warning. As the Israelites were now about to cross over the Jordan
("this day," to indicate that the time was close at hand), to take
possession of nations that were superior to them in size and strength
(the tribes of Canaan mentioned in [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)), and great fortified cities
reaching to the heavens (cf. [Deu
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#028)), namely, the great and tall
nation of the Enakites ([Deu 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#028)),
before which, as was well known, no one could stand (התיצּב, as in [Deu
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#024)); and as they also knew that
Jehovah their God was going before them to destroy and humble these
nations, they were not to say in their heart, when this was done, For my
righteousness Jehovah hath brought me in to possess this land. In [Deu
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003), היּום וידעתּ is not to be taken
in an imperative sense, but as expressive of the actual fact, and
corresponding to [Deu 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001), "thou art
to pass." Israel now knew for certain - namely, by the fact, which spoke
so powerfully, of its having been successful against foes which it could
never have conquered by itself, especially against Sihon and Og - that
the Lord was going before it, as the leader and captain of His people
(Schultz: see [Deu 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#030)). The
threefold repetition of הוּא in [Deu
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003) is peculiarly emphatic. "A
consuming fire:" as in [Deu 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024).
ישׁמידם הוּא is more particularly defined by וגו יכניעם והוּא, which
follows: not, however, as implying that השׁמיד does not signify complete
destruction in this passage, but rather as explaining how the
destruction would take place. Jehovah would destroy the Canaanites, by
bring them down, humbling them before Israel, so that they would be able
to drive them out and destroy them quickly "מהר, quickly, is no more
opposed to [Deu 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#022), 'thou mayest not
destroy them quickly,' than God's not delaying to requite ([Deu
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#010)) is opposed to His
long-suffering" (Schultz). So far as the almighty assistance of God was
concerned, the Israelites would quickly overthrow the Canaanites; but
for the sake of the well-being of Israel, the destruction would only
take place by degrees. "As Jehovah hath said unto thee:" viz., [Exo
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#023), [Exo
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027)., and at the beginning of the
conflict, [Deu 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024).

[Deu 9:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004)

When therefore Jehovah thrust out these nations before them (הדף, as in
[Deu 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#019)), the Israelites were not to
say within themselves, "By (for, on account of) my righteousness Jehovah
hath brought me (led me hither) to possess this land." The following
word, וּברשׁעת, is adversative: "but because of the wickedness of these
nations," etc. - To impress this truth deeply upon the people, Moses
repeats the thought once more in [Deu
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#005). At the same time he mentions, in
addition to righteousness, straightness or uprightness of heart, to
indicate briefly that outward works do not constitute true
righteousness, but that an upright state of heart is indispensable, and
then enters more fully into the positive reasons. The wickedness of the
Canaanites was no doubt a sufficient reason for destroying them, but not
for giving their land to the people of Israel, since they could lay no
claim to it on account of their own righteousness. The reason for giving
Canaan to the Israelites was simply the promise of God, the word which
the Lord had spoken to the patriarchs on oath (cf. [Deu
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008)), and therefore nothing but the
free grace of God, - not any merit on the part of the Israelites who
were then living, for they were a people "of a hard neck," i.e., a
stubborn, untractable generation. With these words, which the Lord
Himself had applied to Israel in [Exo
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009); [Exo
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003), [Exo
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#005), Moses prepares the way for
passing to the reasons for his warning against self-righteous pride,
namely, the grievous sins of the Israelites against the Lord.

[Deuteronomy 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 9:7</span></span>

He reminded the people how they had provoked the Lord in the desert, and
had shown themselves rebellious against God, from the day of their
departure from Egypt till their arrival in the steppes of Moab. את־אשׁר,
for אשׁר, is the object to תּשׁכּח (Ewald, 333, a.): "how thou hast
provoked." המרה, generally with את־פּי (cf. [Deu
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#026)), to be rebellious against the
commandment of the Lord: here with עם, construed with a person, to deal
rebelliously with God, to act rebelliously in relation to Him (cf. [Deu
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#027)). The words "from the day that
thou camest out," etc., are not to be pressed. It is to be observed,
however, that the rebellion against the guidance of God commenced before
they passed through the Red Sea ([Exo
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011)). This general statement Moses
then followed up with facts, first of all describing the worship of the
calf at Horeb, according to its leading features ([Deu
9:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#008)), and then briefly pointing to
the other rebellions of the people in the desert ([Deu
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022), [Deu
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#023)).

[Deu 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#008)

"And indeed even in Horeb ye provoked Jehovah to wrath." By the vav
explic. this sin is brought into prominence, as having been a specially
grievous one. It was so because of the circumstances under which it was
committed.

[Deu 9:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009)

When Moses went up the mountain, and stayed there forty days, entirely
occupied with the holiest things, so that he neither ate nor drank,
having gone up to receive the tables of the law, upon which the words
were written with the finger of God, just as the Lord had spoken them
directly to the people out of the midst of the fire, - at a time,
therefore, when the Israelites should also have been meditating deeply
upon the words of the Lord which they had but just heard, - they acted
so corruptly, as to depart at once from the way that had been pointed
out, and make themselves a molten image (comp. Ex 31:18-32:6, with chs.
Deut 24:12-31:17). "The day of the assembly," i.e., the day on which
Moses gathered the people together before God ([Deu
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010)), calling them out of the camp,
and bringing them to the Lord to the foot of Sinai ([Exo
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017)). The construction of the
sentence is this: the apodosis to "when I was gone up" commences with
"the Lord delivered unto me," in [Deu
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#010); and the clause, "then I abode,"
etc., in [Deu 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009), is a parenthesis. -
The words of God in [Deu 9:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012) are
taken almost word for word from [Exo
32:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007). הרף ([Deu
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#014)), the imperative Hiphil of רפה,
desist from me, that I may destroy them, for לּי הנּיחה, in [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010). But notwithstanding the
apostasy of the people, the Lord gave Moses the tables of the covenant,
not only that they might be a testimony of His holiness before the
faithless nation, but still more as a testimony that, in spite of His
resolution to destroy the rebellious nation, without leaving a trace
behind, He would still uphold His covenant, and make of Moses a greater
people. There is nothing at all to favour the opinion, that handing over
the tables ([Deu 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#011)) was the first
beginning of the manifestations of divine wrath (Schultz); and this is
also at variance with the preterite, נתן, in [Deu
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#011), from which it is very evident
that the Lord had already given the tables to Moses, when He commanded
him to go down quickly, not only to declare to the people the holiness
of God, but to stop the apostasy, and by his mediatorial intervention to
avert from the people the execution of the divine purpose. It is true,
that when Moses came down and saw the idolatrous conduct of the people,
he threw the two tables from his hands, and broke them in pieces before
the eyes of the people ([Deu 9:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#015);
comp. with [Exo 32:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015)), as a
practical declaration that the covenant of the Lord was broken by their
apostasy. But this act of Moses furnishes no proof that the Lord had
given him the tables to declare His holy wrath in the sight of the
people. And even if the tables of the covenant were "in a certain sense
the indictments in Moses' hands, accusing them of a capital crime"
(Schultz), this was not the purpose for which God had given them to him.
For if it had been, Moses would not have broken them in pieces,
destroying, as it were, the indictments themselves, before the people
had been tried. Moses passed over the fact, that even before coming down
from the mountain he endeavoured to mitigate the wrath of the Lord by
his intercession ([Exo 32:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011)), and
simply mentioned (in [Deu 9:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#015))
how, as soon as he came down, he charged the people with their great
sin; and then, in [Deu 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018), [Deu
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#019), how he spent another forty days
upon the mountain fasting before God, on account of this sin, until he
had averted the destructive wrath of the Lord from Israel, through his
earnest intercession. The forty days that Moses spent upon the mountain,
"as at the first," in prayer before the Lord, are the days mentioned in
[Exo 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028) as having been passed upon
Sinai for the perfect restoration of the covenant, and for the purpose
of procuring the second tables (cf. [Deu
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001).).

[Deu 9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020)

It was not from the people only, but from Aaron also, that Moses averted
the wrath of God through his intercession, when it was about to destroy
him. In the historical account in Ex 32, there is no special reference
to this intercession, as it is included in the intercession for the
whole nation. On the present occasion, however, Moses gave especial
prominence to this particular feature, not only that he might make the
people thoroughly aware that at that time Israel could not even boast of
the righteousness of its eminent men (cf. [Isa
43:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#027)), but also to bring out the
fact, which is described still more fully in [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006)., that Aaron's investiture with
the priesthood, and the maintenance of this institution, was purely a
work of divine grace. It is true that at that time Aaron was not yet
high priest; but he had been placed at the head of the nation in
connection with Hur, as the representative of Moses ([Exo
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014)), and was already designated by
God for the high-priesthood ([Exo
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)). The fact, however, that Aaron
had drawn upon himself the wrath of God in a very high degree, was
intimated plainly enough in what Moses told him in [Exo
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021). - In [Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021), Moses mentions again how he
destroyed that manifested sin of the nation, namely, the molten calf
(see at [Exo 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020)).

[Deu 9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022)

And it was not on this occasion only, viz., at Horeb, that Israel
aroused the anger of the Lord its God by its sin, but it did so again
and again at other places: at Tabeerah, by discontent at the guidance of
God ([Num 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001)); at Massah, by
murmuring on account of the want of water ([Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001).); at the graves of lust, by
longing for flesh ([Num 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004).); and at
Kadesh-barnea by unbelief, of which they had already been reminded at
[Deu 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#026). The list is not arranged
chronologically, but advances gradually from the smaller to the more
serious forms of guilt. For Moses was seeking to sharpen the consciences
of the people, and to impress upon them the fact that they had been
rebellious against the Lord (see at [Deu
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007)) from the very beginning, "from
the day that I knew you."

[Deuteronomy 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 9:25</span></span>

After vindicating in this way the thought expressed in [Deu
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007), by enumerating the principal
rebellions of the people against their God, Moses returns in [Deu
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025). to the apostasy at Sinai, for
the purpose of showing still further how Israel had no righteousness or
ground for boasting before God, and owed its preservation, with all the
saving blessings of the covenant, solely to the mercy of God and His
covenant faithfulness. To this end he repeats in [Deu
9:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026) the essential points in his
intercession for the people after their sin at Sinai, and then proceeds
to explain still further, in [Deu
10:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001), how the Lord had not only
renewed the tables of the covenant in consequence of this intercession
([Deu 10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001)), but had also
established the gracious institution of the priesthood for the time to
come by appointing Eleazar in Aaron's stead as soon as his father died,
and setting apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark of the covenant and
attend to the holy service, and had commanded them to continue their
march to Canaan, and take possession of the land promised to the fathers
([Deu 10:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006)). With the words "thus I
fell down," in [Deu 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025), Moses
returns to the intercession already briefly mentioned in [Deu
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018), and recalls to the recollection
of the people the essential features of his plea at the time. For the
words "the forty days and nights that I fell down," see at [Deu
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046). The substance of the
intercession in [Deu 9:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026) is
essentially the same as that in [Exo
32:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011); but given with such freedom
as any other than Moses would hardly have allowed himself (Schultz), and
in such a manner as to bring it into the most obvious relation to the
words of God in [Deu 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012), [Deu
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#013). אל־תּשׁחת, "Destroy not Thy
people and Thine inheritance," says Moses, with reference to the words
of the Lord to him: "thy people have corrupted themselves" ([Deu
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012)). Israel was not Moses' nation,
but the nation and inheritance of Jehovah; it was not Moses, but
Jehovah, who had brought it out of Egypt. True, the people were
stiffnecked (cf. [Deu 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#013)); but let
the Lord remember the fathers, the oath given to Abraham, which is
expressly mentioned in [Exo 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013) (see
at [Deu 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008)), and not turn to the
stiffneckedness of the people (קשׁי equivalent to ערף קשׁה, [Deu
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#013) and [Deu
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#006)), and to their wickedness and sin
(i.e., not regard them and punish them). The honour of the Lord before
the nations was concerned in this ([Deu
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#028)). The land whence Israel came out
("the land" = the people of the land, as in [Gen
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025), etc., viz., the Egyptians: the
word is construed as a collective with a plural verb) must not have
occasion to say, that Jehovah had not led His people into the promised
land from incapacity or hatred. יכלת מבּלי recalls [Num
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#016). Just as "inability" would be
opposed to the nature of the absolute God, so "hatred" would be opposed
to the choice of Israel as the inheritance of Jehovah, which He had
brought out of Egypt by His divine and almighty power (cf. [Exo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 10](deu010)

</div>
