<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu032)  [Next](deu034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 33:1</span></span>

Before ascending Mount Nebo to depart this life, Moses took leave of his
people, the tribes of Israel, in the blessing which is very fittingly
inserted in the book of the law between the divine announcement of his
approaching death and the account of the death itself, as being the last
words of the departing man of God. The blessing opens with an allusion
to the solemn conclusion of the covenant and giving of the law at Sinai,
by which the Lord became King of Israel, to indicate at the outset the
source from which all blessings must flow to Israel ([Deu
33:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)). Then follow the separate
blessings upon the different tribes (vv. 6-25). And the whole concludes
with an utterance of praise to the Lord, as the mighty support and
refuge of His people in their conflicts with all their foes ([Deu
33:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)). This blessing was not
written down by Moses himself, like the song in ch. 32, but simply
pronounced in the presence of the assembled tribes. This is evident, not
only from the fact that there is nothing said about its being committed
to writing, but also from the heading in [Deu
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001), where the editor clearly
distinguishes himself from Moses, by speaking of Moses as "the man of
God," like Caleb in [Jos 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006), and the
author of the heading to the prayer of Moses in [Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001). In later times, "man of God" was
the title usually given to a prophet (vid., [Sa1
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006); [Kg1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#022); [Kg1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#014), etc.), as a man who enjoyed
direct intercourse with God, and received supernatural revelations from
Him. Nevertheless, we have Moses' own words, not only in the blessings
upon the several tribes (vv. 6-25), but also in the introduction and
conclusion of the blessing ([Deu
33:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002) and [Deu
33:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)). The introductory words
before the blessings, such as "and this for Judah" in [Deu
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007), "and to Levi he said" ([Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)), and the similar formulas in
[Deu 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012), [Deu
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013), [Deu
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018), [Deu
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020), [Deu
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022), [Deu
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023), and [Deu
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024), are the only additions made by
the editor who inserted the blessing in the Pentateuch. The arrangement
of the blessings in their present order is probably also his work. It
neither accords with the respective order of the sons of Jacob, nor with
the distribution of the tribes in the camp, nor with the situation of
their possessions in the land of Canaan. It is true that Reuben stands
first as the eldest son of Jacob; but Simeon is then passed over, and
Judah, to whom the dying patriarch bequeathed the birthright which he
withdrew from Reuben, stands next; and then Levi, the priestly tribe.
Then follow Benjamin and Joseph, the sons of Rachel; Zebulun and
Issachar, the last sons of Leah (in both cases the younger before the
elder); and lastly, the tribes descended from the sons of the maids:
Gad, the son of Zilpah; Dan and Naphtali, the sons of Bilhah; and
finally, Asher, the second son of Zilpah. To discover the guiding
principle in this arrangement, we must look to the blessings themselves,
which indicate partly the position already obtained by each tribe, as a
member of the whole nation, in the earthly kingdom of God, and partly
the place which it was to reach and occupy in the further development of
Israel in the future, not only in relation to the Lord, but also in
relation to the other nations. The only exception to this is the
position assigned to Reuben, who occupies the foremost place as the
first-born, notwithstanding his loss of the birthright. In accordance
with this principle, the first place properly belonged to the tribe of
Judah, who was raised into the position of lord over his brethren, and
the second to the tribe of Levi, which had been set apart to take charge
of the sacred things; whilst Benjamin is associated with Levi as the
"beloved of the Lord." Then follow Joseph, as the representative of the
might which Israel would manifest in conflict with the nations; Zebulun
and Issachar, as the tribes which would become the channels of blessings
to the nations through their wealth in earthly good; and lastly, the
tribes descended from the sons of the maids, Asher being separated from
his brother Gad, and placed at the end, in all probability simply
because it was in the blessing promised to him that the earthly
blessedness of the people of God was to receive its fullest
manifestation.

On comparing the blessing of Moses with that of Jacob, we should expect
at the very outset, that if the blessings of these two men of God have
really been preserved to us, and they are not later inventions, their
contents would be essentially the same, so that the blessing of Moses
would contain simply a confirmation of that of the dying patriarch, and
would be founded upon it in various ways. This is most conspicuous in
the blessing upon Joseph; but there are also several other blessings in
which it is unmistakeable, although Moses' blessing is not surpassed in
independence and originality by that of Jacob, either in its figures,
its similes, or its thoughts. But the resemblance goes much deeper. It
is manifest, for example, in the fact, that in the case of several of
the tribes, Moses, like Jacob, does nothing more than expound their
names, and on the ground of the peculiar characters expressed in the
names, foretell to the tribes themselves their peculiar calling and
future development within the covenant nation. Consequently we have
nowhere any special predictions, but simply prophetic glances at the
future, depicted in a purely ideal manner, whilst in the case of most of
the tribes the utter want of precise information concerning their future
history prevents us from showing in what way they were fulfilled. The
difference in the times at which the two blessings were uttered is also
very apparent. The existing circumstances from which Moses surveyed the
future history of the tribes of Israel in the light of divine
revelation, were greatly altered from the time when Jacob blessed the
heads of the twelve tribes before his death, in the persons of his
twelve sons. These tribes had now grown into a numerous people, with
which the Lord had established the covenant that He had made with the
patriarchs. The curse of dispersion in Israel, which the patriarch had
pronounced upon Simeon and Levi ([Gen
49:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)), had been changed into a
blessing so far as Levi was concerned. The tribe of Levi had been
entrusted with the "light and right" of the Lord, had been called to be
the teacher of the rights and law of God in Israel, because it had
preserved the covenant of the Lord, after the conclusion of the covenant
at Sinai, even though it involved the denial of flesh and blood. Reuben,
Gad, and half Manasseh had already received their inheritance, and the
other tribes were to take possession of Canaan immediately. These
circumstances formed the starting-point for the blessings of Moses, not
only in the case of Levi and Gad, where they are expressly mentioned,
but in that of the other tribes also, where they do not stand
prominently forward, because for the most part Moses simply repeats the
leading features of their future development in their promised
inheritance, as already indicated in the blessing of Jacob, and "thus
bore his testimony to the patriarch who anticipated him, that the spirit
of his prophecy was truth" (Ziegler, p. 159).

In this peculiar characteristic of the blessing of Moses, we have the
strongest proof of its authenticity, particularly in the fact that there
is not the slightest trace of the historical circumstances of the nation
at large and the separate tribes which were peculiar to the post-Mosaic
times. The little ground that there is for the assertion which Knobel
repeats, that the blessing betrays a closer acquaintance with the
post-Mosaic times, such as Moses himself could not possibly have
possessed, is sufficiently evident from the totally different
expositions which have been given by the different commentators of the
saying concerning Judah in [Deu 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007),
which is adduced in proof of this. Whilst Knobel finds the desire
expressed in this verse on behalf of Judah, that David, who had fled
from Saul, might return, obtain possession of the government, and raise
his tribe into the royal tribe, Graf imagines that it expresses the
longing of the kingdom of Judah for reunion with that of Israel; and
Hoffmann and Maurer even trace an allusion to the inhabitants of Judea
who were led into captivity along with Jehoiachin: one assumption being
just as arbitrary and as much opposed to the text as the other. - All
the objections brought against the genuineness of this blessing are
founded upon an oversight or denial of its prophetic character, and upon
untenable interpretations of particular expressions abstracted from it.
Not only is there no such thing in the whole blessing as a distinct
reference to the peculiar historical circumstances of Israel which arose
after Moses' death, but there are some points in the picture which Moses
has drawn of the tribes that it is impossible to recognise in these
circumstances. Even Knobel from his naturalistic stand-point is obliged
to admit, that no traces can be found in the song of any allusion to the
calamities which fell upon the nation in the Syrian, Assyrian, and
Chaldaean periods. And hitherto it has proved equally impossible to
point out any distinct allusion to the circumstances of the nation in
the period of the judges. On the contrary, as Schultz observes, the
speaker rises throughout to a height of ideality which it would have
been no longer possible for any sacred author to reach, when the
confusions and divisions of a later age had actually taken place. He
sees nothing of the calamities from without, which fell upon the nations
again and again with destructive fury, nothing of the Canaanites who
still remained in the midst of the Israelites, and nothing of the
hostility of the different tribes towards one another; he simply sees
how they work together in the most perfect harmony, each contributing
his part to realize the lofty ideal of Israel. And again he grasps this
ideal and the realization of it in so elementary a way, and so
thoroughly from the outer side, without regard to any inward
transformation and glorification, that he must have lived in a time
preceding the prophetic age, and before the moral conflicts had taken
place.

[Deuteronomy 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 33:2</span></span>

In the introduction Moses depicts the elevation of Israel into the
nation of God, in its origin ([Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)), its nature ([Deu
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003)), its intention and its goal
([Deu 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#004), [Deu
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005)).

[Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)

"Jehovah came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; He shone from
the mountains of Paran, and came out of holy myriads, at His right rays
of fire to them." To set forth the glory of the covenant which God made
with Israel, Moses depicts the majesty and glory in which the Lord
appeared to the Israelites at Sinai, to give them the law, and become
their king. The three clauses, "Jehovah came from Sinai...from
Seir...from the mountains of Paran," do not refer to different
manifestations of God (Knobel), but to the one appearance of God at
Sinai. Like the sun when it rises, and fills the whole of the broad
horizon with its beams, the glory of the Lord, when He appeared, was not
confined to one single point, but shone upon the people of Israel from
Sinai, and Seir, and the mountains of Paran, as they came from the west
to Sinai. The Lord appeared to the people from the summit of Sinai, as
they lay encamped at the foot of the mountain. This appearance rose like
a streaming light from Seir, and shone at the same time from the
mountains of Paran. Seir is the mountain land of the Edomites to the
east of Sinai; and the mountains of Paran are in all probability not the
mountains of et-Tih, which form the southern boundary of the desert of
Paran, but rather the mountains of the Azazimeh, which ascend to a great
height above Kadesh, and form the boundary wall of Canaan towards the
south. The glory of the Lord, who appeared upon Sinai, sent its beams
even to the eastern and northern extremities of the desert. This
manifestation of God formed the basis for all subsequent manifestations
of the omnipotence and grace of the Lord for the salvation of His
people. This explains the allusions to the description before us in the
song of Deborah ([Jdg 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004)) and in [Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003). - The Lord came not only from
Sinai, but from heaven, "out of holy myriads," i.e., out of the midst of
the thousands of holy angels who surround His throne ([Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019); [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006); [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)), and who are introduced in [Gen
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012) as His holy servants, and in
[Gen 32:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002), as the hosts of God, and
form the assembly of holy ones around His throne ([Psa
89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006), [Psa
89:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#008); cf. [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018); [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005); [Mat
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053); [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022); [Rev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011); [Rev
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011)). - The last clause is a
difficult one. The writing דּת אשׁ in two words, "fire of the law," not
only fails to give a suitable sense, but has against it the fact that
דּת, law, edictum, is not even a Semitic word, but was adopted from the
Persian into the Chaldee, and that it is only by Gentiles that it is
ever applied to the law of God ([Ezr
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012), [Ezr
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#021), [Ezr
7:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#025); [Dan
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006)). It must be read as one word,
אשׁדת, as it is in many MSS and editions - not, however, as connected
with אשׁד, אשׁדות, the pouring out of the brooks, slopes of the
mountains ([Num 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#015)), but in the
form אשּׁדת, composed, according to the probable conjecture of Bttcher,
of אשׁ, fire, and שׁדה (in the Chaldee and Syriac), to throw, to shoot
arrows, in the sense of "fire of throwing," shooting fire, a figurative
description of the flashes of lightning. Gesenius adopts this
explanation, except that he derives דּת from ידה, to throw. It is
favoured by the fact that, according to [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), the appearance of God upon
Sinai was accompanied by thunder and lightning; and flashes of lightning
are often called the arrows of God, whilst shaadaah, in Hebrew, is
established by the name שׁדיאוּר ([Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005); [Num
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#010)). To this we may add the parallel
passage, [Hab 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004), "rays out of His
hand," which renders this explanation a very probable one. By "them," in
the second and fifth clauses, the Israelites are intended, to whom this
fearful theophany referred. On the signification of the manifestation of
God in fire, see [Deu 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#011), and the
exposition of [Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002).

[Deu 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003)

"Yea, nations He loves; all His holy ones are in Thy hand: and they lie
down at Thy feet; they rise up at Thy words." עמּים חבב is the subject
placed first absolutely: "nations loving," sc., is he; or "as loving
nations - all Thy holy ones are in Thy hand." The nations or peoples are
not the tribes of Israel here, any more than in [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008), or [Gen
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003); [Gen
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011), and [Gen
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#004); whilst [Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014) and [Hos
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014) cannot come into consideration
at all, for there the word is defined by a suffix. The meaning of the
words depends upon whether "all His holy ones" are the godly in Israel,
or the Israelites generally, or the angels. There is nothing to favour
the first explanation, as the distinction between the godly and the
wicked would be out of place in the introduction to a blessing upon all
the tribes. The second has only as seeming support in [Dan
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021). and [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006). It does not follow at once from
the calling of Israel to be the holy nation of Jehovah, that all the
Israelites were or could be called "holy ones of the Lord." Least of all
should [Num 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003) be adduced in support
of this. Even in Dan 7 the holy ones of the Most High are not the Jews
generally, but simply the godly, or believers, in the nation of God. The
third view, on the other hand, is a perfectly natural one, on account of
the previous reference to the holy myriads. The meaning, therefore,
would be this: The Lord embraces all nations with His love, He who, so
to speak, has all His holy angels in His hand, i.e., His power, so that
they serve Him as their Lord. They lie down at His feet. The ἄπ. λεγ.
תּכּוּ is explained by Kimchi and Saad. as signifying adjuncti sequuntur
vestigia sua; and by the Syriac, They follow thy foot, from conjecture
rather than any certain etymology. The derivation proposed by modern
linguists, from the verb תּכה, according to an Arabic word signifying
recubuit, innixus est, has apparently more to support it. ישּׂא, it
rises up: intransitive, as in [Hab
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003); [Nah
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#005); [Hos
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001), and [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010). מדּבּרתיך is not a Hithpael
participle (that which is spoken); for מדּבּר has not a passive, but an
active signification, to converse ([Num
7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089); [Eze
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#002), etc.). It is rather a noun,
דבּרת, from דּבּרה, words, utterances. The singular, ישּׂא, is
distributive: every one (of them) rises on account of thine utterance,
i.e., at thy words. The suffixes relate to God, and the discourse passes
from the third to the second person. In our own language, such a change
in a sentence like this, "all His (God's) holy ones are in Thy (God's)
hand," would be intolerably harsh, but in Hebrew poetry it is by no
means rare (see, for example, [Psa
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#019)).

[Deu 33:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#004)

"Moses appointed us a law, a possession of the congregation of Jacob.
And He became King in righteous-nation (Jeshurun); there the heads of
the people assembled, in crowds the tribes of Israel." The God who met
Israel at Sinai in terrible majesty, out of the myriads of holy angels,
who embraces all nations in love, and has all the holy angels in His
power, so that they lie at His feet and rise up at His word, gave the
law through Moses to the congregation of Jacob as a precious possession,
and became King in Israel. This was the object of the glorious
manifestation of His holy majesty upon Sinai. Instead of saying, "He
gave the law to the tribes of Israel through my mediation," Moses
personates the listening nation, and not only speaks of himself in the
third person, but does so by identifying his own person with the nation,
because he wished the people to repeat his words from thorough
conviction, and because the law which he gave in the name of the Lord
was given to himself as well, and was as binding upon him as upon every
other member of the congregation. In a similar manner the prophet
Habakkuk identifies himself with the nation in ch. 3, and says in [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019), out of the heart of the nation,
"The Lord is my strength,...who maketh me to walk upon mine high
places," - an expression which did not apply to himself, but to the
nation as a whole. So again in [Psa
20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001) and [Psa
21:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001), which David composed as the
prayers of the nation for its king, he not only speaks of himself as the
anointed of the Lord, but addresses such prayers to the Lord for himself
as could only be offered by the nation for its king. "A possession for
the congregation of Jacob." "Israel was distinguished above all other
nations by the possession of the divinely revealed law ([Deu
4:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#005)); that was its most glorious
possession, and therefore is called its true κειμήλιον" (Knobel). The
subject in [Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005) is not Moses but
Jehovah, who became King in Jeshurun (see at [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015) and [Exo
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#018)). "Were gathered together;" this
refers to the assembling of the nation around Sinai ([Deu
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010).; cf. [Exo
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017).), to the day of assembly ([Deu
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#010); [Deu
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#004); [Deu
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#016)).

[Deuteronomy 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 33:6</span></span>

The blessings upon the tribes commence with this verse. "Let Reuben live
and not die, and there be a (small) number of his men." The rights of
the first-born had been withheld from Reuben in the blessing of Jacob
([Gen 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)); Moses, however, promises
this tribe continuance and prosperity. The words, "and let his men
become a number," have been explained in very different ways. מספּר in
this connection cannot mean a large number (πολὺς ἐν ἀριθμῷ, lxx), but,
like מספּר מתי ([Deu 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#027); [Gen
34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030); [Jer
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028)), simply a small number, that
could easily be counted (cf. [Deu
28:62](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#062)). The negation must be carried
on to the last clause. This the language will allow, as the rule that a
negation can only be carried forward when it stands with emphatic force
at the very beginning (Ewald, 351) is not without exceptions; see for
example [Pro 30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#002), where three
negative clauses follow a positive one, and in the last the לא is
omitted, without the particle of negation having been placed in any
significant manner at the beginning. - Simeon was the next in age to
Reuben; but he is passed over entirely, because according to Jacob's
blessing ([Gen 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007)) he was to be
scattered abroad in Israel, and lost his individuality as a tribe in
consequence of this dispersion, in accordance with which the Simeonites
simply received a number of towns within the territory of Judah ([Jos
19:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#002)), and, "having no peculiar
object of its own, took part, as far as possible, in the fate and
objects of the other tribes, more especially of Judah" (Schultz).
Although, therefore, it is by no means to be regarded as left without a
blessing, but rather as included in the general blessings in [Deu
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001) and [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029), and still more in the blessing
upon Judah, yet it could not receive a special blessing like the tribe
of Reuben, because, as Ephraim Syrus observes, the Simeonites had not
endeavoured to wipe out the stain of the crime which Jacob cursed, but
had added to it by fresh crimes (more especially the audacious
prostitution of Zimri, Num 25). Even the Simeonites did not become
extinct, but continued to live in the midst of the tribe of Judah, so
that as late as the eighth century, in the reign of Hezekiah, thirteen
princes are enumerated with their families, whose fathers' houses had
increased greatly ([Ch1 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#034).); and
these families effected conquests in the south, even penetrating into
the mountains of Seir, for the purpose of seeking fresh pasture ([Ch1
4:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#039)). Hence the assertion that the
omission of Simeon is only conceivable from the circumstances of a later
age, is as mistaken as the attempt made in some of the MSS of the
Septuagint to interpolate the name of Simeon in the second clause of
[Deu 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006).

[Deuteronomy 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 33:7</span></span>

The blessing upon Judah is introduced with the formula, "And this for
Judah, and he said:" "Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah, and bring him
to his people; with his hands he fights for him; and help against his
adversaries wilt Thou be." Judah, from whom the sceptre was not to
depart ([Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)), is mentioned
before Levi as the royal tribe. The prayer, May Jehovah bring Judah to
his people, can hardly be understood in any other way than it is by
Onkelos and Hengstenberg (Christol. i. 80), viz., as founded upon the
blessing of Jacob, and expressing the desire, that as Judah was to lead
the way as the champion of his brethren in the wars of Israel against
the nations, he might have a prosperous return to his people; for the
thought, "introduce him to the kingdom of Israel and Judah" (Luther), or
"give up to him the people which belongs to him according to Thine
appointment" (Schultz), is hardly implied in the words, "bring to his
people." Other explanations are not worth mentioning. What follows
points to strife and war: "With his hands (ידיו accusative of the
instrument, vid., Ges. ֗138, 1, note 3; Ewald, ֗283, a.) is he fighting
(רב participle of ריב) for it (the nation); Thou wilt grant him help,
deliverance before his foes."

[Deuteronomy 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 33:8</span></span>

Levi. - [Deu 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008), [Deu
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009). "Thy right and Thy light is to
Thy godly man, whom Thou didst prove in Massah, and didst strive with
him at the water of strife; who says to his father and his mother, I see
him not; and does not regard his brethren, and does not know his sons:
for they observed Thy word, and kept Thy covenant." This blessing is
also addressed to God as a prayer. The Urim and Thummim - that pledge,
which the high priest wore upon his breast-plate, that the Lord would
always give His people light to preserve His endangered right (vid.,
[Exo 28:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#029)), - are here regarded as
a prerogative of the whole of the tribe of Levi. Thummim is placed
before Urim, to indicate at the outset that Levi had defended the right
of the Lord, and that for that very reason the right of the Urim and
Thummim had been given to him by the Lord. "Thy holy one" is not Aaron,
but Levi the tribe-father, who represents the whole tribe to which the
blessing applies; hence in [Deu 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)
and [Deu 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010) the verb passes into
the plural. To define more precisely the expression "Thy holy one,"
reference is made to the trials at Massah and at the water of strife, on
the principle that the Lord humbles His servants before He exalts them,
and confirms those that are His by trying and proving them. The proving
at Massah refers to the murmuring of the people on account of the want
of water at Rephidim ([Exo 17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001), as
in [Deu 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016) and [Deu
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022)), from which the place received
the name of Massah and Jeribah; the striving at the water of strife, to
the rebellion of the people against Moses and Aaron on account of the
want of water at Kadesh ([Num
20:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)). At both places it was
primarily the people who strove with Moses and Aaron, and thereby
tempted God. For it is evident that even at Massah the people murmured
not only against Moses, but against their leaders generally, from the
use of the plural verb, "Give ye us water to drink" ([Exo
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002)). This proving of the people,
however, was at the same time a proof, to which the Lord subjected the
heads and leaders of the nation, for the purpose of trying their faith.
And thus also, in [Deu 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)., the whole
of the guidance of Israel through the desert is described as a trial and
humiliation of the people by the Lord. But in Moses and Aaron, the heads
of the tribe of Levi, the whole of the tribe of Levi was proved. The two
provings by means of water are selected, as Schultz observes, "because
in their correlation they were the best adapted to represent the
beginning and end, and therefore the whole of the temptations."

[Deu 33:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)

In these temptations Levi had proved itself "a holy one," although in
the latter Moses and Aaron stumbled, since the Levites had risen up in
defence of the honour of the Lord and had kept His covenant, even with
the denial of father, mother, brethren, and children ([Mat
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037); [Mat
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)). The words, "who says to his
father," etc., relate to the event narrated in [Exo
32:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#026), where the Levites draw their
swords against the Israelites their brethren, at the command of Moses,
after the worship of the golden calf, and execute judgment upon the
nation without respect of person. To this we may add [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008), where Phinehas interposes with
his sword in defence of the honour of the Lord against the shameless
prostitution with the daughters of Moab. On these occasions the Levites
manifested the spirit which Moses predicates here of all the tribe. By
the interposition at Sinai especially, they devoted themselves with such
self-denial to the service of the Lord, that the dignity of the
priesthood was conferred upon their tribe in consequence. - In [Deu
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010) and [Deu
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#011), Moses celebrates this vocation:
"They will teach Jacob Thy rights, and Israel Thy law; bring incense to
Thy nose, and whole-offering upon Thine altar. Bless, Lord, his
strength, and let the work of his hands be well-pleasing to Thee: smite
his adversaries and his haters upon the hips, that they may not rise!"
The tribe of Levi had received the high and glorious calling to instruct
Israel in the rights and commandments of God ([Lev
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#011)), and to present the sacrifices
of the people to the Lord, viz., incense in the holy place,
whole-offering in the court. "Whole-offering," a term applied to the
burnt-offering, which is mentioned instar omnium as being the leading
sacrifice. The priests alone were actually entrusted with the
instruction of the people in the law and the sacrificial worship; but as
the rest of the Levites were given them as assistants in their service,
this service might very properly be ascribed to the whole tribe; and no
greater blessing could be desired for it than that the Lord should give
them power to discharge the duties of their office, should accept their
service with favour, and make their opponents powerless. The enemies and
haters of Levi were not only envious persons, like Korah and his company
([Num 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)), but all opponents of the
priests and Levites. The loins are the seat of strength ([Psa
69:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#024); [Job
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016); [Job
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001); 17). This is the only place in
which מן is used before a finite verb, whereas it often stands before
the infinitive (e.g., [Gen 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001); [Gen
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#029)).

[Deuteronomy 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 33:12</span></span>

Benjamin. - "The beloved of the Lord will dwell safely with Him; He
shelters him at all times, and he dwells between His shoulders."
Benjamin, the son of prosperity, and beloved of his father ([Gen
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018); [Gen
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#020)), should bear his name with
right. He would be the beloved of the Lord, and as such would dwell in
safety with the Lord (עליו, lit., founded upon Him). The Lord would
shelter him continually. The participle expresses the permanence of the
relation: is his shelterer. In the third clause Benjamin is the subject
once more; he dwells between the shoulders of Jehovah. "Between the
shoulders" is equivalent to "upon the back" (vid., [Sa1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006)). The expression is founded upon
the figure of a father carrying his son ([Deu
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#029)). This figure is by no means so
bold as that of the eagle's wings, upon which the Lord had carried His
people, and brought them to Himself ([Exo
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004); vid., [Deu
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)). There is nothing strange in
the change of subject in all three clauses, since it is met with
repeatedly even in plain prose (e.g., [Sa2
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#013)); and here it follows simply
enough from the thoughts contained in the different clauses, whilst the
suffix in all three clauses refers to the same noun, i.e., to Jehovah.

(Note: "To dwell upon God and between His shoulders is the same as to
repose upon Him: the simile being taken from fathers who carry their
sons while delicate and young" (Calvin).)

There are some who regard Jehovah as the subject in the third clause,
and explain the unheard-of figure which they thus obtain, viz., that of
Jehovah dwelling between the shoulders of Benjamin, as referring to the
historical fact that God dwelt in the temple at Jerusalem, which was
situated upon the border of the tribes of Benjamin and Judah. To this
application of the words Knobel has properly objected, that God did not
dwell between ridges (= shoulders) of mountains there, but upon the top
of Moriah; but, on the other hand, he has set up the much more untenable
hypothesis, that the expression refers to Gibeon, where the tabernacle
stood after the destruction of Nob by Saul. - Moreover, the whole nation
participated in the blessing which Moses desired for Benjamin; and this
applies to the blessings of the other tribes also. All Israel was, like
Benjamin, the beloved of the Lord (vid., [Jer
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#015); [Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007)), and dwelt with Him in safety
(vid., [Deu 33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028)).

[Deuteronomy 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 33:13</span></span>

Joseph. - [Deu 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013). "Blessed of the
Lord be his land, of (in) the most precious things of heaven, the dew,
and of the flood which lies beneath, ([Deu
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#014)) and of the most precious of the
produce of the sun, and of the most precious of the growth of the moons,
([Deu 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#015)) and of the head of the
mountains of olden time, and of the most precious thing of the
everlasting hills, ([Deu 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016)) and of
the most precious thing of the earth, and of its fulness, and the
good-will of Him that dwelt in the bush: let it come upon the head of
Joseph, and upon the crown of him that is illustrious among his
brethren." What Jacob desired and solicited for his son Joseph, Moses
also desires for this tribe, namely, the greatest possible abundance of
earthly blessing, and a vigorous manifestation of power in conflict with
the nations. But however unmistakeable may be the connection between
these words and the blessing of Jacob ([Gen
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022).), not only in the things
desired, but even in particular expression, there is an important
difference which equally strikes us, namely, that in the case of Jacob
the main point of the blessing is the growth of Joseph into a powerful
tribe, whereas with Moses it is the development of power on the part of
this tribe in the land of its inheritance, in perfect harmony with the
different times at which the blessings were pronounced. Jacob described
the growth of Joseph under the figure of the luxuriant branch of a
fruit-tree planted by the water; whilst Moses fixes his eye primarily
upon the land of Joseph, and desires for him the richest productions.
"May his land be blessed by Jehovah from (מן of the cause of the
blessing, whose author was Jehovah; vid., [Psa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007); [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)) the most precious thing of the
heaven." מגד, which only occurs again in the [Sol
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013), [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016), and [Sol
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013), is applied to precious fruits.
The most precious fruit which the heaven yields to the land is the dew.
The "productions of the sun," and גּרשׁ, ἅπ. λεγ. from גּרשׁ, "the
produce of the moons," are the fruits of the earth, which are matured by
the influence of the sun and moon, by their light, their warmth. At the
same time, we can hardly so distinguish the one from the other as to
understand by the former the fruits which ripen only once a year, and by
the latter those which grow several times and in difference months; and
[Eze 47:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#012) and [Rev
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002) cannot be adduced as proofs of
this. The plural "moons" in parallelism with the sun does not mean
months, as in [Exo 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002), but the
different phases which the moon shows in its revolution round the earth.
מראשׁ (from the head), in [Deu 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#015),
is a contracted expression signifying "from the most precious things of
the head." The most precious things of the head of the mountains of old
and the eternal hills, are the crops and forests with which the tops of
the mountains and hills are covered. Moses sums up the whole in the
words, "the earth, and the fulness thereof:" everything in the form of
costly good that the earth and its productions can supply. - To the
blessings of the heaven and earth there are to be added the good-will of
the Lord, who appeared to Moses in the thorn-bush to redeem His people
out of the bondage and oppression of Egypt and bring it into the land of
Canaan, the land flowing with milk and honey ([Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002).). The expression "that dwells in
the bush" is to be explained from the significance of this manifestation
of God as shown at Ex 3, which shadowed forth a permanent relation
between the Lord and His people. The spiritual blessing of the covenant
grace is very suitably added to the blessings of nature; and there is
something no less suitable in the way in which the construction
commencing with וּרצון is dropped, so that an anakolouthon ensues. This
word cannot be taken as an accusative of more precise definition, as
Schultz supposes; nor is מן to be supplied before it, as Knobel
suggests. Grammatically considered, it is a nominative to which the verb
תּבואתה properly belongs, although, as a matter of fact, not only the
good-will, but the natural blessings, of the Lord were also to come upon
the head of Joseph. Consequently we have not יבוא (masc.), which רצון
would require, but the lengthened poetical feminine form תּבואתה (vid.,
Ewald, 191, c.), used in a neuter sense. It, i.e., everything mentioned
before, shall come upon Joseph. On the expression, "illustrious among
his brethren," see at [Gen 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026). In
the strength of this blessing, the tribe of Joseph would attain to such
a development of power, that it would be able to tread down all nations.

[Deuteronomy 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 33:17</span></span>

"The first-born of his ox, majesty is to him, and buffalo-horns his
horns: with them he thrusts down nations, all at once the ends of the
earth. These are the myriads of Ephraim, and these the thousands of
Manasseh." The "first-born of his (Joseph's) oxen" (shor, a collective
noun, as in [Deu 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#019)) is not Joshua
(Rabb., Schultz); still less is it Joseph (Bleek, Diestel), in which
case the pronoun his ox would be quite out of place; nor is it King
Jeroboam II, as Graf supposes. It is rather Ephraim, whom the patriarch
Jacob raised into the position of the first-born of Joseph ([Gen
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#004).). All the sons of Joseph
resembled oxen, but Ephraim was the most powerful of them all. He was
endowed with majesty; his horns, the strong weapon of oxen, in which all
their strength is concentrated, were not the horns of common oxen, but
horns of the wild buffalo (reem, [Num
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022)), that strong indomitable beast
(cf. [Job 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009).; [Psa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)). With them he would thrust down
nations, the ends of the earth, i.e., the most distant nations (vid.,
[Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008); [Psa
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009); [Psa
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028)). "Together," i.e., all at once,
belongs rhythmically to "the ends of the earth." Such are the myriads of
Ephraim, i.e., in such might will the myriads of Ephraim arise. To the
tribe of Ephraim, as the more numerous, the ten thousands are assigned;
to the tribe of Manasseh, the thousands.

[Deuteronomy 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 33:18</span></span>

Zebulun and Issachar. - "Rejoice, Zebulun, at thy going out; and,
Issachar, at thy tents. Nations will they invite to the mountain; there
offer the sacrifices of righteousness: for they suck the affluence of
the seas, and the hidden treasures of the sand." The tribes of the last
two sons of Leah Moses unites together, and, like Jacob in [Gen
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013), places Zebulun the younger
first. He first of all confirms the blessing which Jacob pronounced
through simply interpreting their names as omnia, by calling upon them
to rejoice in their undertakings abroad and at home. "At thy tents"
corresponds to "at thy going out" (tents being used poetically for
dwellings, as in [Deu 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#007)); like
"sitting" to "going out and coming in" in [Kg2
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#027); [Isa
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#028); [Psa
139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002); and describes in its two
aspects of work and production, rest and recreation. Although "going
out" (enterprise and labour) is attributed to Zebulun, and "remaining in
tents" (the comfortable enjoyment of life) to Issachar, in accordance
with the delineation of their respective characters in the blessing of
Jacob, this is to be attributed to the poetical parallelism of the
clauses, and the whole is to be understood as applying to both in the
sense suggested by Graf, "Rejoice, Zebulun and Issachar, in your labour
and your rest." This peculiarity, which is founded in the very nature of
poetical parallelism, which is to individualize the thought by
distributing it into parallel members, has been entirely overlooked by
all the commentators who have given a historical interpretation to each,
referring the "going out" to the shipping trade and commercial pursuits
of the Zebulunites, and the expression "in thy tents" either to the
spending of a nomad life in tents, for the purpose of performing a
subordinate part in connection with trade (Schultz), or to the quiet
pursuits of agriculture and grazing (Knobel). They were to rejoice in
their undertakings at home and abroad; for they would be successful. The
good things of life would flow to them in rich abundance; they would not
make them into mammon, however, but would invite nations to the
mountain, and there offer sacrifices of righteousness. "The peoples" are
nations generally, not the tribes of Israel, still less the members of
their own tribes. By the "mountain," without any more precise
definition, we are not to understand Tabor or Carmel any more than the
mountain land of Canaan. It is rather "the mountain of the Lord's
inheritance" ([Exo 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)), upon which
the Lord was about to plant His people, the mountain which the Lord had
chosen for His sanctuary, and in which His people were to dwell with
Him, and rejoice in sacrificial meals of fellowship with Him. To this
end the Lord had sanctified Moriah through the sacrifice of Isaac which
He required of Abraham, though it had not been revealed to Moses that it
was there that the temple, in which the name of the Lord in Israel would
dwell, was afterwards to be built. There is no distinct or direct
allusion to Morah or Zion, as the temple-mountain, involved in the words
of Moses. It was only by later revelations and appointments on the part
of God that this was to be made known. The words simply contain the
Messianic thought that Zebulun and Issachar would offer rich
praise-offerings and thank-offerings to the Lord, from the abundant
supply of earthly good that would flow to them, upon the mountain which
He would make ready as the seat of His gracious presence, and would
call, i.e., invite the nations to the sacrificial meals connected with
them to delight themselves with them in the rich gifts of the Lord, and
worship the Lord who blessed His people thus. For the explanation of
this thought, see [Psa 22:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028).
Sacrifice is mentioned here as an expression of divine worship, which
culminated in sacrifice; and slain-offerings are mentioned, not
burnt-offerings, to set forth the worship of God under the aspect of
blessedness in fellowship with the Lord. "Slain-offerings of
righteousness' are not merely outwardly legal sacrifices, in conformity
with the ritual of the law, but such as were offered in a right spirit,
which was well-pleasing to God (as in [Psa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006); 51:21). It follows as a matter of
course, therefore, that by the abundance of the seas we are not merely
to understand the profits of trade upon the Mediterranean Sea; and that
we are still less to understand by the hidden treasures of the sand "the
fish, the purple snails, and sponges" (Knobel), or "tunny-fish, purple
shells, and glass' (Ps. Jon.); but that the words receive their best
exposition from [Isa 60:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005), [Isa
60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016), and [Isa
66:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#011), i.e., that the thought
expressed is, that the riches and treasures of both sea and land would
flow to the tribes of Israel.

[Deuteronomy 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 33:20</span></span>

Gad. - "Blessed be He that enlargeth Gad: like a lioness he lieth down,
and teareth the arm, yea, the crown of the head. And he chose his
first-fruit territory, for there was the leader's portion kept; and he
came to the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the Lord,
and his rights with Israel." Just as in the blessing of Noah ([Gen
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#026)) the God of Shem is praised, to
point out the salvation appointed by God for Shem, so here Moses praises
the Lord, who enlarged Gad, i.e., who not only gave him a broad
territory in the conquered kingdom of Sihon, but furnished generally an
unlimited space for his development (vid., [Gen
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#022)), so that he might unfold his
lion-like nature in conflict with his foes. On the figure of a lioness,
see [Gen 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009); and on the warlike
character of the Gadites, the remarks on the blessing of Jacob upon Gad
([Gen 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019)). The second part of the
blessing treats of the inheritance which Gad obtained from Moses at his
own request beyond Jordan. ראה, with an accusative and ל, signifies to
look out something for oneself ([Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008); [Sa1
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#017)). The "first-fruit" refers here
to the first portion of the land which Israel received for a possession;
this is evident from the reason assigned, חלקת שׁם כּי, whilst the
statement that Gad chose the hereditary possession is in harmony with
[Num 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#002), [Num
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006), [Num
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025)., where the children of Gad are
described as being at the head of the tribes, who came before Moses to
ask for the conquered land as their possession. The meaning of the next
clause, of which very different explanations have been given, can only
be, that Gad chose such a territory for its inheritance as became a
leader of the tribes. מחקק, he who determines, commands, organizes;
hence both a commander and also a leader in war. It is in the latter
sense that it occurs both here and in [Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014). מחקק חלקת, the field, or
territory of the leader, may either be the territory appointed or
assigned by the lawgiver, or the territory falling to the lot of the
leader. According to the former view, Moses would be the mechokek. But
the thought, that Moses appointed or assigned him his inheritance, could
be no reason why Gad should choose it for himself. Consequently מחקק
חלקת can only mean the possession which the mechokek chose for himself,
as befitting him, or specially adapted for him. Consequently the
mechokek was not Moses, but the tribe of Gad, which was so called
because it unfolded such activity and bravery at the head of the tribes
in connection with the conquest of the land, that it could be regarded
as their leaders. This peculiar prominence on the part of the Gadites
may be inferred from the fact, that they distinguished themselves above
the Reubenites in the fortification of the conquered land ([Num
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034).). ספוּן, from ספן, to cover,
hide, preserve, is a predicate, and construed as a noun, "a thing
preserved." - On the other hand, the opinion has been very widely
spread, from the time of Onkelos down to Baumgarten and Ewald, that this
hemistich refers to Moses: "there is the portion of the lawgiver
hidden," or "the field of the hidden leader," and that it contains an
allusion to the fact that the grave of Moses was hidden in the
inheritance of Gad. But this is not only at variance with the
circumstance, that a prophetic allusion to the grave of Moses such as
Baumgarten assumes is apparently inconceivable, from the simple fact
that we cannot imagine the Gadites to have foreseen the situation of
Moses' grave at the time when they selected their territory, but also
with the fact that, according to [Jos
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#020), the spot where this grave was
situated ([Deu 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005)) was not allotted
to the tribe of Gad, but to that of Reuben; and lastly, with the use of
the word chelkah, which does not signify a burial-ground or grave. - But
although Gad chose out an inheritance for himself, he still went before
his brethren, i.e., along with the rest of the tribes, into Canaan, to
perform in connection with them, what the Lord demanded of His people as
a right. This is the meaning of the second half of the verse. The
clause, "he came to the heads of the people," does not refer to the fact
that the Gadites came to Moses and the heads of the congregation, to ask
for the conquered land as a possession ([Num
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#002)), but expressed the thought that
Gad joined the heads of the people to go at the head of the tribes of
Israel (comp. [Jos 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#014); [Jos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#012), with [Num
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017), [Num
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#021), [Num
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#032)), to conquer Canaan with the
whole nation, and root out the Canaanites. The Gadites had promised this
to Moses and the heads of the people; and this promise Moses regarded as
an accomplished act, and praised in these words with prophetic foresight
as having been already performed, and that not merely as one single
manifestation of their obedience towards the word of the Lord, but
rather as a pledge that Gad would always manifest the same disposition.
"To do the righteousness of Jehovah," i.e., to do what Jehovah requires
of His people as righteousness - namely, to fulfil the commandments of
God, in which the righteousness of Israel was to consist ([Deu
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025)). יתא, imperfect Kal for יאהת or
יאתּה; see Ges. 76, 2, c., and Ewald, 142, c. "With Israel:" in
fellowship with (the rest of) Israel.

[Deuteronomy 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 33:22</span></span>

Dan is "a young lion which springs out of Bashan." Whilst Jacob compared
him to a serpent by the way, which suddenly bites a horse's feet, so
that its rider falls backward, Moses gives greater prominence to the
strength which Dan would display in conflict with foes, by calling him a
young lion which suddenly springs out of its ambush. The reference to
Bashan has nothing to do with the expedition of the Danites against
Laish, in the valley of Rehoboth ([Jdg
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#028)), as this valley did not belong
to Bashan. It is to be explained from the simple fact, that in the
regions of eastern Bashan, which abound with caves, and more especially
in the woody western slopes of Jebel Hauran, many lions harboured, which
rushed forth from the thicket, and were very dangerous enemies to the
herds of Bashan. Even if no other express testimonies to this fact are
to be found it may be inferred from the description given of the eastern
spurs of Antilibanus in the Song of Sol. ([Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)), as the abodes of lions and
leopards. The meaning leap forth, spring out, is confirmed by both the
context and dialects, though the word only occurs here.

[Deuteronomy 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 33:23</span></span>

Naphtali. - "O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full of the blessing
of Jehovah; of sea and south shall he take possession." If the
gracefulness of Naphtali is set forth in the blessing of Jacob, by
comparing it to a gazelle, here Moses assures the same tribe of
satisfaction with the favour and blessing of God, and promises it the
possession of the sea and of the south, i.e., an inheritance which
should combine the advantages of the sea - a healthy sea-breeze - with
the grateful warmth of the south. This blessing is expressed in far too
general terms for it to be possible to interpret it historically, as
relating to the natural characteristics of the inheritance of the
Naphtalites in Canaan, or to regard it as based upon them, apart
altogether from the fact, that the territory of Naphtali was situated in
the north-east of Canaan, and reached as far as the sea of Galilee, and
that it was for the most part mountainous, though it was a very fertile
hill-country ([Jos 19:32-39](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#032)). ירשׁה is
a very unique form of the imperative, though this does not warrant an
alteration of the text.

[Deuteronomy 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 33:24</span></span>

Asher. - "Blessed before the sons be Asher; let him be the favoured
among his brethren, and dipping his foot in oil. Iron and brass be thy
castle; and as the days of thy life let thy rest continue." Asher, the
prosperous (see at [Gen 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#015)), was
justly to bear the name. He was to be a child of prosperity; blessed
with earthly good, he was to enjoy rest all his life long in strong
fortresses. It is evident enough that this blessing is simply an
exposition of the name Asher, and that Moses here promises the tribe a
verification of the omen contained in its name. מבּנים בּרוּך does not
mean "blessed with children," or "praised because of his children," in
which case we should have בּניו; but "blessed before the sons" (cf. [Jdg
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024)), i.e., blessed before the sons
of Jacob, who were peculiarly blessed, equivalent to the most blessed of
all the sons of Israel. אחיו רצוּי does not mean the beloved among his
brethren, acceptable to his brethren, but the one who enjoyed the favour
of the Lord, i.e., the one peculiarly favoured by the Lord. Dipping the
foot in oil points to a land flowing with oil ([Job
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006)), i.e., fat or fertile
throughout, which Jacob had already promised to Asher (see [Gen
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#020)). To complete the prosperity,
however, security and rest were required for the enjoyment of the
blessings bestowed by God; and these are promised in [Deu
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#025). מנעל (ἅπ. λεγ.) does not mean a
shoe, but is derived from נעל, to bolt ([Jdg
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#023)), and signifies either a bolt, or
that which is shut fast; a poetical expression for a castle or fortress.
Asher's dwellings were to be castles, fortresses of iron and brass;
i.e., as strong and impregnable as if they were built of iron and brass.
The pursuit of mining is not to be thought of as referred to here, even
though the territory of Asher, which reached to Lebanon, may have
contained brass and iron (see at [Deu
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#009)). Luther follows the lxx and
Vulgate, and renders this clause, "iron and brass be upon his shoes;"
but this is undoubtedly wrong, as the custom of fastening the shoes or
sandals with brass or iron was quite unknown to the Israelites; and even
Goliath, who was clothed in brass from head to foot, and wore iron
greaves, had no iron sandals, though the military shoes of the ancient
Romans had nails in the soles. Moreover, the context contains no
reference to war, so as to suggest the idea that the treading down and
cursing of the foe are intended. "As thy days," i.e., as long as the
days of thy life last, let thy rest be (continue). Luther's rendering,
"let thine old age be as thy youth," which follows the Vulgate, cannot
be sustained; for although דּבא, derived from דאב, to vanish away,
certainly might signify old age, the expression "thy days" cannot
possibly be understood as signifying youth.

[Deuteronomy 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 33:26</span></span>

The conclusion of the blessing corresponds to the introduction. As Moses
commenced with the glorious fact of the founding of the kingdom of
Jehovah in Israel, as the firm foundation of the salvation of His
people, so he also concludes with a reference to the Lord their eternal
refuge, and with a congratulation of Israel which could find refuge in
such a God.

[Deu 33:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)

"Who is as God, a righteous nation, who rides in heaven to thy help, and
in His exaltation upon the clouds. Abiding is the God of olden time, and
beneath are everlasting arms: and He drives the enemy before thee, and
says, Destroy." The meaning is: No other nation has a God who rules in
heaven with almighty power, and is a refuge and help to his people
against every foe. Jeshurun is a vocative, and the alteration of כּאל
into כּאל, "as the God of Jeshurun," according to the ancient versions,
is to be rejected on the simple ground that the expression "in thy
help," which follows immediately afterwards, is an address to Israel.
Riding upon the heaven and the clouds is a figure used to denote the
unlimited omnipotence with which God rules the world out of heaven, and
is the helper of His people. "In thy help," i.e., as thy helper. This
God is a dwelling to His people. מענה, like the masculine מעון in [Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001), and [Psa
91:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#009), signifies "dwelling," - a
genuine Mosaic figure, to which, in all probability, the houseless
wandering of the people in the desert, which made them feel the full
worth of a dwelling, first gave rise. The figure not only implies that
God grants protection and a refuge to His people in the storms of life
([Psa 91:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001), cf. [Isa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006)), but also that He supplies His
people with everything that can afford a safe abode. "The God of old,"
i.e., who has proved Himself to be God from the very beginning of the
world (vid., [Psa 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001); [Hab
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)). The expression "underneath" is
to be explained from the antithesis to the heaven where God is enthroned
above mankind. He who is enthroned in heaven above is also the God who
is with His people upon the earth below, and holds and bars them in His
arms. "Everlasting arms" are arms whose strength is never exhausted.
There is no need to supply "thee" after "underneath;" the expression
should rather be left in its general form, "upon the earth beneath." The
reference to Israel is obvious from the context. The driving of the
enemy before Israel is not to be restricted to the rooting out of the
Canaanites, but applies to every enemy of the congregation of the Lord.

[Deu 33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028)

"And Israel dwells safely, alone the fountain of Jacob, in a land full
of corn and wine; his heavens also drop down dew." Because the God of
old was the dwelling and help of Israel, it dwelt safely and separate
from the other nations, in a land abounding with corn and wine. "The
fountain of Jacob" is parallel to "Israel;" "alone (separate) dwells the
fountain of Jacob." This title is given to Israel as having sprung from
the patriarch Jacob, in whom it had its source. A similar expression
occurs in [Psa 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027). It completely
destroys the symmetry of the clauses of the verse to connect the words,
as Luther does, with what follows, in the sense of "the eye of Jacob is
directed upon a land." The construction of שׁכן with אל, to dwell into a
land, may be explained on the ground that the dwelling involves the idea
of spreading out over the land. On the "land of corn," etc., see [Deu
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007) and [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008). אף is emphatic: yea his heaven,
i.e., the heaven of this land drops down dew (vid., [Gen
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028)). Israel was to be congratulated
upon this.

[Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029)

"Hail to thee, O Israel! who is like thee, a people saved in the Lord,
the shield of thy help, and who (is) the sword of thine eminence. Thine
enemies will deny themselves to thee, and thou ridest upon their
heights." "Saved;" not merely delivered from danger and distress, but in
general endowed with salvation (like [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009); see also [Isa
45:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#017)). The salvation of Israel rested
in the Lord, as the ground out of which it grew, from which it
descended, because the Lord was its help and shield, as He had already
promised Abraham ([Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)), and "the
sword of his eminence," i.e., the sword which had fought for the
eminence of Israel. But because the Lord was Israel's shield and sword,
or, so to speak, both an offensive and defensive weapon, his enemies
denied themselves to him, i.e., feigned friendship, did not venture to
appear openly as enemies (for the meaning "feign," act the hypocrite,
see [Psa 18:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045); [Psa
81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016)). But Israel would ride upon
their heights, the high places of their land, i.e., would triumph over
all its foes (see at [Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 34](deu034)

</div>
