<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu024)  [Next](deu026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 25:1</span></span>

Corporal Punishment. - The rule respecting the corporal punishment to be
inflicted upon a guilty man is introduced in [Deu
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001) with the general law, that in a
dispute between two men the court was to give right to the man who was
right, and to pronounce the guilty man guilty (cf. [Exo
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008) and [Exo
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#007)).

[Deu 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#002)

If the guilty man was sentenced to stripes, he was to receive his
punishment in the presence of the judge, and not more than forty
stripes, that he might not become contemptible in the eyes of the
people. הכּות בּן, son of stripes, i.e., a man liable to stripes, like
son (child) of death, in [Sa1 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#031).
"According to the need of his crime in number," i.e., as many stripes as
his crime deserved.

[Deu 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#003)

"Forty shall ye beat him, and not add," i.e., at most forty stripes, and
not more. The strokes were administered with a stick upon the back ([Pro
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#013); [Pro
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#029); [Pro
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#003), etc.). This was the Egyptian
mode of whipping, as we may see depicted upon the monuments, when the
culprits lie flat upon the ground, and being held fast by the hands and
feet, receive their strokes in the presence of the judge (vid.,
Wilkinson, ii. p. 11, and Rosellini, ii. 3, p. 274, 78). The number
forty was not to be exceeded, because a larger number of strokes with a
stick would not only endanger health and life, but disgrace the man:
"that thy brother do not become contemptible in thine eyes." If he had
deserved a severer punishment, he was to be executed. In Turkey the
punishments inflicted are much more severe, viz., from fifty to a
hundred lashes with a whip; and they are at the same time inhuman (see
v. Tornauw, Moslem. Recht, p. 234). The number, forty, was probably
chosen with reference to its symbolical significance, which it had
derived from [Gen 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#012) onwards, as the
full measure of judgment. The Rabbins fixed the number at forty save one
(vid., [Co2 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024)), from a scrupulous
fear of transgressing the letter of the law, in case a mistake should be
made in the counting; yet they felt no conscientious scruples about
using a whip of twisted thongs instead of a stick (vid., tract. Macc.
iii. 12; Buxtorf, Synag. Jud. pp. 522-3; and Lundius, Jd. Heiligth. p.
472).

[Deuteronomy 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 25:4</span></span>

The command not to put a muzzle upon the ox when threshing, is no doubt
proverbial in its nature, and even in the context before us is not
intended to apply merely literally to an ox employed in threshing, but
to be understood in the general sense in which the Apostle Paul uses it
in [Co1 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009) and [Ti1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018), viz., that a labourer was not to
be deprived of his wages. As the mode of threshing presupposed here -
namely, with oxen yoked together, and driven to and fro over the corn
that had been strewn upon the floor, that they might kick out the grains
with their hoofs - has been retained to the present day in the East, so
has also the custom of leaving the animals employed in threshing without
a muzzle (vid., Hoest, Marokos, p. 129; Wellst. Arabien, i. p. 194;
Robinson, Pal. ii. pp. 206-7, iii. p. 6), although the Mosaic
injunctions are not so strictly observed by the Christians as by the
Mohammedans (Robinson, ii. p. 207).

[Deuteronomy 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 25:5</span></span>

On Levirate Marriages. - [Deu 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005),
[Deu 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#006). If brothers lived together,
and one of them died childless, the wife of the deceased was not to be
married outside (i.e., away from the family) to a strange man (one not
belonging to her kindred); her brother-in-law was to come to her and
take her for his wife, and perform the duty of a brother-in-law to her.
יבּם, denom. from יבם, a brother-in-law, husband's brother, lit., to act
the brother-in-law, i.e., perform the duty of a brother-in-law, which
consisted in his marrying his deceased brother's widow, and begetting a
son of children with her, the first-born of whom was "to stand upon the
name of his deceased brother," i.e., be placed in the family of the
deceased, and be recognised as the heir of his property, that his name
(the name of the man who had died childless) might not be wiped out or
vanish out of Israel. The provision, "without having a son" (ben), has
been correctly interpreted by the lxx, Vulg., Josephus (Ant. iv. 8, 23),
and the Rabbins, as signifying childless (having no seed, [Mat
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#025)); for if the deceased had simply
a daughter, according to [Num 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#004).,
the perpetuation of his house and name was to be ensured through her.
The obligation of a brother-in-law's marriage only existed in cases
where the brothers had lived together, i.e., in one and the same place,
not necessarily in one house or with a common domestic establishment and
home (vid., [Gen 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#006); [Gen
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007)). - This custom of a
brother-in-law's (Levirate) marriage, which is met with in different
nations, and as an old traditional custom among the Israelites (see at
[Gen 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#008).), had its natural roots in
the desire inherent in man, who is formed for immortality, and connected
with the hitherto undeveloped belief in an eternal life, to secure a
continued personal existence for himself and immorality for his name,
through the perpetuation of his family and in the life of the son who
took his place. This desire was not suppressed in Israel by divine
revelation, but rather increased, inasmuch as the promises given to the
patriarchs were bound up with the preservation and propagation of their
seed and name. The promise given to Abraham for his seed would of
necessity not only raise the begetting of children in the religious
views of the Israelites into the work desired by God and well-pleasing
to Him, but would also give this significance to the traditional custom
of preserving the name and family by the substitution of a marriage of
duty, that they would thereby secure to themselves and their family a
share in the blessing of promise. Moses therefore recognised this custom
as perfectly justifiable; but he sought to restrain it within such
limits, that it should not present any impediment to the sanctification
of marriage aimed at by the law. He took away the compulsory character,
which it hitherto possessed, by prescribing in [Deu
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#007)., that if the surviving brother
refused to marry his widowed sister-in-law, she was to bring the matter
into the gate before the elders of the town (vid., [Deu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#019)), i.e., before the magistrates;
and if the brother-in-law still persisted in his refusal, she was to
take his shoe from off his foot and spit in his face, with these words:
"So let it be done to the man who does not build up his brother's
house."

The taking off of the shoe was an ancient custom in Israel, adopted,
according to [Rut 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007), in cases of
redemption and exchange, for the purpose of confirming commercial
transactions. The usage arose from the fact, that when any one took
possession of landed property he did so by treading upon the soil, and
asserting his right of possession by standing upon it in his shoes. In
this way the taking off of the shoe and handing it to another became a
symbol of the renunciation of a man's position and property, - a symbol
which was also common among the Indians and the ancient Germans (see my
Archologie, ii. p. 66). But the custom was an ignominious one in such a
case as this, when the shoe was publicly taken off the foot of the
brother-in-law by the widow whom he refused to marry. He was thus
deprived of the position which he ought to have occupied in relation to
her and to his deceased brother, or to his paternal house; and the
disgrace involved in this was still further heightened by the fact that
his sister-in-law spat in his face. This is the meaning of the words
(cf. [Num 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014)), and not merely spit
on the ground before his eyes, as Saalschtz and others as well as the
Talmudists (tr. Jebam. xii. 6) render it, for the purpose of diminishing
the disgrace. "Build up his brother's house," i.e., lay the foundation
of a family or posterity for him (cf. [Gen
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002)). - In addition to this, the
unwilling brother-in-law was to receive a name of ridicule in Israel:
"House of the shoe taken off" (הנּעל חלוּץ, taken off as to his shoe;
cf. Ewald, 288, b.), i.e., of the barefooted man, equivalent to "the
miserable fellow;" for it was only in miserable circumstances that the
Hebrews went barefoot (vid., [Isa
20:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002);

[Deuteronomy 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 25:11</span></span>

"But in order that the great independence which is here accorded to a
childless widow in relation to her brother-in-law, might not be
interpreted as a false freedom granted to the female sex" (Baumgarten),
the law is added immediately afterwards, that a woman whose husband was
quarrelling with another, and who should come to his assistance by
laying hold of the secret parts of the man who was striking her husband,
should have her hand cut off.

[Deuteronomy 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 25:13</span></span>

The duty of integrity in trade is once more enforced in [Deu
25:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013) (as in [Lev
19:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#035)). "Stone and stone," i.e.,
two kinds of stones for weighing (cf. [Psa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)), viz., large ones for buying and
small ones for selling. On the promise in [Deu
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#015), see [Deu
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026); [Deu
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016); [Deu
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#016), as in [Deu
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005); [Deu
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#012), etc. In the concluding words,
[Deu 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#016), "all that do
unrighteously," Moses sums up all breaches of the law.

[Deuteronomy 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 25:17</span></span>

But whilst the Israelites were to make love the guiding principle of
their conduct in their dealings with a neighbour, and even with
strangers and foes, this love was not to degenerate into weakness or
indifference towards open ungodliness. To impress this truth upon the
people, Moses concludes the discourse on the law by reminding them of
the crafty enmity manifested towards them by Amalek on their march out
of Egypt, and with the command to root out the Amalekites (cf. [Exo
17:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009)). This heathen nation had come
against Israel on its journey, viz., at Rephidim in Horeb, and had
attacked its rear: "All the enfeebled behind thee, whilst thou wast
faint and weary, without fearing God." זנּב, lit., to tail, hence to
attack or destroy the rear of an army or of a travelling people (cf.
[Jos 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#019)). For this reason, when the
Lord should have given Israel rest in the land of its inheritance, it
was to root out the remembrance of Amalek under heaven. (On the
execution of this command, see 1 Sam 15.) "Thou shalt not forget it:" an
emphatic enforcement of the "remember" in [Deu
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 26](deu026)

</div>
