<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu033)  [Next](jos000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 34:1</span></span>

And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to
the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the LORD shewed him
all the land of Gilead, unto Dan, After blessing the people, Moses
ascended Mount Nebo, according to the command of God ([Deu
32:48-51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#048)), and there the Lord showed
him, in all its length and breadth, that promised land into which he was
not to enter. From Nebo, a peak of Pisgah, which affords a very
extensive prospect on all sides, he saw the land of Gilead, the land to
the east of the Jordan as far as Dan, i.e., not Laish-Dan near the
central source of the Jordan ([Jdg
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027)), which did not belong to
Gilead, but a Dan in northern Peraea, which has not yet been discovered
(see at [Gen 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)); and the whole of
the land on the west of the Jordan, Canaan proper, in all its different
districts, namely, "the whole of Naphtali," i.e., the later Galilee on
the north, "the land of Ephraim and Manasseh" in the centre, and "the
whole of the land of Judah," the southern portion of Canaan, in all its
breadth, "to the hinder (Mediterranean) sea" (see [Deu
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024)); also "the south land" (Negeb:
see at [Num 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017)), the southern land
of steppe towards the Arabian desert, and "the valley of the Jordan"
(see [Gen 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)), i.e., the deep
valley from Jericho the palm-city (so called from the palms which grew
there, in the valley of the Jordan: [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016); [Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013); [Ch2
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#015)) "to Zoar" at the southern
extremity of the Dead Sea (see at [Gen
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#022)). This sight of every part of
the land on the east and west was not an ecstatic vision, but a sight
with the bodily eyes, whose natural power of vision was miraculously
increased by God, to give Moses a glimpse at least of the glorious land
which he was not to tread, and delight his eye with a view of the
inheritance intended for his people.

[Deuteronomy 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 34:5</span></span>

After this favour had been granted him, the aged servant of the Lord was
to taste death as the ages of sin. There, i.e., upon Mount Nebo, he
died, "at the mouth," i.e., according to the commandment, "of the Lord"
(not "by a kiss of the Lord," as the Rabbins interpret it), in the land
of Moab, not in Canaan (see at [Num
27:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)). "And He buried him in the
land of Moab, over against Beth Peor." The subject in this sentence is
Jehovah. Though the third person singular would allow of the verb being
taken as impersonal (ἔθαψαν αὐτόν, lxx: they buried him), such a
rendering is precluded by the statement which follows, "no man knoweth
of his sepulchre unto this day." "The valley" where the Lord buried
Moses was certainly not the Jordan valley, as in [Deu
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#029), but most probably "the valley in
the field of Moab, upon the top of Pisgah," mentioned in [Num
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#020), near to Nebo; in any case, a
valley on the mountain, not far from the top of Nebo. - The Israelites
inferred what is related in [Deu
34:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001) respecting the end of Moses'
life, from the promise of God in [Deu
32:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049), and [Num
27:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012), which was communicated to
them by Moses himself ([Deu 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#027)), and
from the fact that Moses went up Mount Nebo, from which he never
returned. On his ascending the mountain, the eyes of the people would
certainly follow him as far as they possibly could. It is also very
possible that there were many parts of the Israelitish camp from which
the top of Nebo was visible, so that the eyes of his people could not
only accompany him thither, but could also see that when the Lord had
shown him the promised land, He went down with him into the neighbouring
valley, where Moses was taken for ever out of their sight. There is not
a word in the text about God having brought the body of Moses down from
the mountain and buried it in the valley. This "romantic idea" is
invented by Knobel, for the purpose of throwing suspicion upon the
historical truth of a fact which is offensive to him. The fact itself
that the Lord buried His servant Moses, and no man knows of his
sepulchre, is in perfect keeping with the relation in which Moses stood
to the Lord while he was alive. Even if his sin at the water of strife
rendered it necessary that he should suffer the punishment of death, as
a memorable example of the terrible severity of the holy God against
sin, even in the case of His faithful servant; yet after the justice of
God had been satisfied by this punishment, he was to be distinguished in
death before all the people, and glorified as the servant who had been
found faithful in all the house of God, whom the Lord had known face to
face ([Deu 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010)), and to whom He had
spoken mouth to mouth ([Num 12:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007)).
The burial of Moses by the hand of Jehovah was not intended to conceal
his grave, for the purpose of guarding against a superstitious and
idolatrous reverence for his grave; for which the opinion held by the
Israelites, that corpses and graves defiled, there was but little fear
of this; but, as we may infer from the account of the transfiguration of
Jesus, the intention was to place him in the same category with Enoch
and Elijah. As Kurtz observes, "The purpose of God was to prepare for
him a condition, both of body and soul, resembling that of these two men
of God. Men bury a corpse that it may pass into corruption. If Jehovah,
therefore, would not suffer the body of Moses to be buried by men, it is
but natural to seek for the reason in the fact that He did not intend to
leave him to corruption, but, when burying it with His own hand,
imparted a power to it which preserved it from corruption, and prepared
the way for it to pass into the same form of existence to which Enoch
and Elijah were taken, without either death or burial." - There can be
no doubt that this truth lies at the foundation of the Jewish
theologoumenon mentioned in the Epistle of Judge, concerning the contest
between Michael the archangel and the devil for the body of Moses.

[Deuteronomy 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 34:7</span></span>

Though he died at the age of one hundred and twenty (see at [Deu
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#002)), Moses' eyes had not become dim,
and his freshness had not abated (לח ב̔́נ. כוד., connected with לח in [Gen
30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037), signifies freshness). Thus had
the Lord preserved the full vital energy of His servant, even till the
time of his death. The mourning of the people lasted thirty days, as in
the case of Aaron ([Num 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#029)).

[Deuteronomy 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 34:9</span></span>

Joshua now took Moses' place as the leader of the people, filled with
the spirit of wisdom (practical wisdom, manifesting itself in action),
because Moses had ordained him to his office by the laying on of hands
([Num 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018)). And the people obeyed
him; but he was not like Moses. "There arose no more a prophet in Israel
like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face," i.e., so far as the
miracles and signs were concerned which Moses did, by virtue of his
divine mission, upon Pharaoh, his servants, and his land, and the
terrible acts which he performed before the eyes of Israel ([Deu
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#011) and [Deu
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#012); vid., [Deu
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008), and [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034)). "Whom Jehovah knew:" not who
knew Him, the Lord. "To know," like γινώσκειν in [Co1
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#003), relates to the divine knowledge,
which not only involves a careful observance ([Deu
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007)), but is also a manifestation of
Himself to man, a penetration of man with the spiritual power of God.
Because he was thus known by the Lord, Moses was able to perform signs
and wonders, and mighty, terrible acts, such as no other performed
either before or after him. In this respect Joshua stood far below
Moses, and no prophet arose in Israel like unto Moses. - This remark
concerning Moses does not presuppose that a long series of prophets had
already risen up since the time of Moses. When Joshua had defeated the
Canaanites, and conquered their land with the powerful help of the Lord,
which was still manifested in signs and wonders, and had divided it
among the children of Israel, and when the tribes had settled down in
their inheritance, so that the different portions of the land began to
be called by the names of Naphtali, Ephraim, Manasseh, and Judah, as is
the case in [Deu 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#002); the conviction
might already have become established in Israel, that no other prophet
would arise like Moses, to whom the Lord had manifested Himself with
such signs and wonders before the Egyptians and the eyes of Israel. The
position occupied by Joshua in relation to this his predecessor, as the
continuer of his work, would necessarily awaken and confirm this
conviction, in connection with what the Lord had said as to the
superiority of Moses to all the prophets ([Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006).). Moses was the founder and
mediator of the old covenant. As long as this covenant was to last, no
prophet could arise in Israel like unto Moses. There is but One who is
worthy of greater honour than Moses, namely, the Apostle and High Priest
of our profession, who is placed as the Son over all the house of God,
in which Moses was found faithful as a servant (compare [Heb
3:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002) with [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007)), Jesus Christ, the founder and
mediator of the new and everlasting covenant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Introduction](jos000)

</div>
