<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu025)  [Next](deu027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 26:1</span></span>

To the exposition of the commandments and rights of Israel Moses adds,
in closing, another ordinance respecting those gifts, which were most
intimately connected with social and domestic life, viz., the
first-fruits and second tithes, for the purpose of giving the proper
consecration to the attitude of the nation towards its Lord and God.

[Deu 26:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#001)

Of the first of the fruit of the ground, which was presented from the
land received from the Lord, the Israelites was to take a portion
(מראשׁית with מן partitive), and bring it in a basket to the place of
the sanctuary, and give it to the priest who should be there, with the
words, "I have made known to-day to the Lord thy God, that I have come
into the land which the Lord swore to our fathers to give us," upon
which the priest should take the basket and put it down before the altar
of Jehovah ([Deu 26:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#001)). From the
partitive מראשׁית we cannot infer, as Schultz supposes, that the
first-fruits were not to be all delivered at the sanctuary, any more
than this can be inferred from [Exo
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019) (see the explanation of this
passage). All that is implied is, that, for the purpose described
afterwards, it was not necessary to put all the offerings of
first-fruits into a basket and set them down before the altar. טנא ([Deu
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#002), [Deu
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#004), and [Deu
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#005), [Deu
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#017)) is a basket of wicker-work, and
not, as Knobel maintains, the Deuteronomist's word for צנצנת rof ([Exo
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#033). "The priest" is not the high
priest, but the priest who had to attend to the altar-service and
receive the sacrificial gifts. - The words, "I have to-day made known to
the Lord thy God," refer to the practical confession which was made by
the presentation of the first-fruits. The fruit was the tangible proof
that they were in possession of the land, and the presentation of the
first of this fruit the practical confession that they were indebted to
the Lord for the land. This confession the offerer was also to embody in
a prayer of thanksgiving, after the basket had been received by the
priest, in which he confessed that he and his people owed their
existence and welfare to the grace of God, manifested in the miraculous
redemption of Israel out of the oppression of Egypt and their guidance
into Canaan.

[Deu 26:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005)

אבי אבד ארמּי, "a lost (perishing) Aramaean was my father" (not the
Aramaean, Laban, wanted to destroy my father, Jacob, as the Chald.,
Arab., Luther, and others render it). אבד signifies not only going
astray, wandering, but perishing, in danger of perishing, as in [Job
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#013); [Pro
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006), etc. Jacob is referred to, for
it was he who went down to Egypt in few men. He is mentioned as the
tribe-father of the nation, because the nation was directly descended
from his sons, and also derived its name of Israel from him. Jacob is
called in Aramaean, not only because of his long sojourn in Aramaea (Gen
29-31), but also because he got his wives and children there (cf. [Hos
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#013)); and the relatives of the
patriarchs had accompanied Abraham from Chaldaea to Mesopotamia (Aram;
see [Gen 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#030)). מעט בּמתי, consisting
of few men (בּ, the so-called beth essent., as in [Deu
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022); [Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003), etc.; vid., Ewald, 299, q.).
Compare [Gen 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030), where Jacob
himself describes his family as "few in number." On the number in the
family that migrated into Egypt, reckoned at seventy souls, see the
explanation at [Gen 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027). On the
multiplication in Egypt into a great and strong people, see [Exo
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007), [Exo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#009); and on the oppression endured
there, [Exo 1:11-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011), and [Exo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023). - The guidance out of Egypt
amidst great signs ([Deu 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008)), as in
[Deu 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034).

[Deu 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#010)

"So shalt thou set it down (the basket with the first-fruits) before
Jehovah." These words are not to be understood, as Clericus, Knobel, and
others suppose, in direct opposition to [Deu
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#004) and [Deu
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005), as implying that the offerer had
held the basket in his hand during the prayer, but simply as a remark
which closes the instructions.

[Deu 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#011)

Rejoicing in all the good, etc., points to the joy connected with the
sacrificial meal, which followed the act of worship (as in [Deu
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#012)). The presentation of the
first-fruits took place, no doubt, on their pilgrimages to the sanctuary
at the three yearly festivals (ch. 16); but it is quite without ground
that Riehm restricts these words to the sacrificial meals to be prepared
from the tithes, as if they had been the only sacrificial meals (see at
[Deu 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#003)).

[Deuteronomy 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 26:12</span></span>

The delivery of the tithes, like the presentation of the first-fruits,
was also to be sanctified by prayer before the Lord. It is true that
only a prayer after taking the second tithe in the third year is
commanded here; but that is simply because this tithe was appropriated
everywhere throughout the land to festal meals for the poor and
destitute ([Deu 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028)), when prayer
before the Lord would not follow per analogiam from the previous
injunction concerning the presentation of first-fruits, as it would in
the case of the tithes with which sacrificial meals were prepared at the
sanctuary ([Deu 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022).). לעשׂר is the
infinitive Hiphil for להעשׂר, as in [Neh
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#039) (on this form, vid., Ges. 53, 3
Anm. 2 and 7, and Ew. 131, b. and 244, b.). "Saying before the Lord"
does not denote prayer in the sanctuary (at the tabernacle), but, as in
[Gen 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#007), simply prayer before God
the omnipresent One, who is enthroned in heaven ([Deu
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#015)), and blesses His people from
above from His holy habitation. The declaration of having fulfilled the
commandments of God refers primarily to the directions concerning the
tithes, and was such a rendering of an account as springs from the
consciousness that a man very easily transgresses the commandments of
God, and has nothing in common with the blindness of pharisaic
self-righteousness "I have cleaned out the holy out of my house:" the
holy is that which is sanctified to God, that which belongs to the Lord
and His servants, as in [Lev 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#022).
בּער signifies not only to remove, but to clean out, wipe out. That
which was sanctified to God appeared as a debt, which was to be wiped
out of a man's house (Schultz).

[Deuteronomy 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 26:14</span></span>

"I have not eaten thereof in my sorrow." אני, from און, tribulation,
distress, signifies here in all probability mourning, and judging from
what follows, mourning for the dead, equivalent to "in a mourning
condition," i.e., in a state of legal (Levitical) uncleanness; so that
בּאני really corresponded to the בּטמא which follows, except that טמא
includes every kind of legal uncleanness. "I have removed nothing
thereof as unclean," i.e., while in the state of an unclean person. Not
only not eaten of any, but not removed any of it from the house, carried
it away in an unclean state, in which they were forbidden to touch the
holy gifts ([Lev 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#003)). "And not given
(any) of it on account of the dead." This most probably refers to the
custom of sending provisions into a house of mourning, to prepare meals
for the mourners ([Sa2 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#025); [Jer
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#007); [Hos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004); Tobit 4:17). A house of mourning,
with its inhabitants, was regarded as unclean; consequently nothing
could be carried into it of that which was sanctified. There is no good
ground for thinking of idolatrous customs, or of any special
superstition attached to the bread of mourning; nor is there any ground
for understanding the words as referring to the later Jewish custom of
putting provisions into the grave along with the corpse, to which the
Septuagint rendering, οὐκ ἔδωκα ἀπ αὐτῶν τῷ τεθνηκότι, points. (On [Deu
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#015), see [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015).)

[Deuteronomy 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 26:16</span></span>

At the close of his discourse, Moses sums up the whole in the earnest
admonition that Israel would give the Lord its God occasion to fulfil
the promised glorification of His people, by keeping His commandments
with all their heart and soul.

[Deu 26:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#016)

On this day the Lord commanded Israel to keep these laws and rights with
all the heart and all the soul (cf. [Deu
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005); [Deu
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012).). There are two important
points contained in this ([Deu
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017).). The acceptance of the laws
laid before them on the part of the Israelites involved a practical
declaration that the nation would accept Jehovah as its God, and walk in
His way ([Deu 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017)); and the giving
of the law on the part of the Lord was a practical confirmation of His
promise that Israel should be His people of possession, which He would
glorify above all nations ([Deu 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#018),
[Deu 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019)). "Thou hast let the Lord
say to-day to be thy God," i.e., hast given Him occasion to say to thee
that He will be thy God, manifest Himself to thee as thy God. "And to
walk in His ways, and to keep His laws," etc., for "and that thou
wouldst walk in His ways, and keep His laws." The acceptance of Jehovah
as its God involved eo ipso a willingness to walk in His ways.

[Deu 26:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#018)

At the same time, Jehovah had caused the people to be told that they
were His treasured people of possession, as He had said in [Exo
19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); and that if they kept all His
commandments, He would set them highest above all nations whom He had
created, "for praise, and for a name, and for glory," i.e., make them an
object of praise, and renown, and glorification of God, the Lord and
Creator of Israel, among all nations (vid., [Jer
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#009) and [Jer
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011); [Jer
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019)). "And that it should become a
holy people unto the Lord," as He had already said in [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006). The sanctification of Israel was
the design and end of its divine election, and would be accomplished in
the glory to which the people of God were to be exalted (see the
commentary on [Exo 19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)). The Hiphil
האמיר, which is only found here, has no other meaning than this, "to
cause a person to say," or "give him occasion to say;" and this is
perfectly appropriate here, whereas the other meaning suggested, "to
exalt," has no tenable support either in the paraphrastic rendering of
these verses in the ancient versions, or in the Hithpael in [Psa
94:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#004), and moreover is altogether
unsuitable in [Deu 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 27](deu027)

</div>
