<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc009)  [Next](ecc011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 10:1</span></span>

The second half of the foregoing double proverb introduces what now
follows: "Poisonous flies make to stink, make to ferment the oil of the
preparer of ointment; heavier than wisdom, than honour, weighs a little
folly." We do not need to change מות זבוּבי, on account of the foll.
sing. of the pred., either into זבוגי ם (as possible by Hitz.) or זב
ימוּתי (Luzz.); both are inadmissible, for the style of Koheleth is not
adorned with archaisms such as Chirek compaginis; and also such an
attrib. clause as זבוב ימות, a fly which dies," is for him too refined;
but both are also unnecessary, for a plur. of the subj., in which the
plurality of the individuals comes less into view than the oneness of
their character, is frequently enough followed by the sing. of the
pred., e.g., [Gen 39:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#022); [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020); [Isa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#012), etc. It is a question, however,
whether by זבובי מות, death-bringing, i.e., poisonous flies (lxx, Targ.,
Luther)

(Note: The Targ. interprets, as the Talm. and Mid. do, deadly flies as a
figure of the prava concupiscentia. Similarly Wangemann: a mind buried
in the world.)

or dead flies (Symm., Syr., Jerome) is meant. We decide in favour of the
former; for (1) זבובי מות for זבוּבים מתים ([Ecc
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#004); [Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)), "death-flies" for "dead
flies," would be an affected poetic expression without analogy; while,
on the contrary, "death-flies" for "deadly flies" is a genit.
connection, such as מות כּלי instruments of death, i.e., deadly
instruments and the like; Bttcher understands dung-flies; but the
expression can scarcely extend to the designation of flies which are
found on dead bodies. Meanwhile, it is very possible that by the
expression זב ם, such flies are thought of as carry death from dead
bodies to those that are living; the Assyr. syllabare show how closely
the Semites distinguished manifold kinds of זבובים (Assyr. zumbi =
zubbi). (2) In favour of "dead flies," it has been remarked that that
influence on the contents of a pot of ointment is effected not merely by
poison-flies, but, generally, by flies that have fallen into it.

But since the oil mixed with perfumes may also be of the kind which,
instead of being changed by a dead body, much rather embalms it; so it
does not surprise us that the exciter of fermentation is thus
drastically described by μυῖαι θανατοῦσαι (lxx); it happens, besides,
also on this account, because "a little folly" corresponds as a
contrasted figure to the little destructive carcase, - wisdom בע תּח
("giveth life," [Ecc 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002)), a little
folly is thus like little deadly flies. The sequence of ideas יב יבּ
(maketh the ointment stink) is natural. The corrupting body communicates
its foul savour to the ointment, makes it boil up, i.e., puts it into a
state of fermentation, in consequence of which it foams and raises up
small blisters, אבעבועות (Rashi). To the asyndeton יב יבּ, there
corresponds, in 1b, the asyndeton מח מ כּ; the Targ., Syr., and Jerome,

(Note: The lxx entirely remodels [Ecc
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001): τίμιον κ.τ.λ ("a little wisdom
is more honour than the great glory of folly"), i.e., יקר מעט חכמה סכלות
רב (כבוד in the sense of "great multitude"). Van der Palm (1784) regards
this as the original form of the text.)

who translate by "and," are therefore not witnesses for the phrase וּמך,
but the Venet. (καὶ τῆς δόχης) had this certainly before it; it is, in
relation to the other, inferior in point of evidence.

(Note: מכּבוד; thus in the Biblia rabb. 1525, 1615, Genoa 1618, Plantin
1582, Jablonski 1699, and also v. d. Hooght and Norzi. In the Ven. 1515,
1521, 1615, וּמכּבוד is found with the copulat. vav, a form which is
adopted by Michaelis. Thus also the Concord. cites, and thus,
originally, it stood in J., but has been corrected to מכּבוד. F.,
however, has מכּבוד, with the marginal remark: מכבוד כן קבלתי מני שמשון
(Simson ha-Nakdam, to whom the writer of the Frankf. Cod. 1294 here
refers for the reading מך, without the copul. vav, is often called by
him his voucher). This is also the correct Masoretic reading; for if
וּמך were to be read, then the word would be in the catalogue of words
of which three begin with their initial letter, and a fourth has
introduced a vav before it (Mas. fin. f. 26, Ochla veochla, Nr. 15).)

In general, it is evident that the point of comparison is the
hurtfulness, widely extending itself, of a matter which in appearance is
insignificant. Therefore the meaning of [Ecc
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001) cannot be that a little folly is
more weighty than wisdom, than honour, viz., in the eyes of the blinded
crowd (Zckl., Dchsel). This limitation the author ought to have
expressed, for without it the sentence is an untruth. Jerome, following
the Targ. and Midrash, explains: Pretiosa est super sapientiam et
gloriam stultitia parva, understanding by wisdom and honour the
self-elation therewith connected; besides, this thought, which Luther
limits by the introduction of zuweilen \["folly is sometimes better than
wisdom, etc."\], is in harmony neither with that which goes before nor
with that which follows.

Luzz., as already Aben Ezra, Grotius, Geiger, Hengst., and the more
recent English expositors, transfer the verbs of [Ecc
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001) zeugmatically to [Ecc
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001): similiter pretiosum nomine
sapientiae et gloriae virum foetidum facit stolidtias parva. But יביע
forbids this transference, and, besides, מן יקר, "honoured on account
of," is an improbable expression; also מך יקר presents a tautology,
which Luzz. seeks to remove by glossing מך, as the Targ. does, by ונכסים
עושר מרוב. Already Rashi has rightly explained by taking יקר (Syr.
jaḳîr, Arab. waḳur, waḳûr), in its primary meaning, as synon. of כּבד:
more weighty, i.e., heavier and weighing more than wisdom, than honour,
is a little folly; and he reminds us that a single foolish act can at
once change into their contrary the wisdom and the honour of a man,
destroying both, making it as if they had never been, cf. [Co1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006). The sentence is true both in an
intellectual and in a moral reference. Wisdom and honour are swept away
by a little quantum of folly; it places both in the shade, it outweighs
them in the scale; it stamps the man, notwithstanding the wisdom and
dignity which otherwise belong to him, as a fool. The expressive רקח
שׁמן is purposely used here; the dealer in ointments (pigmentarius) can
now do nothing with the corrupted perfume, - thus the wisdom which a man
possesses, the honour which he has hitherto enjoyed, avail him no
longer; the proportionally small portion of folly which has become an
ingredient in his personality gives him the character of a fool, and
operates to his dishonour. Knobel construes rightly; but his explanation
(also of Heiligst., Elst., Ginsb.): "a little folly frequently shows
itself more efficacious and fruitful than the wisdom of an honoured wise
man," helps itself with a "frequently" inserted, and weakens מך to a
subordinated idea, and is opposed to the figure, which requires a
personality.

[Ecclesiastes 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 10:2</span></span>

A double proverb regarding wisdom and folly in their difference: "The
heart of a wise man is directed to his right hand, and the heart of the
fool to his left. And also on the way where a fool goeth, there his
heart faileth him, and he saith to all that he is a fool." Most
interpreters translate: The heart of the wise man is at his right hand,
i.e., it is in the right place. But this designation, meant figuratively
and yet sounding anatomically, would be in bad taste

(Note: Christ. Fried. Bauer (1732) explains as we do, and remarks, "If
we translate: the heart of the wise is at his right hand, but the heart
of the fool at his left, it appears as if the heart of the prudent and
of the foolish must have a different position in the human body, thus
affording to the profane ground for mockery.")

in this distinguishing double form (vid., on the contrary, [Ecc
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#014)). The ל is that of direction;

(Note: Accordingly, [Ecc 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002) has
become a Jewish saying with reference to the study of a book (this
thought of as Heb.): The wise always turn over the leaves backwards,
repeating that which has been read; the fool forwards, superficially
anticipating that which has not yet been read, and scarcely able to wait
for the end.)

and that which is situated to the right of a man is figuratively a
designation of the right; and that to the left, a designation of the
wrong. The designation proceeds from a different idea from that at [Deu
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#032), etc.; that which lies to the
right, as that lying at a man's right hand, is that to which his calling
and duty point him; השׂ denotes, in the later Hebrew, "to turn oneself
to the wrong side."

[Ecclesiastes 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 10:3</span></span>

This proverb forms, along with the preceding, a tetrastich, for it is
divided into two parts by vav. The Kerı̂ has removed the art. in כש and
שה, [Ecc 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#010), as incompatible with
the ש. The order of the words vegam-baderek keshehsachal holek is
inverted for vegam keshehsachal baderek holek, cf. [Ecc
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#013), and also rav shěyihyn, [Ecc
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003); so far as this signifies,
"supposing that they are many." Plainly the author intends to give
prominence to "on the way;" and why, but because the fool, the
inclination of whose heart, according to 2b, always goes to the left, is
now placed in view as he presents himself in his public manner of life.
Instead of לב־הוּא חסר we have here the verbal clause חסר לבּו, which is
not, after [Ecc 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#002), to be translated:
corde suo caret (Herzf., Ginsb.), contrary to the suff. and also the
order of the words, but, after [Ecc
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008) : cor ejus deficit, i.e., his
understanding is at fault; for לב, here and at [Ecc
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002), is thus used in a double sense,
as the Greek νοῦς and the Lat. mens can also be used: there it means
pure, formal, intellectual soul-life; here, pregnantly (Psychol. p.
249), as at [Ecc 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#007), cf. [Hos
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#011), the understanding or the
knowledge and will of what is right. The fool takes no step without
showing that his understanding is not there, - that, so to speak, he
does not take it along with him, but has left it at home. He even
carries his folly about publicly, and prides himself in it as if it were
wisdom: he says to all that he is a fool, se esse stultum (thus,
correctly, most Jewish and Christian interpreters, e.g., Rashi and
Rambach). The expression follows the scheme of Ps. 9:21: May the heathen
know mortales se esse (vid., l.c.). Otherwise Luther, with Symm. and
Jerome: "he takes every man as a fool;" but this thought has no support
in the connection, and would undoubtedly be expressed by המּה סכלים.
Still differently Knobel and Ewald: he says to all, "it is foolish;"
Hitzig, on the contrary, justly remarks that סכל is not used of actions
and things; this also is true of כּסיל, against himself, [Ecc
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002), where he translates qol kesil by
"foolish discourses."

[Ecclesiastes 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 10:4</span></span>

This verse shows what is the wise conduct of a subject, and particularly
of a servant, when the anger of the ruler breaks forth: "If the
ill-humour of the ruler rise up against thee, do not leave thy post; for
patience leaves out great sins." Luther connects [Ecc
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004) and [Ecc
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#003) by "therefore;" for by the
potentate he understands such an one as, himself a fool, holds all who
contradict him to be fools: then it is best to let his folly rage on.
But the מושׁל is a different person from the סכל; and מק אל־תּנּח does
not mean, "let not yourself get into a passion," or, as he more
accurately explains in the Annotationes: "remain self-possessed"
(similarly Hitzig: lose not thy mental state of composure), but, in
conformity with תלך ... אל, [Ecc 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#003),
"forsake not the post (synon. מצּב and מעמד, [Isa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#019), cf. 23) which thou hast
received." The person addressed is thus represented not merely as a
subject, but officially as a subordinate officer: if the ruler's
displeasure (רוּח, as at [Jdg 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#003);
[Pro 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#011)) rises up against him (עלה,
as elsewhere; cf. אף, [Psa 73:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021); or
חמה, [Sa2 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#020)), he ought not, in the
consciousness that he does not merit his displeasure, hastily give up
his situation which has been entrusted to him and renounce submission;
for patience, gentleness (regarding מרפּא, vid., [Pro
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#018)) 'גּד ... 'ין.

This concluding clause of the verse is usually translated: "It appeaseth
(pacifieth) great sins" (lxx καταπαύσει, Symm. παύσει). The phrase (חמה)
אף הניח is not to be compared, for it signifies quieting by an
exhausting outbreak; on the contrary, יניח in the passage before us must
signify quieting, as the preventing of an outbreak (cf. [Pro
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001)). It appears more correct to
render הנּיח in both cases in the sense of ἐᾶν, missum facere: to leave
great sins is = not to commit them, to give up the lust thereto; for
hinniahh signifies to let go, to leave off, e.g., [Jer
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#009); and to indulge, [Est
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008), here as at [Ecc
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#018); [Ecc
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#006), "to keep the hands from
something." The great sins cannot certainly be thought of as those of
the ruler; for on his part only one comes into view, if indeed,
according to the old legal conception, it could be called such, viz.,
cruel proceeding with reference to him who wilfully withdraws from him,
and thus proves his opposition; much rather we are to think of the great
sins into which he who is the object of the ruler's displeasure might
fall, viz., treason ([Ecc 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002)),
insubordination, self-destruction, and at the same time, since he does
not stand alone, or make common cause with others who are discontented,
the drawing of others into inevitable ruin ([Ecc
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#003)). All these sins, into which he
falls who answers wrath with wrath, patience avoids, and puts a check to
them. The king's anger is perhaps justified; the admonition, however,
would be otherwise expressed than by 'l-tnch mq', if it were not
presupposed that it was not justified; and thus without meta'basis eis
a'llo ge'nos an I-section follows the reflection regarding wise
deportment as over against the king's displeasure, a section which
describes from experience and from personal observation the world turned
upside down in the state.

[Ecclesiastes 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 10:5</span></span>

"There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, like an error which
proceedeth from the ruler." The introduction by the virtual relative
raithi is as at [Ecc 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012); [Ecc
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#001). Knobel, Hengst., and others give
to the כ of כּשׁ the meaning of "according to," or "in consequence of
which," which harmonizes neither with ra'ah nor with raithi. Also
Kleinert's translation: "There is a misery - I have seen it under the
sun - in respect of an error which proceedeth from the ruler," is
untenable; for by this translation ra'ah is made the pred. while it is
the subj. to ישׁ, and kishgagah the unfolding of this subject. Hitzig
also remarks: "as \[wie ein\] an error, instead of which we have: in
respect to \[um einen\] an error;" for he confounds things incongruous.
Hitz., however, rightly recognises, as also Kleinert, the כ as Caph
veritatis, which measures the concrete with the idea. [Isa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006), compares the individual with the
general which therein comes to view, [Eze
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#010); [Neh
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#002); cf. [Sa2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008). Koheleth saw an evil under the
sun; something which was like an error, appeared to him altogether like
an error which proceedeth from the ruler. If we could translate שׁיּ by
quod exiit, then כ would be the usual Caph similitudinis; but since it
must be translated by quod exit, וגו כשׁ places the observed fact under
a comprehensive generality: it had the nature of an error proceeding
from the ruler. If this is correct, it is so much the less to be assumed
that by השׁלּיט God is to be understood ([Dan
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#021)), as Jerome was taught by his
Hebraeus: quod putent homines in hac inaequalitate rerum illum non juste
et ut aequum est judicare. It is a governor in a state that is meant, by
whom an error might easily be committed, and only too frequently is
committed, in the promotion of degradation of persons. But since the
world, with its wonderful division of high and low, appears like as it
were an error proceeding from the Most High, there certainly falls a
shadow on the providence of God Himself, the Governor of the world; but
yet not so immediately that the subject of discourse is an "error" of
God, which would be a saying more than irreverent. יּצא = יּצה is the
metaplastic form for יּצאה or יּצאת (for which at [Deu
28:57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#057) incorrectly יּצת), not an error
of transcription, as Olsh. supposes; vid., to the contrary. מלּפני
(Symm. ἐξ ἔμπροστηεν) with יצא is the old usus loq. There now follows a
sketch of the perverted world.

[Ecclesiastes 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 10:6</span></span>

"Folly is set on great heights, and the rich must sit in lowliness. I
have seen servants upon horses, and princes like servants walking on
foot." The word הסּכל (with double seghol, Aram. סכלוּ) is used here
instead of those in whom it is personified. Elsewhere a multiplicity of
things great, such as עמּים, מים, and the like, is heightened by רבּים
(cf. e.g., [Psa 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#017)); here "great
heights" are such as are of a high, or the highest degree; rabbim,
instead of harabbim, is more appos. than adject. (cf. [Gen
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014); [Psa
68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028); [Psa
143:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010); [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)), in the sense of "many" (e.g.,
Ginsburg: "in many high positions") it mixes with the poetry of the
description dull prose.

(Note: Luzz. reads נתן: "Folly brings many into high places." The order
of the words, however, does not favour this.)

'Ashirim also is peculiarly used: divites = nobiles (cf. שׁוע, [Isa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005)), those to whom their family
inheritance gives a claim to a high station, who possess the means of
training themselves for high offices, which they regard as places of
honour, not as sources of gain. Regibus multis, Grotius here remarks,
quoting from Sallust and Tacitus, suspecti qui excellunt sive sapientia
sive nobilitate aut opibus. Hence it appears that the relation of slaves
and princes to each other is suggested; hoc discrimen, says Justin,
41:3, of the Parthians, inter servos liberosque est quod servi pedibus,
liberi nonnisi equis incedunt; this distinction is set aside, princes
must walk 'al-haarěts, i.e., beregel (beraglēhěm), and in their stead
([Jer 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#025)) slaves sit high on
horseback, and rule over them (the princes), - an offensive spectacle,
[Pro 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#010). The eunuch Bagoas, long
all-powerful at the Persian Court, is an example of the evil
consequences of this reversal of the natural relations of men.

[Ecclesiastes 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 10:8</span></span>

"He that diggeth a pit may fall into it; whoso breaketh down walls, a
serpent may sting him. Whoso pulleth out stones may do himself hurt
therewith; he who cleaveth wood may endanger himself thereby." The
futures are not the expression of that which will necessarily take
place, for, thus rendered, these four statements would be contrary to
experience; they are the expression of a possibility. The fut. יפּול is
not here meant as predicting an event, as where the clause 8a is a
figure of self-punishment arising from the destruction prepared for
others, [Pro 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027). Sir. 27:26.
גּוּמּץ is, [Pro 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027), the Targum
word for שׁחת, ditch, from גּמץ = שׁוּח, depressum esse. גּדר (R. גד, to
cut), something cutting off, something dividing, is a wall as a boundary
and means of protection drawn round a garden, vineyard, or farm-court;
גּדר פּרץ is the reverse of פּרץ גּדר, [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012). Serpents are accustomed to
nestle in the crevices and holes of walls, as well as in the earth (from
a city-wall is called חומה and חל); thus he who breaks into such a wall
may expect that the serpent which is there will bite him (cf. [Amo
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019)). To tear down stones, hissi'a,
is synon. of hhatsav, to break stones, [Isa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001); yet hhotsēv does not usually
mean the stone-breaker, but the stone-cutter (stone-mason); hissi'a,
from nasa', to tear out, does not also signify, [Kg1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#018), "to transport," and here, along
with wood-splitting, is certainly to be thought of as a breaking loose
or separating in the quarry or shaft. Ne'etsav signifies elsewhere to be
afflicted; here, where the reference is not to the internal but the
external feeling: to suffer pain, or reflex.: to injure oneself
painfully; the derivat. 'etsev signifies also severe labour; but to find
this signification in the Niph. ("he who has painful labour") is
contrary to the usu loq., and contrary to the meaning intended here,
where generally actual injuries are in view. Accordingly בּם יסּכן, for
which the Mishn. יסכּן בּעצמו, "he brings himself into danger," would
denote, to be placed in danger of life and limb, cf. Gittin 65b, Chullin
37a; and it is therefore not necessary, with Hitzig and others, to
translate after the vulnerabitur of Jerome: "He may wound himself
thereby;" there is not a denom. סכן, to cut, to wound, derived from
סכּין (שׂכּין), an instrument for cutting, a knife.

(Note: The Midrash understands the whole ethically, and illustrates it
by the example of Rabsake we know now that the half-Assyr., half-Accad.
word rabsak means a military chief\], whom report makes a brother of
Manasseh, and a renegade in the Assyrian service.)

The sum of these four clauses is certainly not merely that he who
undertakes a dangerous matter exposes himself to danger; the author
means to say, in this series of proverbs which treat of the distinction
between wisdom and folly, that the wise man is everywhere conscious of
his danger, and guards against it. These two verses ([Ecc
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008), [Ecc
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#009)) come under this definite point
of view by the following proverb; wisdom has just this value in
providing against the manifold dangers and difficulties which every
undertaking brings along with it.

(Note: Thus rightly Carl Lang in his Salom. Kunst im Psalter (Marburg
1874). He sees in [Ecc 10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008) a
beautiful heptastich. But as to its contents, [Ecc
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011) also belongs to this group.)

This is illustrated by a fifth example, and then it is declared with
reference to all together.

[Ecclesiastes 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 10:10</span></span>

"If the iron has become blunt, and he has not whetted the face, then he
must give more strength to the effort; but wisdom has the superiority in
setting right." This proverb of iron, i.e., iron instruments (בּרזל,
from בּרז, to pierce, like the Arab. name for iron, hadîd, means
essentially something pointed), is one of the most difficult in the Book
of Koheleth, - linguistically the most difficult, because scarcely
anywhere else are so many peculiar and unexampled forms of words to be
found. The old translators afford no help for the understanding of it.
The advocates of the hypothesis of a Dialogue have here a support in אם,
which may be rendered interrogatively; but where would we find,
syntactically as well as actually, the answer? Also, the explanations
which understand חילים in the sense of war-troops, armies, which is
certainly its nearest-lying meaning, bring out no appropriate thought;
for the thought that even blunt iron, as far as it is not externally
altogether spoiled (lo-phanim qilqal), or: although it has not a
sharpened edge (Rashi, Rashbam), might be an equipment for an army, or
gain the victory, would, although it were true, not fit the context;
Ginsburg explains: If the axe be blunt, and he (who goes out against the
tyrant) do not sharpen it beforehand (phanim, after Jerome, for
lephanim, which is impossible, and besides leads to nothing, since
lephanim means ehedem formerly, but not zuvor \[prius\], Ewald, 220a),
he (the tyrant) only increases his army; on the contrary, wisdom hath
the advantage by repairing the mischief (without the war being unequal);
- but the "ruler" of the foregoing group has here long ago disappeared,
and it is only a bold imagination which discovers in the hu of [Ecc
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#010) the person addressed in [Ecc
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004), and represents him as a rebel,
and augments him into a warlike force, but recklessly going forth with
unwhetted swords. The correct meaning for the whole, in general at
least, is found if, after the example of Abulwald and Kimchi, we
interpret חילים גּבּר of the increasing of strength, the augmenting of
the effort of strength, not, as Aben-Ezra, of conquering, outstripping,
surpassing; גּבּר means to make strong, to strengthen, [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006), [Zac
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#012); and חילים, as plur. of חיל,
strength, is supported by גּבּורי חילים, [Ch1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#005), [Ch1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#007), [Ch1
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#011), [Ch1
7:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#040), the plur. of חיל גבור; the lxx
renders by δυνάμεις δυναμώσει and he shall strengthen the forces, and
the Peshito has חילי for δυνάμεις, [Act
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#013); [Act
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011) (cf. Chald. Syr. אתחיּל, to
strengthen oneself, to become strengthened). Thus understanding the
words יג יח of intentio virium, and that not with reference to
sharpening (Luth., Grotius), but to the splitting of wood, etc. (Geier,
Desvoeux, Mendelss.), all modern interpreters, with the exception of a
few who lose themselves on their own path, gain the thought, that in all
undertakings wisdom hath the advantage in the devising of means
subservient to an end. The diversities in the interpretation of details
leave the essence of this thought untouched. Hitz., Bttch., Zckl.,
Lange, and others make the wood-splitter, or, in general, the labourer,
the subject to קהה, referring והוא to the iron, and contrary to the
accents, beginning the apodosis with qilqal: "If he (one) has made the
iron blunt, and it is without an edge, he swings it, and applies his
strength."

לא־פנים, "without an edge" (lo for belo), would be linguistically as
correct as בּנים לא, "without children," [Ch1
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#030), [Ch1
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#032); Ewald, 286b; and qilqal would
have a meaning in some measure supported by [Eze
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026). But granting that qilqal, which
there signifies "to shake," may be used of the swinging of an axe (for
which we may refer to the Aethiop. ḳualḳuala, ḳalḳala, of the swinging
of a sword), yet קלקלו (אתו קלקל) could have been used, and, besides,
פנים means, not like פי, the edge, but, as a somewhat wider idea, the
front, face ([Eze 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#021); cf. Assyr.
pan ilippi, the forepart of a ship); "it has no edge" would have been
expressed by (פּיפיּות) פּה לא והוא, or by מלטּשׁ איננו והוא (מוּחד,
מורט). We therefore translate: if the iron has become blunt, hebes
factum sit (for the Pih. of intransitives has frequently the meaning of
an inchoative or desiderative stem, like מעת, to become little,
decrescere, [Ecc 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#003); כּהה,
hebescere, caligare, [Eze 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#012);
Ewald, 120c), and he (who uses it) has not polished (whetted) the face
of it, he will (must) increase the force. והוּא does not refer to the
iron, but, since there was no reason to emphasize the sameness of the
subject (as e.g., [Ch2 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030)), to the
labourer, and thus makes, as with the other explanation, the change of
subject noticeable (as e.g., [Ch2
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#001)). The order of the words קל ...
וה, et ille non faciem (ferri) exacuit, is as at [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009); cf. also the position of lo in
[Sa2 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#034); [Num
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#029).

קלקל, or pointed with Pattach instead of Tsere (cf. qarqar, [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)) in bibl. usage, from the
root-meaning levem esse, signifies to move with ease, i.e., quickness
(as also in the Arab. and Aethiop.), to shake (according to which the
lxx and Syr. render it by ταράσσειν, דּלח, to shake, and thereby to
trouble, make muddy); in the Mishn. usage, to make light, little, to
bring down, to destroy; here it means to make light = even and smooth
(the contrast of rugged and notched), a meaning the possibility of which
is warranted by נח קלל, [Eze 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007); [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006) (which is compared by Jewish
lexicographers and interpreters), which is translated by all the old
translators "glittering brass," and which, more probably than Ewald's
"to steel" (temper), is derived from the root qal, to burn, glow.

(Note: Regarding the two roots, vid., Fried. Delitzsch's Indogerm.-Sem.
Stud. p. 91f.)

With vahhaylim the apodosis begins; the style of Koheleth recognises
this vav apod. in conditional clauses, [Ecc
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#011), cf. [Gen
43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009), Ruth. [Ecc
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#013); [Job
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004); [Mic
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007), and is fond of the inverted order
of the words for the sake of emphasis, 11:8, cf. [Jer
37:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#010), and above, under [Ecc
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#022).

In 10b there follows the common clause containing the application.
Hitzig, Elster, and Zckl. incorrectly translate: "and it is a profit
wisely to handle wisdom;" for instead of the inf. absol. הך, they
unnecessarily read the inf. constr. הכשׁיר, and connect חכמה הכשׁיר,
which is a phrase altogether unparalleled. Hichsir means to set in the
right position (vid., above, kaser), and the sentence will thus mean:
the advantage which the placing rightly of the means serviceable to an
end affords, is wisdom - i.e., wisdom bears this advantage in itself,
brings it with it, concretely: a wise man is he who reflects upon this
advantage. It is certainly also possible that הכשׁ, after the manner of
the Hiph. הצליח and השׂכיל, directly means "to succeed," or causatively:
"to make to succeed." We might explain, as e.g., Knobel: the advantage
of success, or of the causing of prosperity, is wisdom, i.e., it is that
which secures this gain. But the meaning prevalent in post-bibl. Heb. of
making fit, equipping, - a predisposition corresponding to a definite
aim or result, - is much more conformable to the example from which the
porisma is deduced. Buxtorf translates the Hiph. as a Mishnic word by
aptare, rectificare. Tyler suggests along with "right guidance" the
meaning "pre-arrangement," which we prefer.

(Note: Also the twofold Haggadic explanation, Taanith 8a, gives to
hachshir the meaning of "to set, priori, in the right place." Luther
translated qilqal twice correctly, but further follows the impossible
rendering of Jerome: multo labore exacuetur, et post industriam sequetur
sapientia.)

[Ecclesiastes 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 10:11</span></span>

The last proverb of this series presents for consideration the
uselessness of him who comes too late. "If a serpent bite without
enchantment, the charmer is of no use." The Talm. interprets this אם,
like that of [Ecc 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#010), also as
interrog.: Does the serpent bite without its being whispered to, i.e.,
without a providential determination impelling it thereto? Jer. Peah, i.
1. But לחשׁ, except at [Isa 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#016),
where whispering prayers are meant, signifies the whispering of formulas
of charming; "serpents are not to be charmed (tamed)," לחששׁ, [Jer
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017). Rather for הלּ בּעל the meaning
of slander is possible, which is given to it in the Haggada, Taanith 8a:
All the beasts will one day all at once say to the serpent: the lion
walks on the earth and eats, the wolf tears asunder and eats; but what
enjoyment hast thou by thy bite? and it answers them: "Also the
slanderer (לבעל הלשׁון) has certainly no profit." Accordingly the Targ.,
Jerome, and Luther translate; but if אם is conditional, and the vav of
veēn connects the protasis and the apodosis, then ba'al hallashon must
denote a man of tongue, viz., of an enchanting tongue, and thus a
charmer (lxx, Syr.). This name for the charmer, one of many, is not
unintentional; the tongue is an instrument, as iron is, [Ecc
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#010) : the latter must be sharp, if
it would not make greater effort necessary; the former, if it is to gain
its object, must be used at the right time. The serpent bites בּל לח,
when it bites before it has been charmed (cf. belo yomo, [Job
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032)); there are also serpents which
bite without letting themselves be charmed; but here this is the point,
that it anticipates the enchantment, and thus that the charmer comes too
late, and can make no use of his tongue for the intended purpose, and
therefore has no advantage from his act. There appropriately follow here
proverbs of the use of the tongue on the part of a wise man, and its
misuse on the part of a fool.

[Ecclesiastes 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 10:12</span></span>

"The words of a wise man's mouth are grace; but the lips of a fool
swallow him up." The words from a wise man's mouth are חן, graciousness,
i.e., gracious in their contents, their form and manner of utterance,
and thus also they gain favour, affection, approbation, for culture
(education) produces favour, [Pro
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#015), and its lips grace
(pleasantness), which has so wide an influence that he can call a king
his friend, [Pro 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#011), although,
according to [Ecc 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#011), that does not
always so happen as is to be expected. The lips of a fool, on the
contrary, swallow him, i.e., lead him to destruction. The Pih. בּלּע,
which at [Pro 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#028) means to swallow
down, and at [Pro 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#020) to swallow =
to consume in luxury, to spend dissolutely, has here the metaphorical
meaning of to destroy, to take out of the way (for that which is
swallowed up disappears). שׂפתות is parallel form to שׂפתי, like the
Aram. ספות. The construction is, as at [Pro
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#003), "the lips of the wise תשׁם
preserve them;" the idea of unity, in the conception of the lips as an
instrument of speech, prevails over the idea of plurality. The words of
the wise are heart-winning, and those of the fool self-destructive. This
is verified in the following verse.

[Ecclesiastes 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 10:13</span></span>

"The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness; and the end of
his mouth is mischievous madness." From folly (absurdity) the words
which are heard from a fool's mouth rise to madness, which is compounded
of presumption, wantonness, and frenzy, and which, in itself a symptom
of mental and moral depravity, brings as its consequence destruction on
himself ([Pro 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017)). The adjective
רעה is as in רע חלי, which interchanges with רעה חו [Ecc
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#002); [Ecc
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012), etc. The end of his mouth, viz.,
of his speaking, is = the end of the words of his mouth, viz., the end
which they at last reach. Instead of holeloth, there is here, with the
adj. following, holeluth, with the usual ending of abstracta. The
following proverb says how the words of the fool move between these two
poles of folly and wicked madness: he speaks much, and as if he knew all
things.

[Ecclesiastes 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 10:14</span></span>

"And the fool maketh many words: while a man yet doth not know that
which shall be; and what shall be when he is no more, who can show him
that?" The vav at the beginning of this verse corresponds to the Lat.
accedit quod. That he who in [Ecc
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#012) was named kesil is now named
hassachal, arises from this, that meanwhile sichluth has been predicated
of him. The relation of [Ecc 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#014) to
[Ecc 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#014), Geier has rightly defined:
Probatur absurditas multiloquii a communi ignorantia ac imbecillitate
humana, quae tamen praecipue dominatur apud ignaros stultos. We miss
before lo-yeda' an "although" (gam, [Neh
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001), or ki gam, [Ecc
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012)); the clause is, after the manner
of a clause denoting state or condition, subordinated to the principal
clause, as at [Psa 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010) : "an open
grave is their throat יח לשׁ, although they smooth their tongue, i.e.,
speak flatteringly." The lxx, Syr., Symm., and Jerome seek to rectify
the tautology id quod futurum est et quod futurum est (cf. on the other
hand, [Ecc 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007)), for they read יה ...
מה שהיה. But the second quod futurum certainly preserves by מאץ its
distinguishing nearer definition. Hitzig explains: "What is done, and
what after this (that is done) is done." Scarcely correctly: aharav of
the parallel passage, [Ecc 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#012), cf.
[Ecc 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014); [Ecc
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#003), requires for the suffix a
personal reference, so that thus meaharav, as at [Deu
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#021), means "from his death and
onwards." Thus, first, the knowledge of the future is denied to man;
then the knowledge of what will be done after his death; and generally,
of what will then be done. The fool, without any consciousness of human
ignorance, acts as if he knew all, and utters about all and everything a
multitude of words; for he uselessly fatigues himself with his
ignorance, which remains far behind the knowledge that is possible for
man.

[Ecclesiastes 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 10:15</span></span>

"The labour of the foolish wearieth him who knoweth not how to go to the
city." If we do not seek to explain: labour such as fools have wearies
him (the fool), then we have here such a synallage numeri as at [Isa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008); [Hos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008), for from the plur. a transition
is made to the distributive or individualizing sing. A greater anomaly
is the treatment of the noun עמל as fem. (greater even than the same of
the noun pithgam, [Ecc 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011), which
admitted of attractional explanation, and, besides, in a foreign word
was not strange). Kimchi, Michlol 10a, supposes that עמל is thought of
in the sense of עמל יגיעת; impossible, for one does not use such an
expression. Hitzig, and with him Hengst., sees the occasion for the
synallage in the discordance of the masc. ייגּענּוּ; but without
hesitation we use the expressions ייחל, [Mic
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006), ייסּ, [Jos
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026), and the like. 'Amal also cannot
be here fem. unitatis (Bttch. 657. 4), for it denotes the wearisome
striving of fools as a whole and individually. We have thus to suppose
that the author has taken the liberty of using 'amal once as fem. (vid.,
on the contrary, [Ecc 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#018), [Ecc
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#020)), as the poet, [Pro
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#013), in the introduction of the Book
of Proverbs uses musar once as fem., and as the similarly formed צבא is
used in two genders. The fool kindles himself up and perplexes himself,
as if he could enlighten the world and make it happy, - he who does not
even know how to go to the city. Ewald remarks: "Apparently proverbial,
viz., to bribe the great lords in the city." For us who, notwithstanding
[Ecc 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016), do not trouble ourselves
any more with the tyrants of [Ecc
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004), such thoughts, which do violence
to the connection, are unnecessary. Hitzig also, and with him Elst. and
Zckl., thinks of the city as the residence of the rulers from whom
oppression proceeds, but from whom also help against oppression is to be
sought. All this is to be rejected. Not to know how to go to the city,
is = not to be able to find the open public street, and, like the
Syrians, [Kg2 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#018)., to be smitten
with blindness. The way to the city is via notissima et tritissima.
Rightly Grotius, like Aben Ezra: Multi quaestionibus arduis se faitgant,
cum ne obvia quidem norint, quale est iter ad urbem. אל־עיר is vulgar
for אל־העיר. In the Greek language also the word πόλις has a definite
signification, and Athens is called ἄστυ, mostly without the art. But
Stamboul, the name of which may seem as an illustration of the
proverbial phrase, "not to know how to go to the city," is = εἰς τὴν
πόλιν. Grtz finds here an allusion to the Essenes, who avoided the city
- habeat sibi!

[Ecclesiastes 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 10:16</span></span>

"Woe to thee, O land, whose king is a child, and whose princes sit at
table in the early morning! Happy art thou, O land, whose king is a
noble, and whose princes sit at table at the right time, in manly
strength, and not in drunkenness!" Regarding אי. Instead of שׁם ן, the
older language would rather use the phrase מלכּו נער אשׁר; and instead
of na'ar, we might correctly use, after [Pro
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#022), 'ěvěd; but not as Grtz thinks,
who from this verse deduces the reference of the book of Herod (the
"slave of the Hasmonean house," as the Talm. names him), in the same
meaning. For na'ar, it is true, sometimes means - e.g., as Ziba's
by-name ([Sa2 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#018) \[17\]) - a
servant, but never a slave as such, so that here, in the latter sense,
it might be the contrast of בּן־חורים; it is to be understood after [Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012); and Solomon, Bishop of
Constance, understood this woe rightly, for he found it fulfilled at the
time of the last German Karolingian Ludwig III.

(Note: Cf. Bchmann's Feglgelte Worte, p. 178, 5th ed. (1868).)

Na'ar is a very extensively applicable word in regard to the age of a
person. King Solomon and the prophets Jeremiah and Zechariah show that
na'ar may be used with reference to one in a high office; but here it is
one of few years of age who is meant, who is incapable of ruling, and
shows himself as childish in this, that he lets himself be led by bad
guides in accordance with their pleasure. In 16b, the author perhaps
thinks of the heads of the aristocracy who have the phantom-king in
their power: intending to fatten themselves, they begin their feasting
with the break of day. If we translate yochēēlu by "they eat," 16b
sounds as if to breakfast were a sin, - with us such an abbreviation of
the thought so open to misconception would be a fault in style, but not
so with a Hebrew.

(Note: Vid., Gesch. d. jd. Poesie, p. 188.f.)

אכל (for לחם אכל, [Psa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)) is here
eating for eating's sake, eating as its own object, eating which, in the
morning, comes in the place of fresh activity in one's calling,
consecrated by prayer. Instead of אשׁ, [Ecc
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#017), there ought properly to have
been אשׁריך; but (1) אשׁרי has this peculiarity, to be explained from
its interjectional usage, that with the suff. added it remains in the
form of the st. constr., for we say e.g., אשׁריך for אשׁריך; (2) the
sing. form אשׁר, inflected אשׁרי, so substitutes itself that אשׁריך, or,
more correctly, אשׁרך, and אשׁרהוּ, [Pro
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#019), the latter for אשׁריו, are used
(vid., under [Sol 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014)).

Regarding běn-hhorim, the root-word signifies to be white (vid., under
[Gen 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016)). A noble is called hhor,
[Isa 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#012); and one noble by birth,
more closely, or also merely descriptively (Gesen. Lehrgeb. p. 649),
běn-hhorim, from his purer complexion, by which persons of rank were
distinguished from the common people ([Lam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007)). In the passage before us,
běn-hhorim is an ethical conception, as e.g., also generosus becomes
such, for it connects with the idea of noble by birth that of noble in
disposition, and the latter predominates (cf. [Sol
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#002), nadiv): it is well with a land
whose king is of noble mind, is a man of noble character, or, if we give
to běn-hhorim the Mishnic meaning, is truly a free man (cf. [Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)). Of princes after the pattern of
such a king, the contrary of what is said 16b is true: they do not eat
early in the morning, but ba'et, "at the right time;" everywhere else
this is expressed by be'itto ([Ecc
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011)); here the expression -
corresponding to the Greek ἐν καιρῷ, the Lat. in tempore - is perhaps
occasioned by the contrast baboqěr, "in the morning." Eating at the
right time is more closely characterized by bighvurah velo vashshethi.
Jerome, whom Luther follows, translates: ad reficiendum et non ad
luxuriam. Hitz., Ginsb., and Zckl., "for strengthening" (obtaining
strength), not: "for feasting;" but that beth might introduce the object
aimed at (after Hitz., proceeding from the beth of exchange), we have
already considered under [Ecc 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#004). The
author, wishing to say this, ought to have written lshty wl' lgbwrh.
Better, Hahn: "in strength, but not in drunkenness," - as heroes, but
not as drunkards ([Isa 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022)). Ewald's
"in virtue, and not in debauchery," is also thus meant. But what is
that: to eat in virtue, i.e., the dignity of a man? The author much
rather represents them as eating in manly strength, i.e., as this
requires it (cf. the plur. [Psa 71:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#016)
and [Psa 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)), only not bashti ("in
drunkenness - excess"), so that eating and drinking become objects in
themselves. Kleinert, well: as men, and not as gluttons. The Masora
makes, under bashti,' the note לית, i.e., שׁתי has here a meaning which
it has not elsewhere, it signifies drunkenness; elsewhere it means the
weft of a web. The Targ. gives the word the meaning of weakness
(חלּשׁוּת), after the Midrash, which explains it by בּתשׁישׁוּ (in
weakness); Menahem b. Saruk takes along with it in this sense נשׁתה,
[Jer 51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030). The Talm. Shabbath 10a,
however, explains it rightly by בּשׁתיּה שׁל־יין.

[Ecclesiastes 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 10:18</span></span>

Since, now, [Ecc 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#019) has only to do
with princes, the following proverb of the consequences of sloth
receives a particular reference in the frame of this mirror for princes:
"Through being idle the roof falleth; and through laziness of the hands
the house leaketh." Ewald, Redslob, Olsh., Hitz., and Frst, as already
Aben Ezra, understand the dual עצל of the two idle hands, but a similar
attribut. adject.-dual is not found in Heb.; on the contrary, ephraim,
merathaim [Jer 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#021), rish'athaim,
and, in a certain measure, also riqmathaim, speak in favour of the
intensification of the dual; 'atsaltaim is related to 'atslah, as
Faulenzen being idle, living in idleness to Faulheit laziness, it means
doubled, i.e., great, constant laziness (Gesen. H. Wrt., and Bttch. in
the N. Aehrenl., under this passage). If 'atsaltaim were an attribut.
designation of the hands, then shiphluth hadaim would be lowness, i.e.,
the hanging down of the hands languidly by the side; the former would
agree better with the second than with the first passage. Regarding the
difference between hammeqareh (the beams and joists of a house) and
hamqareh (contignans), vid., note below.

(Note: המּקרה, with mem Dageshed (Masora: לית דגש); in [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003), on the contrary, the mem has
Raphe, for there it is particip. (Michlol 46a; Parchon's Lex. f. 3, col.
1).)

Since exceeding laziness leaves alone everything that could support the
house, the beams fall (ימּך, Niph. מכך), and the house drops, i.e., lets
the rain through (ידלף, with o, in spite of the intrans. signification);
cf. the Arab. proverb of the three things which make a house
insufferable, under [Pro 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#013). Also
the community, whom the king and the nobles represent, is a בּית, as
e.g., Israel is called the house of Jacob. If the rulers neglect their
duty, abusing their high position in obeying their own lusts, then the
kingdom (state) becomes as a dilapidated house, affording no longer any
protection, and at last a machshelah, a ruined building, [Isa
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006). It becomes so by slothfulness,
and the prodigal love of pleasure associated therewith.

[Ecclesiastes 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ecc 10:19</span></span>

"Meals they make into a pleasure, and wine cheereth the life, and money
maketh everything serviceable." By עשׂים, wicked princes are without
doubt thought of-but not immediately, since [Ecc
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016) is too remote to give the
subject to [Ecc 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#019). The subject
which 'osim bears in itself (= 'osim hēm) might be syntactically
definite, as e.g., [Psa 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005), אהב, He,
Jahve, loves, thus: those princes, or, from [Ecc
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#018) : such slothful men; but 'osim
is better rendered, like e.g., omrim, [Exo
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#016) (Ewald, 200a), and as in the
Mishna we read קורין and the like with gramm. indefin. subj.: they make,
but so that by it the slothful just designated, and those of a princely
rank are meant (cf. a similar use of the inf. abs., as here of the part.
in the historical style, [Isa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)).
Ginsburg's rendering is altogether at fault: "They turn bread and wine
which cheereth life into revelry." If עשׁה and לחם as its object stand
together, the meaning is, "to prepare a feast," [Eze
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#015); cf. 'avad lehēm, [Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001). Here, as there, 'osim lěhěm
signifies coenam faciunt (parant). The ל of לשׂ is not the sign of the
factitive obj. (as leēl, [Isa 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017)),
and thus not, as Hitz. supposes, the conditioning ל with which adv.
conceptions are formed, - e.g., [Lam
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005), האך למע, where Jerome rightly
translates, voluptuose (vid., E. Gerlach, l.c.), - but, which is most
natural and is very appropriate, it is the ל of the aim or purpose: non
ad debitam corporis refectionem, sed ad hera ludicra et stulta gaudia
(Geier). שׂחוק is laughter, as that to which he utters the sentence
([Ecc 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#002)): Thou art mad. It is
incorrect, moreover, to take lěhěm veyaim together, and to render
yesammahh hayaim as an attribut. clause to yain: this epitheton ornans
of wine would here be a most unsuitable weakening of the figure
intended. It is only an apparent reason for this, that what [Psa
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015) says in praise of wine the
author cannot here turn into a denunciatory reproach. Wine is certainly
fitted to make glad the heart of a man; but here the subject of
discourse is duty-forgetting idlers, to whom chiefly wine must be
brought ([Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012)) to cheer their
life (this sluggard-life spent in feasting and revelry). The fut. ישׂמּח
is meant in the same modal sense as יגבּר, [Ecc
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#010): wine must accomplish that for
them. And they can feast and drink, for they have money, and money
־הכּל... יע. Luther hits the meaning: "Money must procure everything for
them;" but the clause is too general; and better thus, after Jerome, the
Zrich Bible: "unto money are all things obedient." The old Jewish
interpreters compare [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)., where
ענה, with accus. petentis, signifies, "to answer a request, to gratify a
desire." But in the passage before us הכּל is not the obj. accus. of
petentis, but petiti; for 'anah is connected with the accus. of that to
which one answers as well as of that which one answers, e.g., [Job
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#002), cf. [Ecc
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#003). It is unnecessary, with Hitzig,
to interpret יענה as Hiph.: Money makes all to hear (him who has the
money), - makes it that nothing is refused to his wish. It is the Kal:
Money answers to every demand, hears every wish, grants whatever one
longs for, helps to all; as Menander says: "Silver and gold, - these
are, according to my opinion, the most useful gods; if these have a
place in the house, wish what thou wilt (εὖξαι τί βούλει), all will be
thine;" and Horace, Epod. i. 6. 36 s.:

"Scilicet uxorem cum dote fidemque et amicos

Et genus et formam regina pecunia donat."

The author has now described the king who is a misfortune and him who is
a blessing to the land, and princes as they ought to be and as they
ought not to be, but particularly luxurious idle courtiers; there is now
a warning given which has for its motive not only prudence, but also,
according to [Ecc 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002), religiousness.

[Ecclesiastes 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ecc 10:20</span></span>

"Curse not the king even in thy thought; and in thy bed-chamber curse
not the rich; for the birds of the air carry away the sound, and the
winged creature telleth the matter." In the Books of Daniel and
Chronicles, מדּע, in the sense of γνῶσις, is a synon. of השׂכּל and
חכמה; here it is rightly translated by the lxx by συνείδησις; it does
not correspond with the moral-religious idea of conscience, but yet it
touches it, for it designates the quiet, inner consciousness (Psychol.
p. 134) which judges according to moral criteria: even (gam, as e.g.,
[Deu 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)) in the inner region of his
thoughts

(Note: Hengst., not finding the transition from scientia to conscientia
natural, gives, after Hartmann, the meaning of "study-chamber" to the
word מדּע; but neither the Heb. nor the Aram. has this meaning, although
[Psa 68:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013) Targ. touches it.)

one must not curse the king (cf. [Ecc
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#004).) nor the rich (which here, as at
6b, without distinction of the aristocracy of wealth and of birth,
signifies those who are placed in a high princely position, and have
wealth, the nervus rerum, at their disposal) in his bed-chamber, the
innermost room of the house, where one thinks himself free from
treachery, and thus may utter whatever he thinks without concealment
([Kg2 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#012)): for the birds of the air
may carry forth or bring out (Lat. deferrent, whence delator) that which
is rumoured, and the possessor of a pair of wings (cf. [Pro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#017)), after the Chethı̂b (whose ה of
the art. is unnecessarily erased by the Kerı̂,

(Note: הכּן with unpointed He, because it is not read in the Kerı̂;
similarly החנית ([Sa1 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#022)). Cf. Mas.
fin. f. 22, and Ochla veochla, No. 166.)

as at [Ecc 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#006), [Ecc
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#010)): the possessor of wings
(double-winged), shall further tell the matter. As to its meaning, it is
the same as the proverb quoted by the Midrash: "walls have ears."

(Note: Vid., Tendlau's Sprichwrter, No. 861.)

Geier thinks of the swallows which helped to the discovery of Bessus,
the murderer of his father, and the cranes which betrayed the murderer
of Ibycus, as comparisons approaching that which is here said. There
would certainly be no hyperbole if the author thought of carrier-pigeons
(Paxton, Kitto) in the service of espionage. But the reason for the
warning is hyperbolical, like an hundred others in all languages:

"Aures fert paries, oculos nemus: ergo cavere

Debet qui loquitur, ne possint verba nocere."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 11](ecc011)

</div>
