<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc000)  [Next](ecc002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 1:1</span></span>

The title, [Ecc 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001), The words of
Koheleth, son of David, king in Jerusalem, has been already explained in
the Introduction. The verse, which does not admit of being properly
halved, is rightly divided by "son of David" by the accent Zakef; for
the apposition, "king in Jerusalem," does not belong to "David," but to
"Koheleth." In several similar cases, such as [Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003), the accentuation leaves the
designation of the oppositional genitive undefined; in [Gen
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021) it proceeds on an erroneous
supposition; it is rightly defined in [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001), for example, as in the passage
before us. That "king" is without the article, is explained from this,
that it is determined by "in Jerusalem," as elsewhere by "of Israel"
("Judah"). The expression (cf. [Kg2
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023)) is singular.

[Ecclesiastes 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 1:2</span></span>

The book begins artistically with an opening section of the nature of a
preamble. The ground-tone of the whole book at once sounds in [Ecc
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002), which commences this section, "O
vanity of vanities, saith Koheleth, O vanity of vanities! All is vain."
As at [Isa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001) (vid., l.c.) it is a
question whether by "saith" is meant a future or a present utterance of
God, so here and at [Ecc 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#008) whether
"saith" designates the expression of Koheleth as belonging to history or
as presently given forth. The language admits both interpretations, as
e.g., "saith," with God as the subject, [Sa2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003), is meant historically, and in
[Isa 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005) of the present time. We
understand "saith" here, as e.g., [Isa
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#004), "Thus saith ... the king of
Assyria," of something said now, not of something said previously, since
it is those presently living to whom the Solomon redivivus, and through
him the author of this book, preaches the vanity of all earthly things.
The old translators take "vanity of vanities" in the nominative, as if
it were the predicate; but the repetition of the expression shows that
it is an exclamation = O vanitatem vanitatum. The abbreviated connecting
form of הבל is here not punctuated הבל, after the form חדר (חדר) and the
like, but הבל, after the manner of the Aram. ground-form עבד; cf. Ewald,
32b. Jerome read differently: In Hebraeo pro vanitate vanitatum ABAL
ABALIM scriptum est, quod exceptis lxx interpretibus omnes similiter
transtulerunt ἀτμὸς ἀτμἰδων sive ἀτμῶν. Hěvěl primarily signifies a
breath, and still bears this meaning in post-bibl. Heb., e.g., Schabbath
119b: "The world exists merely for the sake of the breath of
school-children" (who are the hope of the future). Breath, as the
contrast of that which is firm and enduring, is the figure of that which
has no support, no continuance. Regarding the superlative expression,
"Vanity of vanities," vid., the [Sol
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001). "Vanity of vanities" is the non
plus ultra of vanity, - vanity in the highest degree. The double
exclamation is followed by a statement which shows it to be the result
of experience. "All is vain" - the whole (of the things, namely, which
present themselves to us here below for our consideration and use) is
vanity.

[Ecclesiastes 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 1:3</span></span>

With this verse commences the proof for this exclamation and statement:
"What profit hath a man of all his labour which he laboureth in under
the sun?!" An interrogative exclamation, which leads to the conclusion
that never anything right, i.e., real, enduring, satisfying, comes of
it.יתרון, profit, synon. with Mothar, [Ecc
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#019), is peculiar to this book (=
Aram. יוּתרן). A primary form, יתרון, is unknown. The punctator Simson
(Cod. 102a of the Leipzig University Lib.f. 5a) rightly blames those who
use ויתּרון, in a liturgical hymn, of the Day of Atonement. The word
signifies that which remains over, either, as here, clear gain, profit,
or that which has the pre-eminence, i.e., superiority, precedence, or is
the foremost. "Under the sun" is the designation of the earth peculiar
to this book, - the world of men, which we are wont to call the
sublunary world. שׁ has not the force of an accusative of manner, but of
the obj. The author uses the expression, "Labour wherein I have
laboured," [Ecc 2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#019); [Ecc
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#017), as Euripides, similarly, μοχθεῖν
μόχθον. He now proceeds to justify the negative contained in the
question, "What profit?"

[Ecclesiastes 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 1:4</span></span>

"One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh: and the
earth remaineth for ev." The meaning is not that the earth remains
standing, and thus (Hitz.) approaches no limit (for what limit for it
could be had in view?); it is by this very immoveable condition that it
fulfils, according to the ancient notion, its destiny, [Psa
119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090). The author rather intends to
say that in this sphere nothing remains permanent as the fixed point
around which all circles; generations pass away, others appear, and the
earth is only the firm territory, the standing scene, of this ceaseless
change. In reality, both things may be said of the earth: that it stands
for ever without losing its place in the universe, and that it does not
stand for ever, for it will be changed and become something else. But
the latter thought, which appertains to the history of redemption, [Psa
102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026)., is remote from the Preacher;
the stability of the earth appears to him only as the foil of the growth
and decay everlastingly repeating themselves. Elster, in this fact, that
the generations of men pass away, and that, on the contrary, the
insensate earth under their feet remains, rightly sees something tragic,
as Jerome had already done: Quid hac vanius vanitate, quam terram
manere, quae hominum causa facta est, et hominem ipsum, terrae dominum,
tam repente in pulverem dissolvi? The sun supplies the author with
another figure. This, which he thinks of in contrast with the earth, is
to him a second example of ceaseless change with perpetual sameness. As
the generations of men come and go, so also does the sun.

[Ecclesiastes 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 1:5</span></span>

"And the sun ariseth, the sun goeth down, and it hasteth (back) to its
place, there to rise again." It rises and sets again, but its setting is
not a coming to rest; for from its place of resting in the west it must
rise again in the morning in the east, hastening to fulfil its course.
Thus Hitzig rightly, for he takes "there to rise again" as a relative
clause; the words may be thus translated, but strictly taken, both
participles stand on the same level; שׁואף (panting, hastening) is like
בּא in [Ecc 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004), the expression of the
present, and זו that of the fut. instans: ibi (rursus) oriturus; the
accentuation also treats the two partic. as co-ordinate, for Tiphcha
separates more than Tebir; but it is inappropriate that it gives to
ואל־ם the greater disjunctive Zakef Quaton (with Kadma going before).
Ewald adopts this sequence of the accents, for he explains: the sun goes
down, and that to its own place, viz., hastening back to it just by its
going down, where, panting, it again ascends. But that the sun goes down
to the place of its ascending, is a distorted thought. If "to its place"
belongs to "goeth," then it can refer only to the place of the going
down, as e.g., Benjamin el-Nahawendi (Neubauer, Aus der Petersb. Bibl.
p. 108) explains: "and that to its place," viz., the place of the going
down appointed for it by the Creator, with reference to [Psa
104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019), "the sun knoweth his going
down." But the שׁם, which refers back to "its place," opposes this
interpretation; and the phrase שׁו cannot mean "panting, rising," since
שאף in itself does not signify to pant, but to snatch at, to long
eagerly after anything, thus to strive, panting after it (cf. [Job
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002); [Psa
119:131](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#131)), which accords with the words
"to its place," but not with the act of rising. And how unnatural to
think of the rising sun, which gives the impression of renewed youth, as
panting! No, the panting is said of the sun that has set, which, during
the night, and thus without rest by day and night, must turn itself back
again to the east ([Psa 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)), there
anew to commence its daily course. Thus also Rashi, the lxx, Syr.,
Targ., Jerome, Venet., and Luther. Instead of שׁו, Grtz would read שׁב
אף, redit (atque) etiam; but שׁו is as characteristic of the Preacher's
manner of viewing the world as סובב וגו, [Ecc
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006), and ין, [Ecc
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#008). Thus much regarding the sun. Many
old interpreters, recently Grtz, and among translators certainly the
lxx, refer also [Ecc 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006) to the sun.
The Targ. paraphrases the whole verse of the state of the sun by day and
night, and at the spring and autumn equinox, according to which Rashi
translates הרוּח, la volont (du soleil). But along with the sun, the
wind is also referred to as a third example of restless motion always
renewing itself. The division of the verses is correct; [Ecc
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006) used of the sun would overload the
figure, and the whole of [Ecc 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006)
therefore refers to the wind.

[Ecclesiastes 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 1:6</span></span>

"It goeth to the south, and turneth to the north; the wind goeth ever
circling, and the wind returneth again on its circuits." Thus designedly
the verse is long-drawn and monotonous. It gives the impression of
weariness. שׁב may be 3rd pret. with the force of an abstract present,
but the relation is here different from that in 5a, where the rising,
setting, and returning stand together, and the two former lie backwards
indeed against the latter; here, on the contrary, the circling motion
and the return to a new beginning stand together on the same line; שׁב
is thus a part., as the Syr. translates it. The participles represent
continuance in motion. In [Ecc 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004) the
subjects stand foremost, because the ever anew beginning motion belongs
to the subject; in [Ecc 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#005) and [Ecc
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006), on the contrary, the pred. stands
foremost, and the subject in [Ecc 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006)
is therefore placed thus far back, because the first two pred. were not
sufficient, but required a third for their completion. That the wind
goes from the south (דּרום, R. דר, the region of the most intense light)
to the north (צפון, R. צפן, the region of darkness), is not so
exclusively true of it as it is of the sun that it goes from the east to
the west; this expression requires the generalization "circling,
circling goes the wind," i.e., turning in all directions here and there;
for the repetition denotes that the circling movement exhausts all
possibilities. The near defining part. which is subordinated to "goeth,"
elsewhere is annexed by "and," e.g., [Jon
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#011); cf. [Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030); here סבב סובב , in the sense of
סביב סביב, [Eze 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#002) (both times with
Pasek between the words), precedes. סביבה is here the n. actionis of
סבב. And "on its circuits" is not to be taken adverbially: it turns back
on its circuits, i.e., it turns back on the same paths (Knobel and
others), but על and שׁב are connected, as [Pro
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011); cf. [Psa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007) : the wind returns back to its
circling movements to begin them anew (Hitzig). "The wind" is repeated
(cf. [Ecc 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#010); [Ecc
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001)) according to the figure
Epanaphora or Palindrome (vid., the Introd. to Isaiah, c. 40-66). To all
regions of the heavens, to all directions of the compass, its movement
is ceaseless, ever repeating itself anew; there is nothing permanent but
the fluctuation, and nothing new but that the old always repeats itself.
The examples are thoughtfully chosen and arranged. From the currents of
air, the author now passes to streams of water.

[Ecclesiastes 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 1:7</span></span>

"All rivers run into the sea, and the sea becomes not full; to the place
whence the rivers came, thither they always return again." Instead of
nehhárim, nehhalim was preferred, because it is the more general name
for flowing waters, brooks, and rivers; נחל (from נחל, cavare), אפיק
(from אפק, continere), and (Arab.) wadin (from the root-idea of
stretching, extending), all three denote the channel or bed, and then
the water flowing in it. The sentence, "all rivers run into the sea," is
consistent with fact. Manifestly the author does not mean that they all
immediately flow thither; and by "the sea" he does not mean this or that
sea; nor does he think, as the Targ. explains, of the earth as a ring
(גּוּשׁפּנקא, Pers. angusht-bâne, properly "finger-guard") surrounding
the ocean: but the sea in general is meant, perhaps including also the
ocean that is hidden. If we include this internal ocean, then the rivers
which lose themselves in hollows, deserts, or inland lakes, which have
no visible outlet, form no exception. But the expression refers first of
all to the visible sea-basins, which gain no apparent increase by these
masses of water being emptied into them: "the sea, it becomes not full;"
איננּוּ (Mishn. אינו) has the reflex. pron., as at [Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002); [Lev
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#034), and elsewhere. If the sea
became full, then there would be a real change; but this sea, which, as
Aristophanes says (Clouds, 1294f.), οὐδὲν γίγνεται ἐπιῤῥηεόντων τῶν
ποταμῶν πλείων, represents also the eternal sameness. In [Lev
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#007), Symm., Jer., Luther, and also
Zckler, translate שׁ in the sense of "from whence;" others, as Ginsburg,
venture to take שׁם in the sense of משּׁם; both interpretations are
linguistically inadmissible.

Generally the author does not mean to say that the rivers return to
their sources, since the sea replenishes the fountains, but that where
they once flow, they always for ever flow without changing their course,
viz., into the all-devouring sea (Elst.); for the water rising out of
the sea in vapour, and collecting itself in rain-clouds, fills the
course anew, and the rivers flow on anew, for the old repeats itself in
the same direction to the same end. מקום is followed by what is a
virtual genitive ([Psa 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008)); the
accentuation rightly extends this only to הלכים; for אשׁר, according to
its relation, signifies in itself ubi, [Gen
39:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#020), and quo, [Num
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#027); [Kg1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#002) (never unde). שׁם, however, has
after verbs of motion, as e.g., [Jer
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#027) after שׁוב, and [Sa1
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006) after הלך, frequently the sense of
שׁמּה. And שׁוּב with ל and the infin. signifies to do something again,
[Hos 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009); [Job
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007), thus: to the place whither the
rivers flow, thither they flow again, eo rursus eunt. The author here
purposely uses only participles, because although there is constant
change, yet that which renews itself is ever the same. He now proceeds,
after this brief but comprehensive induction of particulars, to that
which is general.

[Ecclesiastes 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 1:8</span></span>

"All things are in activity; no man can utter it; the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, and the ear is not full with hearing." All
translators and interpreters who understand devarim here of words (lxx,
Syr., and Targ.) go astray; for if the author meant to say that no words
can describe this everlasting sameness with perpetual change, then he
would have expressed himself otherwise than by "all words weary" (Ew.,
Elst., Hengst., and others); he ought at least to have said לריק יג. But
also "all things are wearisome" (Knob., Hitz.), or "full of labour"
(Zck.), i.e., it is wearisome to relate them all, cannot be the meaning
of the sentence; for יגע does not denote that which causes weariness,
but that which suffers weariness ([Deu
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#018); [Sa2
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002)); and to refer the affection,
instead of to the narrator, to that which is to be narrated, would be
even for a poet too affected a quid pro quo. Rosenmller essentially
correctly: omnes res fatigantur h. e. in perpetua versantur
vicissitudine, qua fatigantur quasi. But יגעים is not appropriately
rendered by fatigantur; the word means, becoming wearied, or perfectly
feeble, or also: wearying oneself (cf. [Ecc
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#015); [Ecc
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#012)), working with a strain on one's
strength, fatiguing oneself (cf.יגיע, that which is gained by labour,
work). This is just what these four examples are meant to show, viz.,
that a restless activity reaching no visible conclusion and end, always
beginning again anew, pervades the whole world-all things, he says,
summarizing, are in labour, i.e., are restless, hastening on, giving the
impression of fatigue.

Thus also in strict sequence of thought that which follows: this unrest
in the outer world reflects itself in man, when he contemplates that
which is done around him; human language cannot exhaust this coming and
going, this growth and decay in constant circle, and the quodlibet is so
great, that the eye cannot be satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing; to the unrest of things without corresponds the unrest of the
mind, which through this course, in these ever repeated variations,
always bringing back the old again to view, is kept in ceaseless
activity. The object to dǎbbēr is the totality of things. No words can
comprehend this, no sensible perception exhaust it. That which is
properly aimed at here is not the unsatisfiedness of the eyes ([Pro
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020)), and generally of the mind,
thus not the ever-new attractive power which appertains to the eye and
the ear of him who observes, but the force with which the restless
activity which surrounds us lays hold of and communicates itself to us,
so that we also find no rest and contentment. With שׂבע, to be
satisfied, of the eye, there is appropriately interchanged נמלא, used of
the funnel-shaped ear, to be filled, i.e., to be satisfied (as at [Ecc
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#007)). The min connected with this
latter word is explained by Zck. after Hitz., "away from hearing," i.e.,
so that it may hear no more. This is not necessary. As saava' with its
min may signify to be satisfied with anything, e.g., [Ecc
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003), [Job
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022); [Psa
104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013); cf. Kal, [Isa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006), Pih. [Jer
51:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#034); [Psa
127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005). Thus mishshemoa' is understood
by all the old translators (e.g., Targ. מלּמשׁמע), and thus also,
perhaps, the author meant it: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, and
the ear is not filled (satisfied) with hearing; or yet more in
accordance with the Heb. expression: there is not an eye, i.e., no eye
is satisfied, etc., restlessly hastening, giving him who looks no rest,
the world goes on in its circling course without revealing anything that
is in reality new.

[Ecclesiastes 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 1:9</span></span>

"That which hath been is that which shall be, and that which is done is
that which shall be done; and there is nothing new under the sun." - The
older form of the language uses only אשׁר instead of מה־שּׁ, in the
sense of id quod, and in the sense of quid-quid, אשׁר כל ([Ecc
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#010); [Ecc
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#024)); but mǎh is also used by it with
the extinct force of an interrogative, in the sense of quodcunque, [Job
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#013), aliquid (quidquam), [Gen
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#008); [Pro
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#013); and mi or mi asher, in the sense
of quisquis, [Exo 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014); [Exo
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033). In שׁ הוא (cf. [Gen
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#014)) are combined the meanings id
(est) quod and idem (est) quod; hu is often the expression of the
equality of two things, [Job 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019), or
of self-sameness, [Psa 102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028). The
double clause, quod fuit ... quod factum est, comprehends that which is
done in the world of nature and of men-the natural and the historical.
The bold clause, neque est quidquam novi sub sole, challenges
contradiction; the author feels this, as the next verse shows.

[Ecclesiastes 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 1:10</span></span>

"Is there anything whereof it may be said: See, this is new? - it was
long ago through the ages (aeons) which have been before us." The Semit.
substantive verb ישׁ (Assyr. isu) has here the force of a hypothetical
antecedent: supposing that there is a thing of which one might say, etc.
The זה, with Makkeph, belongs as subject, as at [Ecc
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#027), [Ecc
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029) as object, to that which follows.
כּבר (vid., List, p. 193) properly denotes length or greatness of time
(as כּברה, length of way). The ל of לע is that of measure: this "long
ago" measured (Hitz.) after infinitely long periods of time. מלּ, ante
nos, follows the usage of מלּף, [Isa
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#026), and l

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

paa', [Jdg 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010), etc.; the past time
is spoken of as that which was before, for it is thought of as the
beginning of the succession of time (vid., Orelli, Synon. der Zeit u.
Ewigkeit, p. 14f.). The singular היה may also be viewed as pred. of a
plur. inhumanus in order; but in connection, [Ecc
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#007), [Ecc
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#009) (Gesen. 147, An. 2), it is more
probable that it is taken as a neut. verb. That which newly appears has
already been, but had been forgotten; for generations come and
generations go, and the one forgets the other.

[Ecclesiastes 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 1:11</span></span>

"There is no remembrance of ancestors; and also of the later ones who
shall come into existence, there will be no remembrance for them with
those who shall come into existence after them." With זכּרון (with
Kametz) there is also זכרון, the more common form by our author, in
accordance with the usage of his age; Gesen., Elst., and others regard
it here and at [Ecc 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#016) as constr.,
and thus לרא as virtually object-gen. (Jerome, non est priorum memoria);
but such refinements of the old syntaxis ornata are not to be expected
in our author: he changes (according to the traditional punctuation)
here the initial sound, as at [Ecc
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017) the final sound, to oth and uth.
אין ל is the contrast of היה ל: to attribute to one, to become partaker
of. The use of the expression, "for them," gives emphasis to the
statement. "With those who shall come after," points from the generation
that is future to a remoter future, cf. [Gen
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#002). The Kametz of the prep. is that
of the recompens. art.; cf. [Num 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#031),
where it denotes "the last" among the four hosts; for there הא is meant
of the last in order, as here it is meant of the remotely future time.

[Ecclesiastes 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 1:12</span></span>

"I, Koheleth, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem." That of the two
possible interpretations of הייתי, "I have become" and "I have been,"
not the former (Grtz), but the latter, is to be here adopted, has been
already shown. We translate better by "I have been" - for the verb here
used is a pure perfect - than by "I was" (Ew., Elst., Hengst., Zck.),
with which Bullock (Speaker's Comm., vol. IV, 1873) compares the
expression Quand j'tois roi ! which was often used by Louis XIV towards
the end of his life. But here the expression is not a cry of complaint,
like the "fuimus Troes," but a simple historical statement, by which the
Preacher of the vanity of all earthly things here introduces himself, -
it is Solomon, resuscitated by the author of the book, who here looks
back on his life as king. "Israel" is the whole of Israel, and points to
a period before the division of the kingdom; a king over Judah alone
would not so describe himself. Instead of "king על (over) Israel," the
old form of the language uses frequently simply "king of Israel,"
although also the former expression is sometimes found; cf. [Sa1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#026); [Sa2
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#023); [Kg1
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#037). He has been king, - king over a
great, peaceful, united people; king in Jerusalem, the celebrated,
populous, highly-cultivated city, - and thus placed on an elevation
having the widest survey, and having at his disposal whatever can make a
man happy; endowed, in particular, with all the means of gaining
knowledge, which accorded with the disposition of his heart searching
after wisdom (cf. [Kg1 3:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#009); [Kg1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#009)).

But in his search after worldly knowledge he found no satisfaction.

[Ecclesiastes 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 1:13</span></span>

"And I gave my heart to seek and to hold survey with wisdom over all
that is done under the sun: a sore trouble it is which God has given to
the children of men to be exercised therewith." The synonyms דּרשׁ(to
seek) and תּוּר (to hold survey over) do not represent a lower and a
higher degree of search (Zck.), but two kinds of searching: one
penetrating in depth, the other going out in extent; for the former of
these verbs (from the root-idea of grinding, testing) signifies to
investigate an object which one already has in hand, to penetrate into
it, to search into it thoroughly; and the latter verb (from the
root-idea of moving round about)

(Note: Vid., the investigation of these roots (Assyr. utîr, he brought
back) in Eth's Schlafgemach der Phantasie, pp. 86-89.)

signifies to hold a survey, - look round in order to bring that which is
unknown, or not comprehensively known, within the sphere of knowledge,
and thus has the meaning of bǎkkēsh, one going the rounds. It is the
usual word for the exploring of a country, i.e., the acquiring personal
knowledge of its as yet unknown condition; the passing over to an
intellectual search is peculiar to the Book of Koheleth, as it has the
phrase ל לב נתן, animum advertere, or applicare ad aliquid, in common
only with [Dan 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012). The beth of
bahhochemah is that of the instrument; wisdom must be the means
(organon) of knowledge in this searching and inquiry. With על is
introduced the sphere into which it extends. Grotius paraphrases:
Historiam animalium et satorum diligentissime inquisivi. But נעשׂה does
not refer to the world of nature, but to the world of men; only within
this can anything be said of actions, only this has a proper history.
But that which offers itself for research and observation there, brings
neither joy nor contentment. Hitzig refers הוּא to human activity; but
it relates to the research which has this activity as its object, and is
here, on that account, called "a sore trouble," because the attainment
and result gained by the laborious effort are of so unsatisfactory a
nature. Regarding ענין, which here goes back to ענה ב, to fatigue
oneself, to trouble oneself with anything, and then to be engaged with
it. The words ענין רע would mean trouble of an evil nature (vid., at
[Psa 78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049); [Pro
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024)); but better attested is the
reading ענין רע "a sore trouble." הוּא is the subj., as at [Ecc
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#001) and elsewhere; the author uses it
also in expressions where it is pred. And as frequently as he uses asher
and שׁ, so also, when form and matter commend it, he uses the scheme of
the attributive clause (elliptical relative clause), as here (cf. [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016)), where certainly, in conformity
with the old style, נתנו was to be used.

[Ecclesiastes 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 1:14</span></span>

He adduces proof of the wearisomeness of this work of research: "I saw
all the works that are done under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity
and striving after the wind." The point of the sentence lies in והנּה =
וארא וה, so that thus rathi is the expression of the parallel fact
(circumst. perfect). The result of his seeing, and that, as he has said
[Ecc 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013), of a by no means
superficial and limited seeing, was a discovery of the fleeting,
unsubstantial, fruitless nature of all human actions and endeavours.
They had, as hevel expresses, not reality in them; and also, as denoted
by reuth ruahh (the lxx render well by προαίρεσις πνεύματος), they had
no actual consequences, no real issue. [Hos
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001) also says: "Ephraim feedeth on
wind," i.e., follows after, as the result of effort obtains, the wind,
roěh ruahh; but only in the Book of Koheleth is this sentence
transformed into an abstract terminus technicus (vid., under Reth).

[Ecclesiastes 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 1:15</span></span>

The judgment contained in the words, "vanity and a striving after the
wind," is confirmed: "That which is crooked cannot become straight; and
a deficit cannot be numerable," i.e., cannot be taken into account (thus
Theod., after the Syro-Hex.), as if as much were present as is actually
wanting; for, according to the proverb, "Where there is nothing, nothing
further is to be counted." Hitzig thinks, by that which is crooked and
wanting, according to [Ecc 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#013), of
the divine order of the world: that which is unjust in it, man cannot
alter; its wants he cannot complete. But the preceding statement refers
only to labour under the sun, and to philosophical research and
observation directed thereto. This places before the eyes of the
observer irregularities and wants, brings such irregularities and wants
to his consciousness, - which are certainly partly brought about and
destined by God, but for the most part are due to the transgressions of
man himself, - and what avails the observer the discovery and
investigation? - he has only lamentation over it, for with all his
wisdom he can bring no help. Instead of לתקן (vid., under תקן), לתקן was
to be expected. However, the old language also formed intransitive
infinitives with transitive modification of the final vowels, e.g.,
יבשׁ, etc. (cf. ישׁון, [Ecc 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011)).

Having now gained such a result in his investigation and research by
means of wisdom, he reaches the conclusion that wisdom itself is
nothing.

[Ecclesiastes 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 1:16</span></span>

"I have communed with mine own heart, saying: Lo, I have gained great
and always greater wisdom above all who were before me over Jerusalem;
and my heart hath seen wisdom and knowledge in fulness. And I gave my
heart to know what was in wisdom and knowledge, madness and folly - I
have perceived that this also is a grasping after the wind." The
evidence in which he bears witness to himself that striving after wisdom
and knowledge brings with it no true satisfaction, reaches down to the
close of [Ecc 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017); ידעתּי is the
conclusion which is aimed at. The manner of expression is certainly so
far involved, as he speaks of his heart to his heart what it had
experienced, and to what he had purposely directed it. The אני leads us
to think that a king speaks, for whom it is appropriate to write a
capital I, or to multiply it into we; vid., regarding this "I," more
pleonastic than emphatic, subordinated to its verb.

It is a question whether עם־לבּי, after the phrase (את) עם דּבּר, is
meant of speaking with any one, colloqui, or of the place of speaking,
as in "thou shalt consider in thine heart," [Deu
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#005), it is used of the place of
consciousness; cf. [Job 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#009), (עמּדי)
עמּי היה = σύνοιδα ἐμαυτῷ, and what is said in my Psychol. p. 134,
regarding συνείδησις, consciousness, and συμμαρτυρεῖν. בּלבּי,
interchanging with עם־לבּי, [Ecc 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#001),
[Ecc 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#015), commends the latter
meaning: in my heart (lxx, Targ., Jerome, Luther); but the cogn.
expressions, medabběrěth ǎl-libbah, [Sa1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013), and ledabbēr ěl-libbi, [Gen
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#045), suggest as more natural the
former rendering, viz., as of a dialogue, which is expressed by the Gr.
Venet. (more distinctly than by Aquila, Symm., and Syr.): διείλεγμαι ἐγὼ
ξὺν τῇ καρδίᾳ μου. Also לאמר, occurring only here in the Book of
Koheleth, brings it near that the following oratio directa is directed
to the heart, as it also directly assumes the form of an address, [Ecc
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#001), after בלבי. The expression, הג
הך, "to make one's wisdom great," i.e., "to gain great wisdom," is
without a parallel; for the words, הג תו, [Isa
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029), quoted by Hitzig, signify to
show and attest truly useful (beneficial) knowledge in a noble way. The
annexed והו refers to the continued increase made to the great treasure
already possessed (cf. [Ecc 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#009) and
[Kg1 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#007)). The al connected therewith
signifies, "above" ([Gen 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026)) all
those who were over Jerusalem before me. This is like the sarrâni âlik
maḥrija, "the kings who were my predecessors," which was frequently used
by the Assyrian kings. The Targumist seeks to accommodate the words to
the actual Solomon by thus distorting them: "above all the wise men who
have been in Jerusalem before me," as if the word in the text were
בירושלם,

(Note: In F. the following note is added: "Several Codd. have,
erroneously, birushalam instead of al-jerushalam." Kennicott counts
about 60 such Codd. It stands thus also in J; and at first it thus stood
in H, but was afterwards corrected to al-yerushalam. Cf. Elias Levita's
Masoreth hamasoreth, II 8, at the end.)

as it is indeed found in several Codd., and according to which also the
lxx, Syr., Jerome, and the Venet. translate. Rather than think of the
wise (הכּימיּא), we are led to think of all those who from of old stood
at the head of the Israelitish community. But there must have been
well-known great men with whom Solomon measures himself, and these could
not be such dissimilarly great men as the Canaanitish kings to the time
of Melchizedek; and since the Jebusites, even under Saul, were in
possession of Zion, and Jerusalem was for the first time completely
subdued by David ([Sa2 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007), cf. [Jos
15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063)), it is evident that only one
predecessor of Solomon in the office of ruler over Jerusalem can be
spoken of, and that here an anachronism lies before us, occasioned by
the circumstance that the Salomo revivivus, who has behind him the long
list of kings whom in truth he had before him, here speaks.

Regarding היה אשׁר, qu'il y uet, for היו אשׁר, qui furent, vid., at [Ecc
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#010). The seeing here ascribed to the
heart (here = νοῦς, Psychol. p. 249) is meant of intellectual
observation and apprehension; for "all perception, whether it be
mediated by the organs of sense or not (as prophetic observing and
contemplating), comprehends all, from mental discernment down to
suffering, which veils itself in unconsciousness, and the Scripture
designates it as a seeing" (Psychol. 234); the Book of Koheleth also
uses the word ראה of every kind of human experience, bodily or mental,
[Ecc 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#024); [Ecc
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#017); [Ecc
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#006); [Ecc
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#009). It is commonly translated: "My
heart saw much wisdom and knowledge" (thus e.g., Ewald); but that is
contrary to the gram. structure of the sentence (Ew. 287c). The adject.
harbēh

(Note: Regarding the form הרבה, which occurs once ([Jer
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#002)), vid., Ew. 240c.)

is always, and by Koheleth also, [Ecc
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#007); [Ecc
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006), [Ecc
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#016); [Ecc
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#011); [Ecc
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#018); [Ecc
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#008); [Ecc
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#009), [Ecc
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#012), placed after its subst.; thus
it is here adv., as at [Ecc 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#019); [Ecc
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#016). Rightly the Venet.: ἡ καρδία μου
τεθέαται κατὰ πολὺ σοφίαν καί γνῶσιν Chokma signifies, properly,
solidity, compactness; and then, like πυκνότης, mental ability, secular
wisdom; and, generally, solid knowledge of the true and the right. Dǎǎth
is connected with chokma here and at [Isa
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#006), as at [Rom
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033), γνῶσις is with σοφία.
Baumggarten-Crusius there remarks that σοφία refers to the general
ordering of things, γνῶσις to the determination of individual things;
and Harless, that σοφία is knowledge which proposes the right aim, and
γνῶσις that which finds the right means thereto. In general, we may say
that chokma is the fact of a powerful knowledge of the true and the
right, and the property which arises out of this intellectual
possession; but dǎǎth is knowledge penetrating into the depth of the
essence of things, by which wisdom is acquired and in which wisdom
establishes itself.

[Ecc 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017)

By the consecutive modus ואתּנה (aor. with ah, like [Gen
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#006); [Gen
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#011), and particularly in more modern
writings; vid., p. 198, regarding the rare occurrence of the aorist form
in the Book of Koheleth) he bears evidence to himself as to the end
which, thus equipped with wisdom and knowledge, he gave his heart to
attain unto (cf. 13a), i.e., toward which he directed the concentration
of his intellectual strength. He wished to be clear regarding the real
worth of wisdom and knowledge in their contrasts; he wished to become
conscious of this, and to have joy in knowing what he had in wisdom and
knowledge as distinguished from madness and folly. After the statement
of the object lādǎǎth, stands vedaath, briefly for ולדעת. Ginsburg
wishes to get rid of the words holēloth vesikluth, or at least would
read in their stead תּבוּנית ושׂכלוּת (rendering them "intelligence and
prudence"); Grtz, after the lxx παραβολὰς καὶ ἐπιστήμην, reads משׁלות
ושׂכלות. But the text can remain as it is: the object of Koheleth is, on
the one hand, to become acquainted with wisdom and knowledge; and, on
the other, with their contraries, and to hold these opposite to each
other in their operations and consequences. The lxx, Targ., Venet., and
Luther err when they render sikluth here by ἐπιστήμη, etc. As sikluth,
insight, intelligence, is in the Aram. written with the letter samek
(instead of sin), so here, according to the Masora סכלות, madness is for
once written with ס, being everywhere else in the book written with שׂ;
the word is an ἐναντιόφωνον,

(Note: Vid., Th. M. Redslob's Die Arab. Wrter, u.s.w. (1873).)

and has, whether written in the one way or in the other, a verb, sakal
(שׂכל, סכל), which signifies "to twist together," as its root, and is
referred partly to a complication and partly to a confusion of ideas.
הללות, from הלל, in the sense of "to cry out," "to rage," always in this
book terminates in th, and only at [Ecc
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#013) in th; the termination th is
that of the abstr. sing.; but th, as we think we have shown at [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020), is that of a fem. plur., meant
intensively, like bogdoth, [Zep 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004);
binoth, chokmoth, cf. bogdim, [Pro
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#028); hhovlim, [Zac
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007), [Zac
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014); toqim, [Pro
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#015) (Bttch. 700g E). Twice vesikluth
presents what, speaking to his own heart, he bears testimony to before
himself. By yādǎ'ti, which is connected with dibbarti ([Ecc
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#016)) in the same rank, he shows the
facit. זה refers to the striving to become conscious of the superiority
of secular wisdom and science to the love of pleasure and to ignorance.
He perceived that this striving also was a grasping after the wind; with
רעוּת, 14b, is here interchanged רעיון. He proves to himself that
nothing showed itself to be real, i.e., firm and enduring, unimpeachable
and imperishable. And why not?

[Ecc 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#018)

"For in much wisdom is much grief; and he that increaseth knowledge
increaseth sorrow." The German proverb: "Much wisdom causeth headache,"
is compared, [Ecc 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#012), but not here,
where כּעס and מכאוב express not merely bodily suffering, but also
mental grief. Spinoza hits one side of the matter in his Ethics, IV 17,
where he remarks: "Veram boni et mali cognitionem saepe non satis valere
ad cupiditates coercendas, quo facto homo imbecillitatem suam
animadvertens cogitur exclamare: Video meliora proboque, deteriora
sequor." In every reference, not merely in that which is moral, there is
connected with knowledge the shadow of a sorrowful consciousness, in
spite of every effort to drive it away. The wise man gains an insight
into the thousand-fold woes of the natural world, and of the world of
human beings, and this reflects itself in him without his being able to
change it; hence the more numerous the observed forms of evil,
suffering, and discord, so much greater the sadness (כּעס, R. כס, cogn.
הס, perstringere) and the heart-sorrow (מכאוב, crve-cour) which the
inutility of knowledge occasions. The form of 18a is like [Ecc
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006), and that of 18b like e.g., [Pro
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022). We change the clause veyosiph
daath into an antecedent, but in reality the two clauses stand together
as the two members of a comparison: if one increaseth knowledge, he
increaseth (at the same time) sorrow. "יוסיף, [Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014); [Isa
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#005); [Ecc
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#018)," says Ewald, 169a, "stands alone
as a part. act., from the stem reverting from Hiph. to Kal with י
instead of ." But this is not unparalleled; in הן יוסיף the verb יוסף is
fin., in the same manner as יסּד, [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016); תּומיך, [Psa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005), is Hiph., in the sense of
amplificas, from ימך; יפיח, [Pro 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#019)
(vid., l.c.), is an attribut. clause, qui efflat, used as an adj.; and,
at least, we need to suppose in the passage before us the confusion that
the ē of kātēl (from kātil, originally kātal), which is only long, has
somehow passed over into î. Bttcher's remark to the contrary, "An
impersonal fiens thus repeated is elsewhere altogether without a
parallel," is set aside by the proverb formed exactly thus: "He that
breathes the love of truth says what is right," [Pro
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#017).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 2](ecc002)

</div>

</div>
