<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc007)  [Next](ecc009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 8:1</span></span>

"Who is like the wise? and who understandeth the interpretation of
things? The wisdom of a man maketh his face bright, and the rudeness of
his face is changed." Unlike this saying: "Who is like the wise?" are
the formulas חכם מי, [Hos 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009), [Jer
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#011), [Psa
107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043), which are compared by Hitzig
and others. "Who is like the wise?" means: Who is equal to him? and this
question, after the scheme מי־כמכה, [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011), presents him as one who has not
his like among men. Instead of כּה the word כּחכם might be used, after
לחכם, [Ecc 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#016), etc. The syncope is,
as at [Eze 40:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#025), omitted, which
frequently occurs, particularly in the more modern books, [Eze
47:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#022); [Ch2
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#007); [Ch2
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#010); [Ch2
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#027); [Neh
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#019); [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038). The regular giving of Dagesh to
כ after מי, with Jethib, not Mahpach, is as at [Ecc
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007) after כּי; Jethib is a
disjunctive. The second question is not כּיודע, but יודע וּמי, and thus
does not mean: who is like the man of understanding, but: who
understands, viz., as the wise man does; thus it characterizes the
incomparably excellent as such. Many interpreters (Oetinger, Ewald,
Hitz., Heiligst., Burg., Elst., Zckl.) persuade themselves that דּבר
פּשׁר is meant of the understanding of the proverb, 8b. The absence of
the art., says Hitzig, does not mislead us: of a proverb, viz., the
following; but in this manner determinate ideas may be made from all
indeterminate ones. Rightly, Gesenius: explicationem ullius rei; better,
as at [Ecc 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#008) : cujusvis rei.
Ginsburg compares נבון דּבר, [Sa1
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018), which, however, does not mean
him who has the knowledge of things, but who is well acquainted with
words. It is true that here also the chief idea פּשׁר first leads to the
meaning verbum (according to which the lxx, Jer., the Targ., and Syr.
translate; the Venet.: ἑρμηνείαν λόγου); but since the unfolding or
explaining (pēshěr) refers to the actual contents of the thing spoken,
verbi and rei coincide. The wise man knows how to explain difficult
things, to unfold mysterious things; in short, he understands how to go
to the foundation of things.

What now follows, [Ecc 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001), might be
introduced by the confirming כי, but after the manner of synonymous
parallelism it places itself in the same rank with 1a, since, that the
wise man stands so high, and no one like him looks through the centre of
things, is repeated in another form: "Wisdom maketh his face bright" is
thus to be understood after [Psa
119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130) and [Psa
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009), wisdom draws the veil from his
countenance, and makes it clear; for wisdom is related to folly as light
is to darkness, [Ecc 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#013). The
contrast, ישׁ ... עזו ("and the rudeness of his face is changed"),
shows, however, that not merely the brightening of the countenance, but
in general that intellectual and ethical transfiguration of the
countenance is meant, in which at once, even though it should not in
itself be beautiful, we discover the educated man rising above the
common rank. To translate, with Ewald: and the brightness of his
countenance is doubled, is untenable; even supposing that ישׁנּא can
mean, like the Arab. yuthattay, duplicatur, still עז, in the meaning of
brightness, is in itself, and especially with פּניו, impossible, along
with which it is, without doubt, to be understood after az panim, [Deu
28:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#050); [Dan
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023), and hē'ēz panim, [Pro
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#013), or bephanim, [Pro
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#029), so that thus פנים עז has the
same meaning as the post-bibl. פנים עזּוּת, stiffness, hardness,
rudeness of countenance = boldness, want of bashfulness, regardlessness,
e.g., Shabbath 30b, where we find a prayer in these words: O keep me
this day from פנים עזי and from עזות פ (that I may not incur the former
or the latter). The Talm. Taanith 7b, thus explaining, says: "Every man
to whom עזות פ belongs, him one may hate, as the scripture says, ישּׂנא
... ועז (do not read ישׁנּא)." The lxx translates μισητηήσεται will be
hated, and thus also the Syr.; both have thus read as the Talm. has
done, which, however, bears witness in favour of ישׁנּא as the
traditional reading. It is not at all necessary, with Hitzig, after
Zirkel, to read y

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

shane': but boldness disfigureth his countenance; עז in itself alone, in
the meaning of boldness, would, it is true, along with פניו as the obj.
of the verb, be tenable; but the change is unnecessary, the passive
affords a perfectly intelligible meaning: the boldness, or rudeness, of
his visage is changed, viz., by wisdom (Bttch., Ginsb., Zckl.). The verb
שׁנה (שנא, [Lam 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001)) means, [Mal
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006), merely "to change, to become
different;" the Pih. שׁנּה, [Jer
52:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#033), שׁנּא, [Kg2
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#029), denotes in these two passages a
change in melius, and the proverb of the Greek, Sir. 13:24, -

Καρδία ἀντηρώπου ἀλλοιοῖ τὸ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ

ἐάν τε εἰς ἀγαθὰ ἐάν τε εἰς κακά,

is preserved to us in its original form thus:

לב אדם ישׁנּא פניו

בּין לטוב וּבין לרע׃

so that thus שׁנּא, in the sense of being changed as to the sternness of
the expression of the countenance, is as good as established. What Ovid
says of science: emollit mores nec sinit esse feros, thus tolerably
falls in with what is here said of wisdom: Wisdom gives bright eyes to a
man, a gentle countenance, a noble expression; it refines and dignifies
his external appearance and his demeanour; the hitherto rude external,
and the regardless, selfish, and bold deportment, are changed into their
contraries. If, now, [Ecc 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001) is not
to be regarded as an independent proverb, it will bear somewhat the
relation of a prologue to what follows. Luther and others regard [Ecc
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001) as of the nature of an epilogue to
what goes before; parallels, such as [Hos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009), make that appear probable; but
it cannot be yielded, because the words are not חכם מי, but מי כהח. But
that which follows easily subordinates itself to [Ecc
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001), in as far as fidelity to duty and
thoughtfulness amid critical social relations are proofs of that wisdom
which sets a man free from impetuous rudeness, and fits him
intelligently and with a clear mind to accommodate himself to the time.

[Ecclesiastes 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 8:2</span></span>

The faithfulness of subjects, Koheleth says, is a religious duty: "I
say: Observe well the kings' command, and that because of the oath of
God." The author cannot have written [Ecc
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002) as it here stands; אני hovers in
the air. Hitzig reads, with Jerome, שׁמר, and hears in [Ecc
8:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002) a servile person speaking who
veils himself in the cloak of religion; in [Ecc
8:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005) follows the censura of this
corrupt theory. but we have already remarked that [Ecc
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002) accords with [Rom
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005), and is thus not a corrupt
theory; besides, this distribution of the expressions of the Book of
Koheleth between different speakers is throughout an expedient resting
on a delusion. Luther translates: I keep the word of the king, and thus
reads אשׁרּ; as also does the Jer. Sanhedrin 21b, and Koheleth rabba,
under this passage: I observe the command of the king, of the queen. In
any case, it is not God who is meant here by "the king;" the words: "and
that because of the oath of God," render this impossible, although
Hengst. regards it as possible; for (1) "the oath of God" he
understands, against all usage, of the oath which is taken to God; and
(2) he maintains that in the O.T. scarcely any passage is to be found
where obedience to a heathen master is set forth as a religious duty.
But the prophets show themselves as morally great men, without a stain,
just in this, that they decidedly condemn and unhesitatingly chastise
any breach of faith committed against the Assyrian or Chaldean
oppressor, e.g., [Isa 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015); [Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001); [Eze
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015); cf. [Jer
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#012). However, although we understand
mělěk not of the heavenly, but of an earthly king, yet אשׁמר does not
recommend itself, for Koheleth records his experience, and derives
therefrom warnings and admonitions; but he never in this manner presents
himself as an example of virtue. The paraenetic imper. שׁמר is thus not
to be touched. Can we then use ani elliptically, as equivalent to "I say
as follows"? Passages such as [Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010) (Elst.), where לאמר is omitted,
are not at all the same. Also [Eze
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#011), where הנני is strengthened by
ani, and the expression is not elliptical, is not in point here. And
[Isa 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#009) also does not apply to the
case of the supposed ellipsis here. In an ingenious bold manner the
Midrash helps itself in Lev 18 and Num 14, for with reference to the
self-introduction of royal words like פרעה אני it explains: "Observe the
I from the mouth of the king." This explanation is worthy of mention,
but it has little need of refutation; it is also contrary to the
accentuation, which gives Pashta to ani, as to ראה, [Ecc
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#027), and לבד, [Ecc
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029), and thus places it by itself.
Now, since this elliptical I, after which we would place a colon, is
insufferably harsh, and since also it does not recommend itself to omit
it, as is done by the lxx, the Targ., and Syr., - for the words must
then have a different order, המלך פי שׁמר, - it is most advisable to
supply אמרתּי, and to write אם אני or אני אם, after [Ecc
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#001); [Ecc
3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#017). We find ourselves here,
besides, within an I section, consisting of sentences interwoven in a
Mashal form. The admonition is solemnly introduced, since Koheleth,
himself a king, and a wise man in addition, gives it the support of the
authority of his person, in which it is to be observed that the
religious motive introduced by ו explic. (vid., Ewald, 340b) is not
merely an appendix, but the very point of the admonition. Kleinert,
incorrectly: "Direct thyself according to the mouth of the king, and
that, too, as according to an oath of God." Were this the meaning, then
we might certainly wish that it were a servile Alexandrian court-Jew who
said it. But why should that be the meaning? The meaning "wegen" because
of, which is usually attributed to the word-connection עלדברת here and
at [Ecc 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#018); [Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014), Kleinert maintains to be an
arbitrary invention. But it alone fits these three passages, and why an
arbitrary invention? If על־דּבר, [Psa
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005); [Psa
79:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#009), etc., means "von wegen" on
account of, then also על־דברת will signify "propter rationem, naturam,"
as well as ([Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)) ad rationem.
שׁב אל is, as elsewhere שׁב יה, e.g., [Exo
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#010), a promise given under an appeal
to God, a declaration or promise strengthened by an oath. Here it is the
oath of obedience which is meant, which the covenant between a king and
his people includes, though it is not expressly entered into by
individuals. The king is designated neither as belonging to the nation,
nor as a foreigner; that which is said is valid also in the case of the
latter. Daniel, Nehemiah, Mordecai, etc., acted in conformity with the
words of Koheleth, and the oath of vassalage which the kings of Israel
and Judah swore to the kings of Assyria and of Babylon is regarded by
the prophets of both kingdoms as binding on king and people.

[Ecclesiastes 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 8:3</span></span>

The warning, corresponding to the exhortation, now follows: One must not
thoughtlessly avoid the duty of service and homage due to the king:
"Hasten not to go away from him: join not in an evil matter; for he
executeth all that he desireth." Regarding the connection, of two verbs
with one idea, lying before us in תּלך ... אל־, as e.g., at [Zac
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#015); [Hos
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006), vid., Gesen. 142. 3b. Instead of
this sentence, we might use אל־תבהל ללכת מפניו, as e.g., Aboth v. 8:
"The wise man does not interrupt another, and hastens not to answer,"
i.e., is not too hasty in answering. As with עם, to be with the king,
[Ecc 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#015) = to hold with him, so here
מפניו הלך means to take oneself away from him, or, as it is expressed in
[Ecc 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004), to leave one's station; cf.
[Hos 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#002) : "They (the prophets of
Jahve) called to them, forthwith they betook themselves away from them."
It is possible that in the choice of the expression, the phrase נבהל
מפני, "to be put into a state of alarm before any one," [Job
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#015), was not without influence. The
indef. רע דּבר, [Deu 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001); [Deu
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#010), cf. [Deu
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012); [Deu
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#020), [Kg2
4:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#041), etc., is to be referred (with
Rosenm., Knobel, Bullock, and others) to undertakings which aim at
resisting the will of the king, and reach their climax in conspiracy
against the king's throne and life ([Pro
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#021)). אל־תּעמד בּ might mean:
persist not in it; but the warning does not presuppose that the entrance
thereon had already taken place, but seeks to prevent it, thus: enter
not, go not, engage not, like 'amad bederek, [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); 'amad babrith, [Kg2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#003); cf. [Psa
106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023); [Jer
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#018). Also the Arab. 'amada li =
intendit, proposuit sibi rem, is compared; it is used in the general
sense of "to make toward something, to stretch to something." Otherwise
Ewald, Elst., Ginsb., and Zckl.: stand not at an evil word (of the
king), provoking him to anger thereby still more, - against [Ecc
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005), where רע דבר, as generally (cf.
[Psa 141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004)), means an evil thing, and
against the close connection of בּ עמד, which is to be presupposed.
Hitzig even: stand not at an evil command, i.e., hesitate not to do even
that which is evil, which the king commands, with the remark that here a
servilismus is introduced as speaking, who, in saying of the king, "All
that pleaseth him he doeth," uses words which are used only of God the
Almighty, [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009), etc. Hengst., Hahn, Dale, and
others therefore dream of the heavenly King in the text. But proverbs of
the earthly king, such as [Pro 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002),
say the very same thing; and if the Mishna Sanhedrin ii. 2, to which
Tyler refers, says of the king, "The king cannot himself be a judge, nor
can any one judge him; he does not give evidence, and no evidence can be
given against him," a sovereignty is thus attributed to the king, which
is formulated in 3b and established in the verse following.

[Ecclesiastes 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 8:4</span></span>

"Inasmuch as the word of a king is powerful; and who can say to him:
What doest thou?" The same thing is said of God, [Job
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#012); [Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009); [Dan
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032), Wisd. 12:12, but also of the
king, especially of the unlimited monarch of a despotic state. Baasher
verifies as בּשׁ at [Ecc 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#016); cf.
[Gen 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#009), [Gen
39:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#023); Greek, ἐν ᾧ and ἐφ ̓ ᾧ. Burger
arbitrarily: quae dixit (דּבּר for דּבר), rex, in ea potestatem habet.
The adjectival impers. use of the noun shilton = potestatem habens, is
peculiar; in the Talm. and Midrash, shilton, like the Assyr. siltannu,

(Note: Vid., Fried. Delitzsch's Assyr. Stud. p. 129f.)

means the ruler (vid., under [Ecc
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008)). That which now follows is not,
as Hitzig supposes, an opposing voice which makes itself heard, but as
[Ecc 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002) is compared with [Rom
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005), so is [Ecc
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005) with [Rom
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003).

[Ecclesiastes 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 8:5</span></span>

"Whoso remaineth true to the commandment will experience nothing evil;
and the heart of the wise man will know a time and judicial decision."
That by מצוה is here to be understood not the commandment of God, at
least not immediately, as at [Pro
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#016) (Ewald), but that of the king,
and generally an injunction and appointment of the superior authority,
is seen from the context, which treats not of God, but of the ruler over
a state. Knobel and others explain: He who observeth the commandment
engageth not with an evil thing, and the wise mind knoweth time and
right. But ידע is never thus used (the author uses for this, בּ עמד),
and the same meaning is to be supposed for the repeated ידע: it means to
arrive at the knowledge of; in the first instance: to suffer, [Eze
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014); cf. [Isa
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008); [Hos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007); in the second, to experience,
[Jos 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#031); [Psa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011). It may also, indeed, be
translated after [Ecc 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#012) : a wise
heart knoweth time and judgment, viz., that they will not fail; but why
should we not render ידע both times fut., since nothing stands in the
way? We do not translate: a wise heart, a wise mind (Knobel), although
this is possible, [Kg1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#012) (cf. [Psa
90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012)), but: the heart of a wise man,
which is made more natural by [Ecc
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002), [Pro
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#023). The heart of a wise man, which
is not hurried forward by dynastic oppression to a selfish forgetfulness
of duty, but in quietness and hope ([Lam
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026)) awaits the interposition of God,
will come to the knowledge that there is an eth, a time, when oppression
has an end, and a mishpat, when it suffers punishment. Well adapted to
the sense in which eth is here used is the remark of Elia Levita in his
Tishbi, that זמן corresponds to the German Zeit and the Romanic tempo,
but עת to the German Ziel and the Romanic termino. The lxx translates
καιρὸν κρίσεως; and, inf act, עת ום is a hendiadys, which, however,
consists in the division of one conception into two. The heart of the
wise man remaining true to duty will come to learn that there is a
terminus and judicial decision, for everything has an end when it falls
under the fate for which it is ripe, especially the sinner.

[Ecclesiastes 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 8:6</span></span>

"For there is a time and decision for everything, for the wickedness of
man becomes too great." From [Ecc 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006)
there follow four clauses with כּי; by such monotonous repetition of one
and the same word, the author also elsewhere renders the exposition
difficult, affording too free a space for understanding the כי as
confirming, or as hypothetical, and for co-ordinating or subordinating
to each other the clauses with כי. Presupposing the correctness of our
exposition of [Ecc 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005), the clause
[Ecc 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006) with כי may be rendered
parenthetically, and that with כי in [Ecc
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006) hypothetically: "an end and
decision the heart of the wise man will come to experience (because for
everything there is an end and decision), supposing that the wickedness
of man has become great upon him, i.e., his burden of guilt has reached
its full measure." We suppose thereby (1) that בּה, which appears from
the accent on the ult. to be an adj., can also be the 3rd pret., since
before ע the tone has gone back to h (cf. [Gen
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#010); [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)), to protect it from being put
aside; but generally the accenting of such forms of עע hovers between
the penult. and the ult., e.g., [Psa
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005); [Psa
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022); [Pro
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#019). Then (2) that עליו goes back to
האדם without distinction of persons, which has a support in [Ecc
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#001), and that thus a great רעה is
meant lying upon man, which finally finds its punishment. But this view
of the relation of the clauses fails, in that it affords no connection
for [Ecc 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007). It appears to be best to
co-ordinate all the four כי as members of one chain of proof, which
reaches its point in [Ecc 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#008), viz.,
in the following manner: the heart of a wise man will see the time and
the judgment of the ruler, laying to his heart the temptation to
rebellion; for (1) as the author has already said, [Ecc
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#017) : "God will judge the righteous
as well as the wicked, for there is with Him a time for every purpose
and for every act;" (2) the wickedness of man (by which, as [Ecc
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#009) shows, despots are aimed at) which
he has committed, becomes great upon him, so that suddenly at once the
judgment of God will break in upon him; (3) he knows not what will be
done; (4) no one can tell him how (quomodo) it, the future, will be, so
that he might in any way anticipate it - the judgment will overwhelm him
unexpectedly and irretrievably: wickedness does not save its possessor.

[Ecclesiastes 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 8:7</span></span>

[Ecc 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007) and [Ecc
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#008) thus continue the For and For:
"For he knoweth not that which shall be; for who can tell him who it
will be? There is no man who has power over the wind, to restrain the
wind; and no one has authority over the day of death; and there is no
discharge in the war; and wickedness does not save its possessor." The
actor has the sin upon himself, and bears it; if it reaches the terminus
of full measure, it suddenly overwhelms him in punishment, and the too
great burden oppresses its bearer (Hitzig, under [Isa
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#020)). This עת ומשׁ comes unforeseen,
for he (the man who heaps up sins) knoweth not id quod fiet; it arrives
unforeseen, for quomodo fiet, who can show it to him? Thus, e.g., the
tyrant knows not that he will die by assassination, and no one can say
to him how that will happen, so that he might make arrangements for his
protection. Rightly the lxx κατηὼς ἔσται; on the contrary, the Targ.,
Hitzig, and Ginsburg: when it will be;

(Note: The Venet. ἐν ᾧ, as if the text had בּאשׁר.)

but כּאשׁר signifies quum, [Ecc 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001);
[Ecc 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#003); [Ecc
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#016), but not quando, which must be
expressed by מתי (Mishnic אימתי, אימת).

Now follows the concluding thought of the four כי, whereby [Ecc
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005) is established. There are four
impossibilities enumerated; the fourth is the point of the enumeration
constructed in the form of a numerical proverb. (1) No man has power
over the wind, to check the wind. Ewald, Hengst., Zckl., and others
understand רוּח, with the Targ., Jerome, and Luther, of the Spirit
(חיים( tir רוח); but man can limit this physically when he puts a
violent termination to life, and must restrain it morally by ruling it,
[Pro 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#032); [Pro
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#028). On the contrary, the wind hrwch
is, after [Ecc 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005), incalculable, and
to rule over it is the exclusive prerogative of Divine Omnipotence, [Pro
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004). The transition to the second
impossibility is mediated by this, that in רוח, according to the usus
loq., the ideas of the breath of animal life, and of wind as the breath
as it were of the life of the whole of nature, are interwoven. (2) No
one has power over the day of death: death, viz., natural death, comes
to a man without his being able to see it before, to determine it, or to
change it. With שׁלּיט there here interchanges שׁלטון, which is rendered
by the lxx and Venet. as abstr., also by the Syr. But as at [Dan
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002), so also above at [Ecc
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#004), it is concr., and will be so also
in the passage before us, as generally in the Talm. and Midrash, in
contradistinction to the abstr., which is שׁלטן, after the forms אבדן,
דּרבן, etc., e.g., Bereshith rabba, c. 85 extr.: "Every king and ruler
שלטון who had not a שולטן, a command (government, sway) in the land,
said that that did not satisfy him, the king of Babylon had to place an
under-Caesar in Jericho," etc.

(Note: Regarding the distinction between שׁלטון and שׁלטן, vid., Baer's
Abodath Jisrael, p. 385.)

Thus: no man possesses rule or is a ruler ... .

A transition is made from the inevitable law of death to the inexorable
severity of the law of war; (3) there is no discharge, no dispensation,
whether for a time merely (missio), or a full discharge (dimissio), in
war, which in its fearful rigour (vid., on the contrary, [Deu
20:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)) was the Persian law. Even so,
every possibility of escape is cut off by the law of the divine
requital; (4) wickedness will not save (מלּט, causative, as always) its
lord (cf. the proverb: "Unfaithfulness strikes its own master") or
possessor; i.e., the wicked person, when the עת ום comes, is hopelessly
lost. Grtz would adopt the reading עשׁר instead of רשע; but the fate of
the רשׁע בּעל, or of the רשׁע, is certainly that to which the
concatenation of thought from [Ecc 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006)
leads, as also the disjunctive accent at the end of the three first
clauses of [Ecc 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#008) denotes. But that
in the words בּעל רשׁע (not בּעלי) a despotic king is thought of
(בּעליו, as at [Ecc 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010), [Ecc
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012); [Ecc
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#012); [Pro
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#027); cf. under [Pro
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#019)), is placed beyond a doubt by the
epilogistic verse:

[Ecclesiastes 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 8:9</span></span>

"All that I have seen, and that, too, directing my heart to all the
labour that is done under the sun: to the time when a man rules over a
man to his hurt." The relation of the clauses is mistaken by Jerome,
Luther, Hengst., Vaih., Ginsburg, and others, who begin a new clause
with עת: "there is a time," etc.; and Zckl., who ventures to interpret
עת וגו as epexegetical of כּל־מע וגו ("every work that is done under the
sun"). The clause ונתון is an adverbial subordinate clause (vid., under
[Ecc 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#002)): et advertendo quidem
animum. עת is accus. of time, as at [Jer
51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033); cf. [Psa
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008), the relation of 'eth asher, like
מק שׁ, [Ecc 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007); [Ecc
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#003). All that, viz., the wisdom of
patient fidelity to duty, the perniciousness of revolutionary
selfishness, and the suddenness with which the judgment comes, he has
seen (for he observed the actions done under the sun), with his own
eyes, at the time when man ruled over man לו לרע, not: to his own the
ruler's injury (Symm., Jerome), but: to the injury (lxx, Theod., τοῦ
κακῶσαι αὐτόν, and thus also the Targ. and Syr.) of this second man; for
after 'eth asher, a description and not a judgment was to be expected.
The man who rules over man to the hurt of the latter rules as a tyrant;
and this whole section, beginning with [Ecc
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001), treats of the right wisdom of
life at a time of tyrannical government.

[Ecclesiastes 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 8:10</span></span>

"And then I have seen the wicked buried, and they came to rest; but away
from the holy place they had to depart, and were forgotten in the city,
such as acted justly: also this is vain." The double particle בּכן
signifies, in such a manner, or under such circumstances; with "I have
seen" following, it may introduce an observation coming under that which
precedes (בכן = Mishnic בּכך), or, with the force of the Lat. inde,
introduce a further observation of that ruler; this temporal
signification "then" (= אז), according to which we have translated, it
has in the Targ. (vid., Levy's W.B.).

(Note: Cf. וכן, [Ch2 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031); Ewald,
354a; Baer's Abodath Jisrael, pp. 384, 386.)

Apparently the observation has two different classes of men in view, and
refers to their fate, contradicting, according to appearance, the
rectitude of God. Opposite to the רשׁ ("the wicked") stand they who are
described as וגו אשׁר: they who have practised what is rightly directed,
what stands in a right relation (vid., regarding כּן, as noun, under
[Pro 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#019)), have brought the morally
right into practice, i.e., have acted with fidelity and honour (כּן
עשׂה, as at [Kg2 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#009)). Koheleth has
seen the wicked buried; ראה is followed by the particip. as predic.
obj., as is שׁמע, [Ecc 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#021); but
קבוּרים is not followed by וּבאים (which, besides not being distinct
enough as part. perfecti, would be, as at [Neh
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#022), part. praes.), but, according
to the favourite transition of the particip. into the finite, Gesen.
134. 2, by ובאוּ, not וּבאוּ; for the disjunctive Reba has the fuller
form with waa; cf. [Isa 45:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#020) with
[Job 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010), and above, at [Ecc
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#023). "To enter in" is here, after
[Isa 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#002), = to enter into peace, come
to rest.

(Note: Cf. Zunz, Zur Gesch. u. Literatur, pp. 356-359.)

That what follows ומם does not relate to the wicked, has been mistaken
by the lxx, Aquila, Symm., Theod., and Jerome, who translate by
ἐπῃνήθησαν, laudabantur, and thus read ישתבחו (the Hithpa., [Psa
106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047), in the pass. sense), a word
which is used in the Talm. and Midrash along with שתכחו.

(Note: The Midrash Tanchuma, Par. יתרו, init., uses both expressions;
the Talm. Gittin 56b, applies the passage to Titus, who took away the
furniture of the temple to magnify himself therewith in his city.)

The latter, testified to by the Targ. and Syr., is without doubt the
correct reading: the structure of the antithetical parallel members is
chiastic; the naming of the persons in 1a a precedes that which is
declared, and in 1a b it follows it; cf. [Psa
70:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#005), [Psa
75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009). The fut. forms here gain, by the
retrospective perfects going before, a past signification. מק קד, "the
place of the holy," is equivalent to מקום קדושׁ, as also at [Lev
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#006). Ewald understands by it the place
of burial: "the upright were driven away (cast out) from the holy place
of graves." Thus e.g., also Zckl., who renders: but wandered far from
the place of the holy ... those who did righteously, i.e., they had to
be buried in graves neither holy nor honourable. But this form of
expression is not found among the many designations of a burial-place
used by the Jews (vid., below, [Ecc
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#005), and Hamburger's Real-Encykl. fr
Bibel u. Talm., article "Grab"). God's-acre is called the "good place,"

(Note: Vid., Tendlau's Sprichw., No. 431.)

but not the "holy place." The "holy place," if not Jerusalem itself,
which is called by Isaiah II ([Isa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#002)), Neh., and Dan., 'ir haqqodesh
(as now el-ḳuds), is the holy ground of the temple of God, the τόπος
ἃγιος ([Mat 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)), as Aquila and
Symm. translate. If, now, we find min connected with the verb halak, it
is to be presupposed that the min designates the point of departure, as
also השׁלך מן, [Isa 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019). Thus not:
to wander far from the holy place; nor as Hitz., who points יהלכוּ: they
pass away (perish) far from the holy place. The subject is the being
driven away from the holy place, but not as if יהלּ were causative, in
the sense of יוליכוּ fo esne, and meant ejiciunt, with an indef. subj.
(Ewald, Heiligst., Elst.), - it is also, [Ecc
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#015); [Ecc
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009), only the intens. of Kal, - but
יהלּ denotes, after [Psa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007); [Job
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028), cf. [Job
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010), the meditative, dull, slow walk
of those who are compelled against their will to depart from the place
which they love ([Psa 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008); [Psa
84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002).). They must go forth (whither,
is not said, but probably into a foreign country; cf. [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017)), and only too soon are they
forgotten in the city, viz., the holy city; a younger generation knows
nothing more of them, and not even a gravestone brings them back to the
memory of their people. Also this is a vanity, like the many others
already registered - this, viz., that the wicked while living, and also
in their death, possess the sacred native soil; while, on the contrary
the upright are constrained to depart from it, and are soon forgotten.
Divine rectitude is herein missed. Certainly it exists, and is also
recognised, but it does not show itself always when we should expect it,
nor so soon as appears to us to be salutary.

[Ecclesiastes 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 8:11</span></span>

"Because judgment against the work of the wicked man is not speedily
executed, for this reason the heart of the children of men is full
within them, to this, that they do evil." The clause with asher is
connected first with the foregoing ־מג havel: thus vain, after the
nature of a perverted world (inversus ordo) events go on, because ...
(asher, as at [Ecc 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#003); [Ecc
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#012); cf. [Deu
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024)); but the following clause with
'al-ken makes this clause with asher reflex. an antecedent of itself
(asher = 'al-asher) - originally it is not meant as an antecedent.פּתגם

(Note: With ג raph. in H. P. and the older edd., as also [Est
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#020); [Dan
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016). Thus also the punctuator
Jekuthil in his En hakore to [Est
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#020).)

(here to be written after נעשׂה, with פ raph., and, besides, also with ג
raph.), in the post-exilian books, is the Persian paigam, Armen. patgam,
which is derived from the ancient Pers. paiti-gama: "Something that has
happened, tidings, news." The Heb. has adopted the word in the general
sense of "sentence;" in the passage before us it signifies the saying or
sentence of the judge, as the Pers. word, like the Arab. nabazn, is used
principally of the sayings of a prophet (who is called peighâm-bar).
Zirkel regards it as the Greek φθέγμα; but thus, also, the words אזמל,
אפּריון strangely agree in sound with σμίλη φορεῖον, without being
borrowed from the Greek. The long a of the word is, as Elst. shows, Eccl
1:20, invariable; also here פּתגם is the constr. To point פּתגם, with
Heiligst. and Burg., is thus unwarrantable. It is more remarkable that
the word is construed fem. instead of mas. For since אין is construed

(Note: Ginsburg points in favour of נעשׂה as fin. to [Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002), but there אכּל is particip.; to
[Jer 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#005), but there יוּכל (if it is
not to be read יכול) represents an attributive clause; and to [Job
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#015), but there the word is rightly
pointed אין, not אין; and this, like the vulg. Arab. laysa, is used as
an emphatic לא.)

neither in the bibl. nor in the Mishnic style with the finite of the
verb, נעשׂה is not the 3rd pret., but the particip. It is not, however,
necessary, with Hitz., to read נישׂה. The foreign word, like the (Arab.)
firdans, παράδεισος, admits of use in the double gend. (Ewald, 174g);
but it is also possible that the fem. נעשׂה is per. attract. occasioned
by הרעה, as Kimchi, Michlol 10a, supposes (cf. besides, under [Ecc
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#015)). מעשׂה is const. governed by
phithgam, and hara'ah is thus obj. gen. The lxx, Syr., and Jerome read
מעשׂי, which would be possible only if phithgam min - after the analogy
of the Heb.-Aram. phrase, niphra' ('ithpera') min, to take one's due of
any one, i.e., to take vengeance on him, to punish him - could mean the
full execution of punishment on any one; but it means here, as Jerome
rightly translates, sententia; impossible, however, with me'ose hara'ah,
sententia contra malos. Hengst. supposes that not only the traditional
text, but also the accentuation, is correct, for he construes: because a
sentence (of the heavenly Judge) is not executed, the work of wickedness
is haste, i.e., speedy. Thus also Dachselt in the Biblia accentuata.
Mercerus, on the contrary, remarks that the accents are not in the first
instance marks of interpunction, but of cantillation. In fact, genit.
word-connections do not exclude the keeping them asunder by distinctives
such as Pashta and Tiphcha, [Isa 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#002),
and also Zakeph, as e.g., [Est 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004).
The lxx well renders: "Therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully
persuaded in them to do evil;" for which Jerome, freely, after Symm.:
absque timore ullo filii hominum perpetrant mala. The heart of one
becomes full to do anything, is = it acquires full courage thereto
(Luzzatto, 590: gli blast l'animo); cf. [Est
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#005) : "Where is he who has his heart
filled to do?" (thus rightly, Keil), i.e., whom it has encourage to so
bold an undertaking. בּהם in itself unnecessarily heightens the
expression of the inwardness of the destructive work (vid., Psychol. p.
151f.). The sentence of punishment does not take effect mehera, hastily
(adv. accus. for bimherah, [Ecc 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#012)),
therefore men are secure, and they give themselves with full, i.e., with
fearless and shameless, boldness to the practice of evil. The author
confirms this further, but not without expressing his own conviction
that there is a righteous requital which contradicts this appearance.

[Ecclesiastes 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 8:12</span></span>

"Because a sinner doeth evil an hundred times, and he becometh old
therein, although I know that it will go well with them that fear god,
that fear before Him: but it will not go well with the wicked, and he
shall not live long, like a shadow; because he feareth not before God."
Ewald (whom Heiligst., Elst., and Zckl. follow), as among the ancients,
e.g., Mendelssohn, translates [Ecc
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012) : "Though a sinner do evil an
hundred times, and live long, yet I know," etc. That an antecedent may
begin with asher is admissible, [Lev
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#022); [Deu
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022); but in the case lying before
us, still less acceptable than at [Ecc
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011). For, in the first place, this
asher of the antecedent cannot mean "although," but only "considering
that;" and in places such as [Ecc 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003),
where this "considering that" may be exchanged with "although," there
follows not the part., but the fut. natural to the concessive clause;
then, in the second place, by this antecedent rendering of asher a
closer connection of [Ecc 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012) and
[Ecc 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012) is indeed gained, but the
mediation of [Ecc 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012) and [Ecc
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011) is lost; in the third place, גם
כי, in the meaning "however" (gam, ὃμως, with affirmative ki), is not
found; not asher, but just this ki gam,

(Note: That גּם is pointed גּם, has its reason in the disjunctive Jethîb
with כי, which is not interchanged with the conjunctive Mahpach. Thus,
[Ecc 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001), כּ מי, and [Ecc
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007), כּ כּי.)

signifies, in the passage before us, as at [Ecc
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#014), εἰ καί, although, - only a
somewhat otherwise applied gam ki, Ewald, 362b, as כי על־כן is a
somewhat otherwise applied על־כן כי. Rightly, Hitzig: "In [Ecc
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012), [Ecc
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011) is again resumed, and it is
explained how tardy justice has such a consequence." The sinner is
thereby encouraged in sinning, because he does evil, and always again
evil, and yet enjoys himself in all the pleasures of long life.
Regarding חטא for חטא, vid., above, p. 641, 1. מאת is = פעמים מאה, an
hundred times, as אחת, [Job 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#005), is =
אחת פעם; Hengst. and others, inexactly: an hundredfold, which would have
required the word מאתים; and falsely, Ginsburg, with the Targ.: an
hundred years, which would have required מאה, scil. שׁנה, [Gen
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017). This centies (Jerome) is, like
מאה, scil. בנים, [Ecc 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003), a round
number for a great many, as at [Pro
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#010), and frequently in the Talm. and
Midrash, e.g., Wajikra rabba, c. 27: "an hundred deeply-breathed sighs
(מאה פעיות) the mother gave forth."

(Note: Vid., Jac. Reifmann in the Zeitsch., המגיד, 1874, p. 342.)

The meaning of לו וּמעריך לו is in general clear: he becomes therein
old. Jerome, improbable: et per patientiam sustentatur, as Mendelssohn:
he experiences forbearance, for they supply 'pow ([Isa
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#009)), and make God the subject. לּו
is in any case the so-called dat. ethic.; and the only question is,
whether the doing of evil has to be taken from רע עשׂה,

(Note: We expect these two words (cf. [Gen
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#012)) with the retrogression of the
tone; but as this ceases, as a rule, with Mercha before Tifcha and
Pashta, [Gen 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#003); [Exo
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#005); [Deu
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#042); [Deu
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#004); [Isa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014) (cf. the penult. accent of יאכל,
[Lev 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010), [Lev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010), [Lev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019), and בּנה, [Gen
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#017), with the ult. accent [Lev
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#014); [Hab
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#012)), so with Mercha sometimes also
before other disjunctives, as here before Tebr.)

as obj. to ומא: he practises it to him long, or whether, which is more
probable, ימים is to be supplied after [Ecc
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#013), so that האריך signifies to live
long, as at [Pro 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#002), to last long;
the dat. ethic. gives the idea of the feeling of contentment connected
with long life: he thereupon sins wantonly, and becomes old in it in
good health.

That is the actual state of the case, which the author cannot conceal
from himself; although, on the other hand, as by way of limitation he
adds ki ... ani, he well knows that there is a moral government of the
world, and that this must finally prevail. We may not translate: that it
should go well, but rather: that it must go well; but there is no reason
not to interpret the fut. as a pure indic.: that it shall go well, viz.,
finally, - it is a postulate of his consciousness which the author here
expresses; that which exists in appearance contradicts this
consciousness, which, however, in spite of this, asserts itself. That to
ליר האל the clause אשׁר מלּ, explaining idem per idem, is added, has
certainly its reason in this, that at the time of the author the name
"fearers of God" \[Gottesfrchitige\] had come into use. "The fearers of
God, who fear before (מלּפני, as at [Ecc
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#014)) Him," are such as are in reality
what they are called.

In [Ecc 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#013), Hitzig, followed by
Elster, Burg., and Zckl., places the division at ימים: like the shadow
is he who fears not before God. Nothing can in point of syntax be said
against this (cf. [Ch1 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015)),
although אשׁר כּצּל, "like the shadow is he who," is in point of style
awkward. But that the author did not use so rude a style is manifest
from [Ecc 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#012), according to which כצל
is rightly referred to ימים ... ולא־. Is then the shadow, asks Hitzig,
because it does not "prolong its days," therefore ימים קצר? How subtle
and literal is this use of ימים! Certainly the shadow survives not a
day; but for that very reason it is short-lived, it may even indeed be
called קצר ימים, because it has not existence for a single day. In
general, qetsel, ὡς σκιά, is applicable to the life of all men, [Psa
144:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004), Wisd. 2:5, etc. It is true of
the wicked, if we keep in view the righteous divine requital, especially
that he is short-lived like the shadow, "because he has no fear before
God," and that in consequence of this want of fear his life is shortened
by his sin inflicting its own punishment, and by the act of God. Asher,
[Ecc 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#013), as at [Ecc
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011), [Ecc
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012), is the relative conj. Also in
[Ecc 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014), אשׁר (שׁ) as a pronoun, and
אשׁר (שׁ) as a conj., are mixed together. After the author has declared
the reality of a moral government of the world as an inalienable fact of
human consciousness, and particularly of his own consciousness, he
places over against this fact of consciousness the actual state of
things partly at least contradicting it.

[Ecclesiastes 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 8:14</span></span>

"There is a vanity which is done on the earth; that there be just men,
to whom it happeneth according to the conduct of the wicked; and that
there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the conduct of
the righteous - I said, that also this is vain." The limiting clause
with ki gam, [Ecc 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012), [Ecc
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#013), is subordinated to the
observation specified in [Ecc 8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010),
and the confirmation of it is continued here in [Ecc
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014). Regarding הגּיע, to happen,
vid., above, p. 639, under נגע. Jerome translates כּם הר by quasi opera
egerint impiorum, and כם הץ by quasi justorum facta habeant; instar
operis ... would be better, such as is conformable to the mode of acting
of the one and of the other; for כ is in the Semitic style of speech a
nomen, which annexes to itself the word that follows it in the genitive,
and runs through all the relations of case. This contradictory
distribution of destiny deceives, misleads, and causes to err; it
belongs to the illusory shadowy side of this present life, it is a
hevel. The concluding clause of this verse: "I said, that also this is
vain," begins to draw the facit from the observation, and is continued
in the verse following.

[Ecclesiastes 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 8:15</span></span>

"And I commended joy, that there is nothing better for a man under the
sun than to eat and drink and enjoy himself; and that this accompanies
him in his labour throughout all the days of his life, which God hath
given him under the sun." We already read the ultimatum, 15a, in a
similar form at [Ecc 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#024); [Ecc
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#012), [Ecc
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022); cf. [Ecc
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#017). With הוּא יל either begins a new
clause, and the fut. is then jussive: "let this accompany him," or it is
subordinate to the foregoing infinitives, and the fut. is then
subjunctive: et ut id eum comitetur. The lxx and other Greeks translate
less appropriately indicat.: καὶ αὐτὸ συμπροσέσται αὐτῷ. Thus also
Ewald, Hengst., Zckl., and others: and this clings to him, which,
however, would rather be expressed by לו יתרון והוא or וה חלקו. The verb
לוה (R. לו, to twist, to bend) does not mean to cling to = to remain,
but to adhere to, to follow, to accompany; cf. under [Gen
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016). The possibility of the meaning,
"to accompany," for the Kal, is supported by the derivatives לויה and
לוּוּי (particularly לוית המתים, convoy of the dead); the verb, however,
in this signification extra-bibl. is found only in Pih. and Hiph.

(Note: Vid., Baer in Abodath Jisrael, p. 39.)

[Ecclesiastes 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 8:16</span></span>

"When I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to view the business which is
done on the earth (for neither day nor night doth he see sleep with his
eyes): then have I seen all the work of God, that a man is unable to
find out the work which is done under the sun: therefore that a man
wearieth himself to seek out, and yet findeth not; and although a wise
man taketh in hand to know, - he is unable to find." A long period
without a premeditated plan has here formed itself under the hand of the
author. As it lies before us, it is halved by the vav in veraithi ("then
I have seen"); the principal clause, introduced by "when I gave," can
nowhere otherwise begin than here; but it is not indicated by the
syntactical structure. Yet in Chr. and Neh. apodoses of כאשׁר begin with
the second consec. modus, e.g., [Ch1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001); [Neh
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001), and frequently; but the author
here uses this modus only rarely, and not (vid., [Ecc
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001), [Ecc
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#007)) as a sign of an apodosis.

We consider, first, the protasis, with the parenthesis in which it
terminates. The phrase נתן את־הלב ל, to direct the heart, to give
attention and effort toward something, we have now frequently met with
from [Ecc 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013) down. The aim is here
twofold: (1) "to know wisdom" (cf. [Ecc
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017)), i.e., to gain the knowledge of
that which is wisdom, and which is to be regarded as wisdom, viz., solid
knowledge regarding the essence, causes, and objects of things; (2) by
such knowledge about that which wisdom is in itself "to see earthly
labour," and - this arises from the combination of the two resolutions -
to comprehend this labour in accordance with the claims of true wisdom
from the point of view of its last ground and aim. Regarding 'inyan,
vid., under [Ecc 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#010). "On the earth"
and "under the sun" are parallel designations of this world.

With גּם כּי begins a parenthetical clause. Ki may also, it is true, be
rendered as at [Ecc 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#017): the labour
on the earth, that he, etc. (Zckl.); but this restlessness, almost
renouncing sleep, is thereby pressed too much into the foreground as the
special obj. of the reuth (therefore Ginsburg introduces "how that");
thus better to render this clause with ki gam, as establishing the fact
that there is 'inyan, self-tormenting, restless labour on the earth.
Thus also איננּוּ is easier explained, which scarcely goes back to
laadam, [Ecc 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#015) (Hitz.), but shows
that the author, by )inyan, has specially men in view. וּבלּ ... גּם is
= גם בי גם בל: as well by day as by night, with the negat. following
(cf. [Num 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#025); [Isa
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#008)): neither by day nor by night;
not only by day, but also in the night, not. "To see sleep" is a phrase
occurring only here; cf. Terence, Heautontim. iii. 1. 82, Somnum hercle
ego hac nocte oculis non vidi meis, for which we use the expression: "In
this whole night my eyes have seen no sleep." The not wishing to sleep,
and not being able to sleep, is such an hyperbole, carrying its
limitation in itself, as is found in Cicero (ad Famil. vii. 30): Fuit
mirifica vigilantia, qui toto suo consulatu somnum non vidit.

With ור, "Then I have seen," begins the apodosis: vidi totum Dei opus
non posse hominem assequi. As at [Ecc
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#024), the author places the obj. in
the foreground, and lets the pred. with ki follow (for other examples of
this so-called antiposis, vid., under [Gen
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004)). He sees in the labour here below
one side of God's work carrying itself forward amid this restless
confusion, and sets forth this work of God, as at [Ecc
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011) (but where the connection of the
thoughts is different), as an object of knowledge remaining beyond the
reach of man. He cannot come to it, or, as מצא properly means, he
reaches not to it, therefore "that a man wearies himself to seek, and
yet finds not," i.e., that the search on the part of a man with all his
endeavours comes not to its aim. אשׁר בכל Ewald's emendation, instead of
the words of the text before us: for all this, that quantumcunque
(Ewald, 362c), which seems to have been approved of by the lxx, Syr.,
and Jerome, is rightly rejected by Hitzig; beshel asher is Heb., exactly
equivalent to Aram. בּדיל דּ, e.g., [Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003); and is rightly glossed by Rashi,
Kimchi, Michlol 47b, by בּשׁביל שׁ and בּעבוּר שׁ. The accent dividing
the verse stands on yimetsa, for to this word extends the first half of
the apodosis, with vegam begins the second. Gam im is = εἰ καί, as gam
ki is = ἐὰν καί. יאמר is to be understood after אם אח, [Ecc
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#023) : also if (although) the wise man
resolves to know, he cannot reach that which is to be known. The
characteristic mark of the wise man is thus not so much the possession
as the striving after it. He strives after knowledge, but the highest
problems remain unsolved by him, and his ideal of knowledge unrealized.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 9](ecc009)

</div>

</div>
