<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est009)  [Next](job000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)

[Esther 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 10:1</span></span>

And King Ahashverosh laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles of
the sea. [Est 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002). And all the acts
of his power and of his might, and the statement of the greatness of
Mordochai to which the king advanced him, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia? The Chethiv
אחשׁרשׁ is a clerical error for אהשׁורשׁ. The word מס, service, here
stands for tribute. As the provinces of the kingdom paid the imposts for
the most part in natural produce, which they had reared or obtained by
the labour of their hands, their labour (agriculture, cattle-keeping,
etc.) was to a certain extent service rendered to the king. The matter
of [Est 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001) seems extraneous to the
contents of our book, which has hitherto communicated only such
information concerning Ahashverosh as was necessary for the complete
understanding of the feast of Purim. "It seems" - remarks Bertheau - "as
thou the historian had intended to tell in some further particulars
concerning the greatness of King Ahashverosh, for the sake of giving his
readers a more accurate notion of the influential position and the
agency of Mordochai, the hero of his book, who, according to [Est
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#004), waxed greater and greater; but
then gave up his intention, and contented himself with referring to the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia, which contained
information of both the power and might of Ahashverosh and the greatness
of Mordochai." There is not, however, the slightest probability in such
a conjecture. This matter may be simply explained by the circumstance,
that the author of this book was using as an authority the book of the
chronicles alluded to in [Est 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002),
and is quite analogous with the mode observed in the books of Kings and
Chronicles by historians both of Babylonian and post-Babylonian days,
who quote from the documents they make use of such events only as seem
to them important with regard to the plan of their own work, and then at
the close of each reign refer to the documents themselves, in which more
may be found concerning the acts of the kings, at the same time
frequently adding supplementary information from these sources, - comp.
e.g., [Kg1 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#030); [Kg1
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#007), [Kg1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#023), [Kg1
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#032); [Kg1
22:47-50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#047); [Kg2
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037); [Ch2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015), - with this difference only,
that in these instances the supplementary notices follow the mention of
the documents, while in the present book the notice precedes the
citation. As, however, this book opened with a description of the power
and glory of King Ahashverosh, but yet only mentioned so much concerning
this ruler of 127 provinces as was connected with the history of the
Jews, its author, before referring to his authorities, gives at its
close the information contained in [Est
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001), from the book of the chronicles
of the kingdom, in which probably it was connected with a particular
description of the power and greatness of Ahashverosh, and probably of
the wars in which he engaged, for the sake of briefly intimating at the
conclusion whence the king derived the means for keeping up the
splendour described at the commencement of the book. This book of the
chronicles contained accounts not only of the power and might of
Ahashverosh, but also a פּרשׁה, a plain statement or accurate
representation of the greatness of Mordochai wherewith the king had made
him great, i.e., to which he had advanced him, and therefore of the
honours of the individual to whom the Jews were indebted for their
preservation. On this account is it referred to. For Mordochai was next
to the king, i.e., prime minister of the king (משׁנה, comp. [Ch2
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#007)), and great among the Jews and
acceptable to the multitude of his brethren, i.e., he was also a great
man among the Jews and was beloved and esteemed by all his
fellow-countrymen (on רצוּי, comp. [Deu
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#024)), seeking the good of his people
and speaking peace to all his race. This description of Mordochai's
position with respect both to the king and his own people has, as
expressive of an exalted frame of mind, a rhetorical and poetic tinge.
Hence it contains such expressions as אחיו רב, the fulness of his
brethren, טּוב דּרשׁ; comp. [Psa
122:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#009); [Jer
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004). On שׁלום דּבּר, comp. [Psa
85:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#009); [Psa
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#020); [Psa
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#003). זרעו in parallelism with עמּו is
not the descendants of Mordochai, or his people, but his race. Comp. on
this signification of זרע, [Kg2 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#001);
[Isa 61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009). The meaning of the two last
phrases is: Mordochai procured both by word and deed the good and
prosperity of his people. And this is the way in which honour and
fortune are attained, the way inculcated by the author of the 34th Psalm
in [Psa 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013), when teaching the fear
of the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Introduction](job000)

</div>
