<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est005)  [Next](est007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 6:0</span></span>

Elevation of Mordochai and Disgrace of Haman - [Est
6:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

The next night the king, being unable to sleep, caused the chronicles of
the kingdom to be read to him. The account of the conspiracy discovered
by Mordochai, which was written therein, was thus brought before him,
and he inquired of his servants whether this man had been rewarded ([Est
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)). On receiving a negative
answer, the king sent to inquire who was in the court; and Haman being
found there thus early, he had him summoned, and asked him: what should
be done to the man in whose honour the king delighteth. Haman, supposing
that the king could intend to honour no one but himself, voted for the
very highest public mark of respect ([Est
6:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#003)), and was then obliged at the
king's command to pay the proposed honour to Mordochai ([Est
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010), [Est
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#011)). From this humiliation his wife
and friends prognosticated his speedy downfall ([Est
6:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012)).

[Esther 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 6:1</span></span>

An unexpected turn of affairs. [Est
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001). On that night between Esther's
first and second banquet, the king's sleep fled, and he commanded to
bring the book of records of the chronicles and to read therefrom. On
הזּכרנות ספר, comp. [Ezr 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015). The
title is here more particularly stated than in [Est
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#023), where the book is briefly
called: The book of the chronicles. נקראים ויּהיוּ, and they (the
chronicles) were read before the king. The participle denotes the long
continuance of this reading.

[Est 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#002)

And it was found written therein among other matters, that Mordochai had
given information concerning the two courtiers who were plotting against
the king's life. This is the conspiracy related [Est
2:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#021). The name Bigthana is in [Est
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#021) written Bigthan.

[Est 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#003)

On this occasion the king asked: What honour and greatness hath been
done to Mordochai for this? על־זה, for giving this information. And the
king's servants answered: Nothing has been shown him. עם עשׂה, to show
any one something, e.g., favour; comp. [Sa2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#006); [Sa2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008), and elsewhere. גּדוּלה,
greatness, i.e., promotion to honour.

[Est 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004)

To repair this deficiency, and to do honour to the man who had done good
service to the king - as the Persian monarchs were accustomed, comp.
Brisson, de reg. Pers. princ. i. c. 135 - he asked, "who is in the
court?" i.e., whether some minister or state functionary were there with
whom he might consult concerning the honour due to Mordochai. Those who
desired an audience with the king were accustomed to appear and wait in
the outer court, until they were summoned into the inner court to
present themselves before the monarch. From this question of the king it
appears that it was already morning. And Haman, it is parenthetically
remarked, was come into the outer court to speak to the king, to hang
Mordochai on the tree which he had prepared.

[Est 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#005)

The attendants inform the king that Haman is in the court; whereupon the
king commands: יבוא, let him come in.

[Est 6:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#006)

As soon as he enters the king asks: What is to be done to the man in
whose honour the king delighteth? i.e., whom he delights to honour. And
Haman, thinking (בּלבּו אמר, to say in one's heart, i.e., to think) to
whom will the king delight to show honour more than to me (ממּבּי יותר,
projecting before me, surpassing me, hence adverbially, beyond me, e.g.,
[Ecc 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#012), comp. [Ecc
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#015); [Ecc
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#011), [Ecc
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#016))? votes immediately for the
greatest possible mark of honour, and says, [Est
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#007).: "As for the man in whose honour
the king delighteth, let them bring the royal apparel with which the
king has been clothed, and a horse on which the king has ridden, and the
king's crown upon his head, and let them deliver this apparel and horse
to one of the chief princes of the king, and let them array (i.e., with
the royal apparel) the man in whose honour the king delighteth, and
cause him to ride upon the horse through the streets of the city, and
proclaim before him: Thus shall it be done to the man in whose honour
the king delighteth." וגו אשׁר אישׁ, [Est
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#007), precedes absolutely, and the
predicate does not follow till והלבּישׁוּ, [Est
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#009), where the preceding subject is
now by an anacoluthon taken up in the accusative (את־האישׁ). Several
clauses are inserted between, for the purpose of enumerating beforehand
all that appertains to such a token of honour: a royal garment, a royal
steed, a crown on the head, and one of the chief princes for the
carrying out of the honour awarded. The royal garment is not only, as
Bertheau justly remarks, such a one as the king is accustomed to wear,
but, as is shown by the perf. לבשׁ, one which the king has himself
already put on or worn. Hence it is not an ordinary state-robe, the
so-called Median apparel which the king himself, the chief princes among
the Persians, and those on whom the king bestowed such raiment were wont
to appear in (Herod. 3.84, 7.116; Xenoph. Cyrop. 8.3.1, comp. with the
note of Baehr on Her. 3.84), but a costly garment, the property of the
sovereign himself. This was the highest mark of honour that could be
shown to a subject. So too was the riding upon a horse on which the king
had ridden, and whose head was adorned with a royal crown. נתּן is perf.
Niph., not 1st pers. pl. imperf. Kal, as Maurer insists; and בּראשׁו
אשׁר refers to the head of the horse, not to the head of the man to be
honoured, as Clericus, Rambach, and most ancient expositors explain the
words, in opposition to the natural sense of - בּראשׁו נתּן אשׁר. We do
not indeed find among classical writers any testimony to such an
adornment of the royal steed; but the circumstance is not at all
improbable, and seems to be corroborated by ancient remains, certain
Assyrian and ancient Persian sculptures, representing the horses of the
king, and apparently those of princes, with ornaments on their heads
terminating in three points, which may be regarded as a kind of crown.
The infin. absol. ונתון is a continuation of the preceding jussive
יביאוּ: and they shall give, let them give the garment - to the hand of
a man, i.e., hand or deliver to him. The garment and horse are to be
delivered to one of the noblest princes, that he may bring them to the
individual to be honoured, may array him in the garment, set him on the
horse, and proclaim before him as he rides through the city, etc. On
הפּרתּמים, comp. [Est 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004), and on the
matter itself, [Gen 41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043). רחוב is
either an open square, the place of public assemblage, the forum, or a
collective signifying the wide streets of the city. יעשׂה כּכה as in
[Deu 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#009) and elsewhere.

[Est 6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010)

This honour, then, the haughty Haman was now compelled to pay to the
hated Jew. The king commanded him: "Make haste, take the apparel and the
horse, as thou hast said," i.e., in the manner proposed by thee, "and do
even so to Mordochai the Jew, that sitteth at the king's gate; let
nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken," i.e., carry out your
proposal exactly. How the king knew that Mordochai was a Jew, and that
he sat in the king's gate, is not indeed expressly stated, but may
easily be supplied from the conversation of the king with his servants
concerning Mordochai's discovery of the conspiracy, [Est
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001). On this occasion the servants
of the king would certainly give him particulars concerning Mordochai,
who by daily frequenting the king's gate, [Est
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#019); [Est
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#009), would certainly have attracted
the attention of all the king's suite. Nor can doubt be case upon the
historical truth of the fact related in this verse by the question:
whether the king had forgotten that all Jews were doomed to destruction,
and that he had delivered them up to Haman for that purpose (J. D.
Mich.). Such forgetfulness in the case of such a monarch as Xerxes
cannot surprise us.

[Esther 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 6:12</span></span>

After this honour had been paid him, Mordochai returned to the king's
gate; but Haman hasted to his house, "sad and with his head covered," to
relate to his wife and friends all that had befallen him. A deeper
mortification he could not have experienced than that of being obliged,
by the king's command, publicly to show the highest honour to the very
individual whose execution he was just about to propose to him. The
covering of the head is a token of deep confusion and mourning; comp.
[Jer 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#004); [Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030). Then his wise men, and Zeresh
his wife, said to him: "If Mordochai, before whom thou hast begun to
fall, be of the seed of the Jews, thou wilt not prevail against him, but
wholly fall before him." לו תוּכל לא, non praevalebis ei, comp. [Gen
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#026). תּפּול נפול with an emphatic
infin. absol.: wholly fall. Instead of the חכמיו אהביו are here named,
or to speak more correctly the friends of Haman are here called his wise
men (magi). Even in [Est 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#014) Haman's
friends figure as those with whom he takes counsel concerning Mordochai,
i.e., as his counsellors or advisers; hence it is very probable that
there were magi among their number, who now "come forward as a genus
sapientum et doctorum (Cicero, divin. i. 23)" (Berth.), and predict his
overthrow in his contest with Mordochai. The ground of this prediction
is stated: "If Mordochai is of the seed of the Jews," i.e., of Jewish
descent, then after this preliminary fall a total fall is inevitable.
Previously ([Est 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#014)) they had not
hesitated to advise him to hang the insignificant Jew; but now that the
insignificant Jew has become, as by a miracle, a man highly honoured by
the king, the fact that the Jews are under the special protection of
Providence is pressed upon them. Ex fato populorum, remarks Grotius, de
singulorum fatis judicabant. Judaei gravissime oppressi a Cyri
temporibus contra spem omnem resurgere caeperant. We cannot, however,
regard as well founded the further remark: de Amalecitis audierant
oraculum esse, eos Judaeorum manu perituros, which Grotius, with most
older expositors, derives from the Amalekite origin of Haman. The
revival of the Jewish people since the times of Cyrus was sufficient to
induce, in the minds of heathen who were attentive to the signs of the
times, the persuasion that this nation enjoyed divine protection.

[Esther 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 6:14</span></span>

During this conversation certain courtiers had already arrived, who
hastily brought Haman to the banquet of the queen, to which he would
certainly go in a less happy state of mind than on the preceding day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 7](est007)

</div>
