<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est006)  [Next](est008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 7:0</span></span>

Haman's Downfall and Ruin - [Est
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001)

At this second banquet the king again inquired of the queen what was her
petition, when she entreated that her life and that of her people might
be spared, for that she and her people were sold to destruction ([Est
7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001)). The king, evidently shocked at
such a petition, asked who was the originator of so evil a deed, and
Esther named the wicked Haman as the enemy ([Est
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#005), [Est
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#006)). Full of indignation at such a
crime, the king rose from the banquet and went into the garden; Haman
then fell down before the queen to entreat for his life. When the king
returned to the house, he saw Haman lying on the couch on which Esther
was sitting, and thinking that he was offering violence to the queen, he
passed sentence of death upon him, and caused him to be hanged on the
tree he had erected for Mordochai ([Est
7:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007)).

[Esther 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 7:1</span></span>

The king and Haman came to drink (לשׁתּות), i.e., to partake of the
משׁתּה, in the queen's apartment.

[Est 7:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#002)

At this banquet of wine the king asked again on the second day, as he
had done on the first ([Est 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#006)): What
is thy petition, Queen Esther, etc.? Esther then took courage to express
her petition. After the usual introductory phrases ([Est
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#003) like [Est
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#008)), she replied: "Let my life be
given me at my petition, and my people at my request." For, she adds as
a justification and reason for such a petition, "we are sold, I and my
people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. And if we had been
sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had been silent, for the enemy is not
worth the king's damage." In this request עמּי is a short expression
for: the life of my people, and the preposition ב, the so-called בּ
pretii. The request is conceived of as the price which she offers or
presents for her life and that of her people. The expression נמכּרנוּ,
we are sold, is used by Esther with reference to the offer of Haman to
pay a large sum into the royal treasury for the extermination of the
Jews, [Est 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#009); [Est
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#007). אלּוּ, contracted after Aramaean
usage from לוּ אם, and occurring also [Ecc
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#006), supposes a case, the realization
of which is desired, but not to be expected, the matter being
represented as already decided by the use of the perfect. The last
clause, וגו הצּר אין כּי, is by most expositors understood as a
reference, on the part of Esther, to the financial loss which the king
would incur by the extermination of the Jews. Thus Rambach, e.g.,
following R. Sal. ben Melech, understands the meaning expressed to be:
hostis nullo modo aequare, compensare, resarcire potest pecunia sua
damnum, quod rex ex nostro excidio patitur. So also Cler. and others.
The confirmatory clause would in this case refer not to החרשׁתּי, but to
a negative notion needing completion: but I dare not be silent; and such
completion is itself open to objection. To this must be added, that שׁוה
in Kal constructed with בּ does not signify compensare, to equalize, to
make equal, but to be equal; consequently the Piel should be found here
to justify the explanation proposed. שׁוה in Kal constructed with בּ
signifies to be of equal worth with something, to equal another thing in
value. Hence Gesenius translates: the enemy does not equal the damage of
the king, i.e., is not in a condition to compensate the damage. But
neither when thus viewed does the sentence give any reason for Esther's
statement, that she would have been silent, if the Jews had been sold
for salves. Hence we are constrained, with Bertheau, to take a different
view of the words, and to give up the reference to financial loss. נזק,
in the Targums, means not merely financial, but also bodily, personal
damage; e.g., [Psa 91:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#007); [Gen
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#011), to do harm, [Ch1
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#022). Hence the phrase may be
understood thus: For the enemy is not equal to, is not worth, the damage
of the king, i.e., not worthy that I should annoy the king with my
petition. Thus Esther says, [Est 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#004) :
The enemy has determined upon the total destruction of my people. If he
only intended to bring upon them grievous oppression, even that most
grievous oppression of slavery, I would have been silent, for the enemy
is not worthy that I should vex or annoy the king by my accusation.

[Est 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#005)

The king, whose indignation was excited by what he had just heard, asks
with an agitation, shown by the repetition of the ויּאמר: "Who is he,
and where is he, whose heart hath filled him (whom his heart hath
filled) to do so?" Evil thoughts proceed from the heart, and fill the
man, and impel him to evil deeds: [Isa
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020); [Ecc
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011); [Mat
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019).

[Est 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#006)

Esther replies: "The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman." Then was
Haman afraid before the king and the queen. נבעת as in [Ch1
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#030); [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017).

[Esther 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 7:7</span></span>

The king in his wrath arose from the banquet of wine, and went into the
garden of the house (קם is here a pregnant expression, and is also
combined with אל־גּנּת); but Haman remained standing to beg for his life
to Queen Esther (על בּקּשׁ as in [Est
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008)), "for he saw that there was evil
determined against him by the king" (כּלה, completed, i.e., determined;
comp. [Sa1 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#007), [Sa1
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#009); [Sa1
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#017), and elsewhere); and hence that
he had no mercy to expect from him, unless the queen should intercede
for him.

[Est 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#008)

The king returned to the house, and found Haman falling (נפל as in [Jos
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#010); [Deu
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001), and elsewhere) at or on the
couch on which Esther was (sitting), i.e., falling as a suppliant at her
feet; and crediting Haman in the heat of his anger with the worst
designs, he cried out: "Shall also violence be done to the queen before
me in the house?" The infin. לכבּושׁ after the interrogatory particle
signifies: Is violence to be done, i.e., shall violence be done? as in
[Ch1 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#002) and elsewhere; comp. Ewald,
237, c. כּבשׁ, to tread under foot, to subdue, used here in the more
general sense, to offer violence. Without waiting for an explanation,
the king, still more infuriated, passes sentence of death upon Haman.
This is not given in so many words by the historian, but we are told
immediately that: "as the word went out of the king's mouth, they
covered Haman's face." הדּבר is not the speech of the king just
reported, but the judicial sentence, the death warrant, i.e., the word
to punish Haman with death. This is unmistakeably shown by the further
statement: they covered Haman's face. The subject is indefinite: the
attendants present. To cover the face was indeed to begin to carry the
sentence of death into execution. With respect to this custom,
expositors appeal to Curtius, vi. 8. 22: Philetam - capite velato in
regiam adducunt; and Cicero, pro C. Rabirio iv. 13: I lictor, colliga
manus, caput obnubito, arbori infelici suspendito.

[Est 7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#009)

Then said Harbonah (already mentioned [Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010)), one of the eunuchs before the
king, i.e., who held office before the king: "Behold also the tree which
Haman made (comp. [Est 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#014)) stands in
the house of Haman." גּם points to the fact that the other eunuchs had
already brought forward various particulars concerning Haman's crime.
Mordochai, who had spoken good for the king, viz., when he gave
information of the conspiracy, [Est
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#022); [Est
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#002). On this tree the king ordered
that Haman should be hanged, and this sentence was executed without
delay. - "And the king's wrath was pacified." With this remark the
narrative of this occurrence is closed, and the history pursues its
further course as follows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 8](est008)

</div>
