<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est003)  [Next](est005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 4:0</span></span>

Mordochai's Mourning on account of the Decree for the Assassination of
the Jews, and His Admonition to Esther to Intercede for Her People -
Esther 4

When Mordochai heard what had happened, he went mourning and lamenting
about the city, and even to the king's gate; and the decree of Haman
occasioned great lamentations among the Jews in all the provinces of the
kingdom ([Est 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)). When Queen
Esther heard through her maids and courtiers of Mordochai's mourning,
she sent him raiment that he might put off his mourning garb, but he
refused to do so. She then sent an eunuch to him to inquire more
particularly as to its cause. Mordochai informed him of all that had
happened, giving him a copy of the decree to show to Esther, and
charging her to entreat the king's favour for her people ([Est
4:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#004)). The queen, however, expressed
her hesitation to go in unto the king unsummoned, but upon Mordochai's
repeated admonition, resolved to make the desired attempt, at the peril
of her life ([Est 4:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#009)).

[Esther 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 4:1</span></span>

Mordochai learnt all that was done, - not only what had been openly
proclaimed, but, as is shown by [Est
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#007), also the transaction between the
king and Haman. Then he rent his garments, put on sackcloth and ashes,
and went out into the midst of the city, making loud and bitter
lamentation. Comp. on the last words, [Gen
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#034). The combination of אפר with שׂק
ילבּשׁ is an abbreviation for: put on a hairy garment and spread ashes
upon his head, in sign of deep grief; comp. [Dan
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#003); [Job
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012), and elsewhere.

[Est 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#002)

And came even before the king's gate, i.e., according to [Est
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#006), the open space before the
entrance to the royal palace; for none might enter wearing mourning.
לבוא אין, there is no entering, i.e., none may enter; comp. Ewald, 321,
c.

[Est 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003)

Also in every province whither the king's decree arrived, there arose a
great mourning among the Jews. אשׁר מקום is an adverbial accusat. loci
in apposition to בּכל־מדינה: in every place to which the word of the
king and his decree reached, i.e., arrived. "Sackcloth and ashes were
spread for many," i.e., many sat in hairy garments upon the earth, where
ashes had been spread; comp. [Isa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005). The meaning is: All the Jews
broke out into mourning, weeping, and lamentation, while many manifested
their grief in the manner above described.

[Esther 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 4:4</span></span>

The matter was made known to Esther by her maids and eunuchs, i.e., by
her attendants. The Chethiv תּבואינה does not elsewhere occur after ו
consecutive, hence the substitution of the Keri תּבואנה. The object of
יגּידוּ: what they told her, is evidently, from what follows, the
circumstance of Mordochai's appearance in deep mourning before the gate
of the palace. On receiving this information the queen fell into
convulsive grief (תּתחלחל, an intensive form of חוּל, to be seized with
painful grief), and sent to Mordochai raiment to put on instead of his
sackcloth, evidently for the purpose of enabling him to enter the palace
and give her the particulars of what had happened. But Mordochai did not
accept the raiment.

[Est 4:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005)

Then Esther sent Hatach, one of the eunuchs whom the king had set before
her, i.e., appointed to attend her, to Mordochai to learn "what this,
and why this," i.e., what was the meaning and the cause of his thus
going about in mourning. When Hatach came forth to him in the open place
of the city before the king's gate, Mordochai told him all that had
happened, and the amount of the money which Haman had promised to weigh
to the king's treasures (i.e., to pay into the royal treasury) for the
Jews, to destroy them, i.e., that it might be permitted him to destroy
the Jews. פּרשׁה, properly a determined, accurate statement, from פּרשׁ
in the sense of to determine clearly (see rem. on [Lev
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#012)); here, according to the
context: amount, sum. This promise of Haman is here emphatically
mentioned as the chief point, not so much for the purpose of raising the
indignation of Esther to the highest pitch (Bertheau), as to show the
resentment and eagerness with which Haman had urged the extermination of
the Jews. The Chethiv יהוּדיּים is the rarer form for יהוּדים, and is
repeated [Est 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001), [Est
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#007),[Est
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#013); [Est
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#015), [Est
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#018).

[Est 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008)

Mordochai also gave Hatach a copy of the decree published in Susa
(בּשׁוּשׁן נתּן, like [Est 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015)) to
show it to the queen. The להּ וּלהגּיד following is more correctly drawn
towards the subsequent וּלצוּות, as by Bertheau, than connected
according to the accentuation with what precedes. Before this infinitive
must be supplied from the context, especially from [Est
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#007) : and Mordochai commissioned him
or told him (Hatach): to declare unto her and to command her (Esther) to
go in unto the king, to entreat him and to make request before him for
her people. על בּקּשׁ, to beg, to make request for something, like [Ezr
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#023), and [Est
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007). עמּהּ על, concerning her people,
i.e., in this connection: for them.

[Esther 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 4:9</span></span>

When Hatach brought this information to Esther, she sent word by him to
Mordochai, that she might not go in unto the king unsummoned. אל מ
תּצוּהוּ, she ordered or commissioned him to Mordochai, viz., to tell
him what follows, [Est 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#011) : "All the
king's servants and the people of the king's provinces (i.e., all the
officers and subjects of the king) know, that with respect to every man
or woman that shall come in unto the king, into the inner court, that is
not called - one (the same) law (is) for him: to put (him) to death,
except him to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he
may live." לואשּׁה כּל־אישׁ precede as nominativi absol.; these are
followed by two relative clauses, which are succeeded by the anacoluthic
predicate דּתו אחת: one and the same law is for him (דּתו, the law
concerning him, the unsummoned appearer, the matter of which is briefly
stated by להמית). In the inner court dwelt the king, seated on his
throne (comp. [Est 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001)). The law, that
every one entering unbidden should be put to death, was subject to but
one exception: וגו מאשׁר לבד, except him to whom the king stretches out,
etc. הושׁיט from ישׁט, appearing only in the present book ([Est
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#002); [Est
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#004)), but frequently in Chaldee and
Syriac, signifies to hold out, to extend, with לו, to or towards him.
שׁרביט, the Aramaic form for שׁבט, sceptre. Access to the royal presence
had been already rendered difficult by an edict issued by Dejokes the
Mede, Herod. 1:9; and among the Persians, none, with the exception of a
few individuals (Herod. iii. 118), were permitted to approach the king
without being previously announced (Herod. iii. 140; Corn. Nepos, Conon,
3). Any one entering unannounced was punished with death, unless the
king, according to this passage, gave it to be understood by stretching
forth his sceptre that he was to remain unpunished. It is, however,
self-evident, and the fact is confirmed by Herod. iii. 140, that any who
desired audience were allowed to announce themselves. Esther might, it
seems, have done this. Why, then, did she not make the attempt? The
answer lies in her further message to Mordochai: "and I have not been
called to come in unto the king these thirty days." From these words it
appears, that formerly she had been more frequently summoned before the
king. Now, however, a whole month had passed without any invitation.
Hence she concluded that the king did not much wish to see her, and for
this reason dared not go unto him unbidden. Evidently, too, she was
unwilling to be announced, because in that case she would have been
obliged immediately to make known to the king the cause of her desiring
this interview. And this she would not venture to do, fearing that,
considering the great favour in which Haman stood with the king, she
might, if she did not provoke his displeasure against herself through
her intercession for her people, at least meet with a rejection of her
petition. To set aside an irrevocable decree sealed with the king's
seal, must have appeared to Esther an impossible undertaking. To have
asked such a thing of the king would have been indeed a bold venture.

[Esther 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 4:12</span></span>

When what Esther said was reported to Mordochai, he sent word back to
her (השׁיב): "Think not in thy soul (with thyself) to be saved in the
house of the king above all the Jews; for if thou holdest thy peace at
this time, recovery and deliverance will arise from another place, but
thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed. And who knows if thou
hast attained to royalty for a time such as this?" By the words: "Think
not that thou wilt be saved in the king's house above all the Jew,"
i.e., alone of all the Jews, Mordochai does not reproach Esther with
being indifferent to the fate of her fellow-countrymen, but rather calls
her attention to the fact that her own life is in danger. This is
evident from the clause: if thou hold thy peace, will not intercede with
the king for thy people, help will come from some other quarter. רוח =
רוחה, [Exo 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#011), ἀναψύξις, deliverance
from oppressive restraint. יעמוד, rise up, arise, used according to
later custom for קוּם, as in [Ch1
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#004). The thought is: the Jewish
nation cannot perish, its continuance is guaranteed by the divine
promise. If thou wilt venture nothing for its safety, God will bring
deliverance, but destruction will come upon thee and thy family. Though
Mordochai neither speaks of God, nor alludes directly to His assistance,
he still grounds his hopes of the preservation of his people upon the
word and promise of God, and Brentius pertinently remarks: habes hic
excellentem ac plane heroicam Mardochaei fidem, qua in praesentissimo ac
periculosissimo discrimine videt futuram liberationem. The last clause
of [Est 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#014) is by most expositors
understood as saying: and who knows whether thou hast not for a time
like this attained to royalty? This agrees with the sense, but cannot be
verbally justified, for אם does not mean whether not. The sentence
contains an aposiopesis. The clause depending on the conditional אם is
unspoken, but understood. Besides, הגּעתּ is not in the imperfect. Hence
it can only be translated: Who knows, if thou hadst not attained to
royalty at or for such a time? Then the clause omitted would be: what
thou then wouldst have done. יודע מי more frequently has the meaning of
perhaps; and Mordochai says: perhaps thou hast attained to royalty (to
the dignity of queen) for a time like this, sc. to use thy position for
the deliverance of thy people. In the turn thus given to the sentence it
contains the most urgent injunction to Esther to use her high position
for the preservation of her fellow-countrymen.

[Esther 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 4:15</span></span>

This pressing monition produced its result. Esther returned answer to
Mordochai: "Go, gather together all the Jews that are found in Susa, and
fast ye for me: I also and my maidens will fast; and so will I go to the
king against the law; and if I perish, I perish." Esther resolves to go
to the king unsummoned, but begs Mordochai and all the Jews to unite in
a three days' fast, during which she and her maidens will also fast, to
seek by earnest humiliation God's gracious assistance in the step she
proposes to take, for the purpose of averting the threatened destruction
of her people. "Though 'God' and 'prayer' are not here mentioned, it is
yet obviously assumed that it was before God that the Jews were to
humble themselves, to seek His help, and to induce Him to grant it. [Kg1
21:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027); [Joe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014); [Jon
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005)." (Berth.). To designate the
strictness of this fasting, the words: "neither eat nor drink," are
added. The "three days, night and day," are not to be reckoned as three
times twenty-four hours, but to be understood of a fast which lasts till
the third day after that on which it begins; for according to [Est
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001), Esther goes to the king on the
third day. Comp. the similar definition of time, [Jon
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001). The addition "day and night"
declares that the fast was not to be intermitted. וּבכן, and in thus,
i.e., in this state of fasting. כּדּת לא אשׁר: which is not according to
law. לא אשׁר is used, like the Aramaean form לא דּי, in the sense of
without (comp. Ewald, 222, c): without according to law = contrary to
law. The last words: "if I perish, I perish," etc., are the expression
not of despair, but of resignation, or perfect submission to the
providence of God; comp. [Gen 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014).

[Esther 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">est 4:17</span></span>

And Mordochai went his way, i.e., from the place before the court of the
king, to do what the queen had commanded him to do.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 5](est005)

</div>
