<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](neh013)  [Next](est001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 0:0</span></span>

The Book of Esther

Introduction

1\. Name, Contents, Object, and Unity of the Book of Esther

This book bears the name of אסתּר or אסתּר מגלּת, book of Esther, also
briefly that of מגלּה with the Rabbis, from Esther the Jewess,
afterwards raised to the rank of queen, to whom the Jews were indebted
for their deliverance from the destruction with which they were
threatened, as related in this book.

Its contents are as follows: - Ahashverosh, king of Persia, gave, in the
third year of his reign, a banquet to the grandees of his kingdom at
Susa; and on the seventh day of this feast, when his heart was merry
with wine, required the Queen Vashti to appear before his guests and
show her beauty. When she refused to come at the king's commandment, she
was divorced, at the proposal of his seven counsellors; and this divorce
was published by an edict throughout the whole kingdom, lest the example
of the queen should have a bad effect upon the obedience of other wives
to their husbands (Est 1). When the king, after his wrath was appeased,
began again to feel a tenderness towards his divorced wife, the most
beautiful virgins in the whole kingdom were, at the advice of his
servants, brought to the house of the women at Susa, that the king might
choose a wife at his pleasure. Among these virgins was Esther the
Jewess, the foster-daughter and near relative of Mordochai, a Benjamite
living in exile, who, when brought before the king, after the customary
preparation, so pleased him, that he chose her for his queen. Her
intercourse with Mordochai continued after her reception into the royal
palace; and during his daily visits in the gate of the palace, he
discovered a conspiracy against the life of the king, and thus rendered
him an important service (Est 2). Ahashverosh afterwards made Haman, an
Agagite, his prime minister or grand visier, and commanded all the
king's servants to pay him royal honours, i.e., to bow down before him.
When this was refused by Mordochai, Haman's indignation was so great,
that he resolved to destroy all the Jews in the whole empire. For this
purpose he appointed, by means of the lot, both the month and day; and
obtained from the king permission to prepare an edict to all the
provinces of the kingdom, appointing the thirteenth day of the twelfth
month for the extermination of the Jews throughout the whole realm ([Est
3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001)). Mordochai apprised Queen
Esther of this cruel command, and so strongly urged her to apply to the
king on behalf of her people, that she resolved, at the peril of her
life, to appear before him unbidden. When she was so favourably received
by him, that he promised beforehand to grant whatever she had to
request, even to the half of his kingdom, she first entreated that the
king and Haman should eat with her that day. During the repast, the king
inquired concerning her request, and she answered that she would declare
it on the following day, if the king and Haman would again eat with her
([Est 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)). Haman, greatly elated at
this distinction, had the mortification, on his departure from the
queen, of beholding Mordochai, who did not rise up before him, in the
gate of the palace; and returning to his house, formed, by the advice of
his wife and friends, the resolution of hanging Mordochai next day upon
a gallows; for which purpose he immediately caused a tree fifty cubits
high to be prepared ([Est 5:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#009)).
Next night, however, the king, being unable to sleep, caused the records
of the kingdom to be read to him, and was thereby reminded of the
obligation he was under to Mordochai. When, on this occasion, he learnt
that Mordochai had as yet received no reward for his service, he sent
for Haman, who had resorted thus early to the court of the palace for
the purpose of obtaining the royal permission for the execution of
Mordochai, and asked him what should be done to the man whom the King
desired to honour. Haman, thinking his honour concerned himself,
proposed the very highest, and was by the king's command obliged, to his
extreme mortification, himself to pay this honour to Mordochai, his wife
and friends interpreting this occurrence as an omen of his approaching
ruin ([Est 6:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)). When the king and
Haman afterwards dined with Esther, the queen begged for her life and
that of her people, and pointed to Haman as the enemy who desired to
exterminate the Jews. Full of wrath at this information, the king went
into the garden of the palace; while Haman, remaining in the room, fell
at the feet of the queen to beg for his life. When the king, returning
to the banquet chamber, saw Haman lying on the queen's couch, he thought
he was offering violence to the queen, passed sentence of death upon
him, caused him to be hanged upon the gallows he had erected for
Mordochai ([Est 7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001)), and on the
same day gave his house to the queen, and made Mordochai his prime
minister in the place of Haman ([Est
8:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001)). Hereupon Esther earnestly
entreated the reversal of Haman's edict against the Jews; and since,
according to the laws of the Medes and Persians, an edict issued by the
king and sealed with the seal-royal could not be repealed, the king
commanded Mordochai to prepare and publish throughout the whole kingdom
another edict, whereby the Jews were permitted, to their great joy and
that of many other inhabitants of the realm ([Est
8:3-17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003)), not only to defend themselves
against the attacks of their enemies on the appointed day, but also to
kill and plunder them. In consequence of this, the Jews assembled on the
appointed day to defend their lives against their adversaries; and being
supported by the royal officials, through fear of Mordochai, they slew
in Susa 500, and in the whole kingdom 75,000 men, besides 300 more in
Susa on the day following, but did not touch the goods of the slain.
They then celebrated in Susa the fifteenth, and in the rest of the
kingdom the fourteenth, day of the month Adar, as a day of feasting and
gladness (Est 9:1-19). Hereupon Mordochai and Queen Esther sent letters
to all the Jews in the kingdom, in which they ordered the yearly
celebration of this day, by the name of the feast of Purim, i.e., lots,
because Haman had cast lots concerning the destruction of the Jews ([Est
9:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020)). In conclusion, the documents
in which are described the acts of Ahashverosh and the greatness of
Mordochai, who had exerted himself for the good of his people, are
pointed out ([Est 10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)).

From this glance at its contents, it is obvious that the object of this
book is to narrate the events in remembrance of which the feast of Purim
was celebrated, and to transmit to posterity an account of its origin.
The aim of the entire contents of this book being the institution of
this festival, with which it concludes, there can be no reasonable doubt
of its integrity, which is also generally admitted. Bertheau, however,
after the example of J. D. Michaelis, has declared the sections [Est
9:20-28](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020) and [Est
9:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#029) to be later additions,
incapable of inclusion in the closely connected narrative of Est 1-9:19,
and regards [Est 10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001) as differing
from it both in matter and language. The sections in question are said
to be obviously distinct from the rest of the book. But all that is
adduced in support of this assertion is, that the words קיּם, to
institute ([Est 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#021), [Est
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#027), [Est
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#029), [Est
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#031)), סוּף, to come to an end, to
cease ([Est 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#028)), the plural צומות,
fasts ([Est 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#031)), and an allusion to
the decree in a direct manner, occur only in these sections. In such a
statement, however, no kind of consideration is given to the
circumstance that there was no opportunity for the use of קיּם סוּף and
the plur. צומות in the other chapters. Hence nothing remains but the
direct introduction of the decree, which is obviously insufficient to
establish a peculiarity of language. Still weaker is the proof offered
of diversity of matter between [Est
9:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020) and Est 9-9:19; Bertheau being
unable to make this appear in any way, but by wrongly attributing to the
word קיּם the meaning: to confirm a long-existing custom.

2\. Historical Character of the Book of Esther

The feast of Purim is mentioned, 2 Macc. 15:36, under the name of
Μαρδοχαΐκή ἡμέρα, as a festival existing in the time of Nicanor (about
160 b.c.); and Josephus tells us, Ant. xi. 6. 13, that it was kept by
the Jews during a whole week. Now the institution of this festival must
have been based upon an historical event similar to that related in this
book. Hence even this is sufficient to show that the assertion of
Semler, Oeder, and others, that this book contains a fictitious parable
(confictam esse universam parabolam), is a notion opposed to common
sense. For if this festival has been from of old celebrated by the Jews
all over the world, it must owe its origin to an occurrence which
affected the whole Jewish people, and the names Purim and Mordochai's
day are a pledge, that the essential contents of this book are based
upon an historical foundation. The name Purim (i.e., lots), derived from
the Persian, can be suitably explained in no other manner than is done
in this book, viz., by the circumstance that lots were cast on the fate
of the Jews by a Persian official, who contemplated their extermination,
for the purpose of fixing on a favourable day for this act; while the
name, Mordochai's day, preserves the memory of the individual to whom
the Jews were indebted for their deliverance. Hence all modern critics
admit, that at least an historical foundation is thus guaranteed, while
a few doubt the strictly historical character of the whole narrative,
and assert that while the feat of Purim was indeed celebrated in
remembrance of a deliverance of the Jews in the Persian empire, it was
the existence of this festival, and the accounts given by those who
celebrated it, which gave rise to the written narrative of the history
of Esther (thus Bertheau). On the other hand, the historical character
of the whole narrative has been defended not only by Hvernick (Einl.),
M. Baumgarten (de fide libri Estherae, 1839), and others, but also, and
upon valid grounds, by Staehelin (spec. Einl. in die kanon. BB. des A.
T. 51f.). The objections that have been raised to its credibility have
arisen, first from the habit of making subjective probability the
standard of historical truth, and next from an insufficient or imperfect
attention to the customs, manners, and state of affairs at the Persian
court on the one hand, or an incorrect view of the meaning of the text
on the other. When, e.g., Bertheau as well as Bleek (Einleit. p. 286)
says, "The whole is of such a nature that the unprejudiced observer
cannot easily regard it as a purely historical narrative," Cleric.
(dissert. de scriptoribus librr. hist. 10) far more impartially and
correctly decides: Mirabilis sane est et παράδοξος (quis enim neget?)
historia, sed multa mirabilia et a moribus nostris aliena olim apud
orientales ut apud omnes alios populos contigerunt. The fact that King
Ahashverosh should grant his grand vizier Haman permission to publish an
edict commanding the extermination of the Jews throughout his empire, is
not challenged by either Bleek or Bertheau; and, indeed, we need not go
so far as the despotic states of the East to meet with similar
occurrences; the Parisian massacre of St. Bartholomew being a sufficient
proof that the apparently incredible may be actual reality.

(Note: Rosenmller (bibl. Altertumsk. i. 1, p. 379) calls to mind
Mithridates king of Pontus, who, when at war with the Romans, secretly
issued an order to all the satraps and local authorities his realm, to
assassinate all Romans, without distinction of age or sex, on an
appointed day, in consequence of which 80,000 perished on one day; also
the pasha of Zaid Mehmed in the sixteenth century, who surprised the
nation of the Druses, and put to death all whom he met with (comp.
Arvieux, merkw. Nachr. i. p. 391); and then continues: "It is almost
more incredible that a ruler should, from the blindness of religious
zeal, either execute or drive out of his realm 100,000 of his most
diligent and prosperous subjects; yet the history of modern Europe
offers us, in Ferdinand the Catholic, who chased 300,000 Jews from
Spain, and Louis XIV, who, after putting some thousands of Protestants
to death, banished hundreds of thousands from France, examples of such
incredible events.")

And all the other statements of this book, however seemingly
unaccountable to us, become conceivable when we consider the character
of King Ahashverosh, i.e., as is now generally admitted, of Xerxes, who
is described by Greek and Roman historians as a very luxurious,
voluptuous, and at the same time an extremely cruel tyrant. A despot
who, after his army had been hospitably entertained on its march to
Greece, and an enormous sum offered towards defraying the expenses of
the war, by Pythius the rich Lydian, could be betrayed into such fury by
the request of the latter, that of his five sons who were in the army
the eldest might be released, to be the comfort of his declining years,
as to command this son to be hewn into two pieces, and to make his army
pass between them (Herod. vii. c. 37-39; Seneca, de ira, vii. 17); a
tyrant who could behead the builders of the bridge over the Hellespont,
because a storm had destroyed the bridge, and command the sea to be
scourged, and to be chained by sinking a few fetters (Herod. vii. 35); a
debauchee who, after his return from Greece, sought to drive away his
vexation at the shameful defeat he had undergone, by revelling in
sensual pleasures (Herod. ix. 108f.); so frantic a tyrant was capable of
all that is told us in the book of Esther of Ahashverosh.

Bleek's objections to the credibility of the narrative consist of the
following points: a. That it is inconceivable that if the Persian despot
had formed a resolution to exterminate all the Jews in his kingdom, he
would, even though urged by a favourite, have proclaimed this by a royal
edict published throughout all the provinces of his kingdom twelve
months previously. In advancing this objection, however, Bleek has not
considered that Haman cast lots for the appointment of the day on which
his project was to be carried into execution; the Persians being,
according to Herod. iii. 128, Cyrop. i. 6. 46, frequently accustomed to
resort to the lot; while not only in Strabo's time, but to the present
day, also, everything is with them decided according to the dicta of
soothsayers and astrologers. If, then, the lot had declared the day in
question to be a propitious one for the matter contemplated, the haughty
Haman would not reflect that the premature publication of the edict
would afford a portion of the Jews the opportunity of escaping
destruction by flight. Such reflections are inconsistent with absolute
confidence in the power of magical decisions; and even if what was
possible had ensued, he would still have attained his main object of
driving the Jews out of the realm, and appropriating their possessions.
- b. That at this time Judea, which was then almost wholly reinhabited
by Jews, was among the provinces of Persia, and that hence the king's
edict commanded the extermination of almost all the population of that
country. This, he says, it is difficult to believe; and not less so,
that when the first edict was not repealed, the second, which granted
the Jews permission to defend themselves against their enemies, should
have resulted everywhere in such success to the Jews, even though, from
fear of Mordochai the new favourite, they were favoured by the royal
officials, that all should in all countries submit to them, and that
they should kill 75,000 men, equally with themselves subjects of the
king. To this it may be replied: that Judea was, in relation to the
whole Persian realm, a very unimportant province, and in the time of
Xerxes, as is obvious from the book of Ezra, by no means "almost
wholly," but only very partially, inhabited by Jews, who were, moreover,
regarded with such hostility by the other races dwelling among them,
that the execution of the decree cannot appear impossible even here.
With regard to the result of the second edict, the slaughter of 75,000
men, this too is perfectly comprehensible. For since, according to
Medo-Persian law, the formal repeal of a royal edict issued according to
legal form was impracticable, the royal officials would understand the
sense and object of the second, and not trouble themselves much about
the execution of the first, but, on the contrary, make the second
published by Mordochai, who was at that time the highest dignitary in
the realm, their rule of action for the purpose of ensuring his favour.
Round numbers, moreover, of the slain are evidently given; i.e., they
are given upon only approximate statements, and are not incredibly high,
when the size and population of the kingdom are considered. The Persian
empire, in its whole extent from India to Ethiopia, must have contained
a population of at least 100,000,000, and the number of Jews in the
realm must have amounted to from two to three millions. A people of from
two to three millions would include, moreover, at least from 500,000 to
700,000 capable of bearing arms, and these might in battle against their
enemies slay 75,000 men. Susa, the capital, would not have been less
than the Stamboul of the present day, and would probably contain at
least half a million of inhabitants; and it by no means surpasses the
bounds of probability, that in such a town 500 men should be slain in
one day, and 300 more on the following, in a desperate street fight. Nor
can the numbers stated by looked upon as too high a computation. The
figures are only rendered improbable by the notion, that the Jews
themselves suffered no loss at all. Such an assumption, however, is by
no means justified by the circumstance, that such losses are
unmentioned. It is the general custom of the scriptural historians to
give in their narratives of wars and battles only the numbers of the
slain among the vanquished foes, and not to mention the losses of the
victors. We are justified, however, in supposing that the war was of an
aggravated character, from the fact that it bore not only a national,
but also a religious character. Haman's wrath against Mordochai was so
exasperated by the information that he was a Jews, that he resolved upon
the extermination of the people of Mordochai, i.e., of all the Jews in
the realm ([Est 3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#004)). To obtain the
consent of the king, he accused the Jews as a scattered and separated
people, whose laws were different from the laws of all other nations, of
not observing the laws of the king. This accusation was, "from the
standpoint of Parseeism, the gravest which could have been made against
the Jews" (Haev. Einl. ii. 1, p. 348). The separation of the Jews from
all other people, a consequence of the election of Israel to be the
people of God, has at all times inflamed and nourished the hatred of the
Gentiles and of the children of this world against them. This hatred,
which was revived by the edict of Haman, could not be quenched by the
counter-edict of Mordochai. Though this edict so inspired the royal
officials with fear of the powerful minister, that they took part with,
instead of against the Jews, yet the masses of the people, and
especially the populations of towns, would not have paid such respect to
it as to restrain their hatred against the Jews. The edict of Mordochai
did not forbid the execution of that of Haman, but only allowed the Jews
to stand up for their lives, and to slay such enemies as should attack
them ([Est 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011)). The heathen were not
thereby restrained from undertaking that fight against the Jews, in
which they were eventually the losers.

When, however, c. Bleek finds it "utterly unnatural" that, after the
Jews had slain 500 of their foes in one day in Susa, the king should, at
the request of Esther, whose vengeance and thirst of blood were not yet
appeased, have granted an edict that the slaughter should be renewed on
the following day, when no attack upon the Jews was permitted, his
objection rests upon a sheer misunderstanding of the whole affair. The
queen only requested that "it should be granted to the Jews in Susa to
do to-morrow also, according to the decree of to-day" ([Est
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#013)), i.e., "to stand for their
lives, and slay all who should assault them" ([Est
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011)). This petition presupposes that
the heathen population of Susa would renew the attack upon the Jews on
the next day. Hence it is evident that Bleek's assertion, that the
heathen were not allowed on that day to renew their attack upon the
Jews, is an erroneous notion, and one at variance with the text.
Together with this erroneous assumption, the reproach of vengeance and
bloodthirstiness raised against Esther is also obviated. Her foresight
in securing the lives of her people against renewed attacks, betrays
neither revenge nor cruelty. Unless the heathen population had attacked
the Jews on the second day, the latter would have had no opportunity of
slaying their foes. How little, too, the Jews in general were influenced
by a desire of vengeance, is shown by the fact so repeatedly brought
forward, that they laid not their hand on the spoil of the slain ([Est
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#009), [Est
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#015)), though this was granted them by
the royal edict ([Est 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011)). - d.
Bleek's remaining objections are based partly upon misrepresentations of
the state of affairs, and partly upon erroneous notions of Eastern
customs.

(Note: E.g., the remark that, though all Susa was thrown into
consternation by the edict of Haman, it rejoiced greatly at the second;
where Bleek has inserted all to make the matter appear incredible by
exaggeration. In the text we only read "the city of Susa was perplexed"
([Est 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015)), "the city of Susa
rejoiced and was glad" ([Est 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015));
i.e., in the city of Susa there was in the one instance perplexity, in
the other rejoicing. Also that the king published a special decree in
all the provinces of his kingdom, that every man should be master in his
own house, - a misinterpretation of the passage [Est
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#022); see the explanation of this
verse. Finally, the difficulty that Esther, as queen-consort, should
have concealed her nationality so long as is stated in the narrative,
can exist only for those unacquainted with the state of affairs in the
harem of an Oriental prince. The Persian monarchs, who had a fresh
concubine for each day, would certainly be ignorant of the descent of
each; and though, according to Herod. 3:84, the queens were generally of
the race of Achaemenides, yet the same historian also relates (3:31) of
Cambyses, that the royal δικασταί declared to him, with respect to his
marriage with a sister, that: τῷ βασιλεύοντι Περσέων ἐξεῖναι ποιέειν τὸ
ἂν βούληται. The case, too, of a concubine being raised to the rank of
queen by a Persian monarch is not inconceivable.)

If, then, all the objections raised against the credibility of the
narrative may by thus disposed of, we are perfectly justified in
adhering to a belief in the historical character of the whole book,
since even Bleek cannot deny, that some at least of "the customs and
arrangements of the Persian court are both vividly and faithfully
depicted." To this must be added the statement of the names of the
individuals who take part in the narrative, e.g., the courtiers, [Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010); the seven princes of Persia,
[Est 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014); the keeper of the women's
houses, [Est 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#008) and [Est
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#014); the ten sons of Haman, [Est
9:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#007), and others; and the reference
to the book of the chronicles of the Medes and Persians, as the
documents in which not only the acts of Ahashverosh, but also the
greatness of Mordochai, were written ([Est
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002)). As the numerous and otherwise
wholly unknown names could not possibly be invented, so neither can the
reference to the book of the chronicles be a mere literary fiction.
When, therefore, Bertheau thinks, that the writer of this book, by thus
bringing forward so many small details, by stating the names of
otherwise unknown individuals, and especially by giving so much accurate
information concerning Persian affairs and institutions, - the
correctness of which is in all respects confirmed both by the statements
of classical authors and our present increased knowledge of Oriental
matters, - certainly proves himself acquainted with the scene in which
the narrative takes place, with Persian names and affairs, but not
possessed also of an historical knowledge of the actual course of
events; we can perceive in this last inference only the unsupported
decision of a subjectivistic antipathy to the contents of the book.

3\. Authorship and Date of the Book of Esther

No certain information concerning the author of this book is obtainable.
The talmudic statement in Baba bathr. 15. 1, that it was written by the
men of the Great Synagogue, is devoid of historical value; and the
opinion of Clem. Al., Aben Ezra, and others, that Mordochai was its
author, as is also inferred from [Est
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020) and [Est
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#023) by de Wette, is decidedly a
mistaken one, - the writer plainly distinguishing in this passage
between himself and Mordochai, who sent letters concerning the feast of
Purim to the Jews in the realm of Persia. Other conjectures are still
more unfounded. The date, too, of its composition can be only
approximately determined. The opinion that in [Est
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#019) the long existence of the feast
of Purim is presupposed, cannot be raised to the rank of a certainty.
Nor does the book contain allusions pointing to the era of the Greek
universal monarchy. This is admitted by Sthelin, who remarks, p. 178:
"The most seemingly valid argument in support of this view, viz., that
Persian customs are explained in this book, [Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001), [Est
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013) (for [Est
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#008), usually cited with these
passages, is out of the question, and is the king's speech in answer to
[Est 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#005)), is refuted by the
consideration, that the book was written for the information of
Palestinian Jews; while Hvernick, ii. 1, p. 361, refers to a case in
Bohaeddin, in which this biographer of Saladin, p. 70, though writing
for Arabs, explains an Arabian custom with respect to prisoners of war."
On the other hand, both the reference to the chronicles of the Medes and
Persians ([Est 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002)), and the intimate
acquaintance of the writer with Susa and the affairs of the Persian
monarchy, decidedly point to the fact, that the date of its composition
preceded the destruction of the Persian empire, and may perhaps have
been that of Artaxerxes I or Darius Nothus, about 400 b.c. The omission,
moreover, of all reference to Judah and Jerusalem, together with the
absence not only of theocratic notions, but of a specially religious
view of circumstances, favour the view that the author lived not in
Palestine, but in the more northern provinces of the Persian realm,
probably in Susa itself. For though his mode of representing events,
which does not even once lead him to mention the name of God, is not
caused by the irreligiousness of the author, but rather by the
circumstance, that he neither wished to depict the persons whose acts he
was narrating as more godly than they really were, nor to place the
whole occurrence - which manifests, indeed, the dealings of Divine
Providence with the Jewish people, but not the dealings of Jahve with
the nation of Israel - under a point of view alien to the actors and the
event itself, yet a historian acquainted with the theocratic ordinances
and relations of Judah would scarcely have been capable of so entirely
ignoring them.

4\. The Canonicity of the Book of Esther

The book of Esther has always formed a portion of the Hebrew canon. It
is included also among the twenty-two books which, according to
Josephus, c. Ap. i. 8, were acknowledged by the Jews as δικαίως
πεπιστευμένα. For Josephus, who repeatedly asserts, that the history of
the Hebrews from Moses to Artaxerxes was written by the prophets and
worthy to be believed, relates also in his Jewish Antiquities (l. xi. c.
6) the history of Esther, Mordochai, and Haman. Certain critics have
indeed desired to infer, from the statement in the Talmud, Jerush.
Megill. 70. 4, that "among the eighty elders who contended against the
institution of the feast of Purim by Esther and Mordochai as an
innovation in the law, there were more than thirty prophets," that the
Jews did not formerly attribute the same authority to the book of Esther
as to the other Scriptures (Movers, loci quidam historiae canonis V. T.
p. 28; Bleek, Einl. p. 404); but even Bertheau doubts whether this
passage refers to the whole book of Esther. For it treats unambiguously
only of the fact [Est 9:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#029), which
is very specially stated to have been an institution of Esther and
Mordochai, and concerning which differences of opinion might prevail
among the Rabbis. The further remark of Movers, l.c., that the oldest
patristic testimonies to the inclusion of this book in the canon are of
such a nature, ut ex iis satis verisimiliter effici possit, eum tunc
recens canoni adjectum esse, because it occupies the last place in the
series of O.T. writings given by Origen, Epiphanius, and Jerome,
according to Jewish authority, and because the canons of the Greek
Church, which more accurately enumerate the books received by the
synagogue, do not contain the book of Esther, is also incorrect. For
(1.) the lists of the canonical books of the O.T. given by Origen (in
Euseb. hist. eccl. vi. 25) and Epiphanius give these books not according
to their order in the Hebrew canon, but to that of the Alexandrinian
version, while only Jerome places the book of Esther last. (2.) In the
lists of the Greek Church this book is omitted only in that given in
Euseb. hist. eccl. iv. 26, from the eclogae of Melito, Bishop of Sardis,
and in that of Gregory of Nazianzen, while it is included in those of
Origen and Cyril of Jerusalem; a circumstance which leads to the
supposition that it might have been omitted by an oversight in
transcription in those of Origen and Epiphanius. Only Athanasius (in his
epist. fest.), Amphilochius (in the Jambi ad Seleuc.), and the author of
the Synopsis Athanasius, who is supposed not to have lived till the
tenth century, reckon it among the apocryphal books; while Junilius (of
the sixth century) remarks that there were many in his days who doubted
the canonicity of the book of Esther. From this it is sufficiently
obvious, that these doubts were not founded upon historical tradition,
but proceeded only from subjective reasons, and were entertained because
offence was taken, first at the non-mention of the name of God in this
book, and then at the confessedly apocryphal additions mingled with this
book in the Alexandrinian translation. The author of the Synopsis Ath.,
moreover, expressly says that the Hebrews regarded this book as
canonical. The well-known harsh judgments of Luther in his work de servo
arbitrio: liber Esther, quamvis hunc habent in canone, dignior omnibus,
me judice, qui extra canonem haberetur, and in his Table Talk, are
purely subjective.

(Note: "And while the Doctor was correcting the second book of Maccabees
he said: I am so hostile to this book and that of Esther, that I wish
they did not exist; they are too Judaizing, and contain many heathenish
improprieties.")

Luther could never reconcile himself to this book, because he felt that
the saving truths of Scripture were absent from it. The later Jews, on
the contrary, exalted it even far above the Thorah and the prophets.

(Note: Comp. the collection of rabbinical eulogies of this book in Aug.
Pfeiffer, thes. herm. p. 597f., and in Carpzov's introd. i. p. 366.)

Later Protestant theologians, too, have, in their efforts to justify the
canonicity of this book, over-estimated its canonical value, and
attributed to the history therein related, Messianic references which
are foreign to its meaning (comp. the verdict given upon it in Carpzov's
Introd. in V. T. p. 369f.). The moderate opinion of Brentius is: hic
liber utilis est ad docendam fidem et timorem Dei, ut pii non frangantur
adversis, sed invocantes nomen Domini ex fide, accipiant spem salutis;
impii vero alieno supplicio terreantur et ad pietatem convertantur. This
opinion is one far better founded than the depreciatory decision of
modern critics, that this book breathes a spirit of revenge and pride
(de Wette-Schrader); or of Bertheau, that "Esther and Mordochai are full
of a spirit of revenge and hostility not to Gentile ways, but to the
Gentiles themselves, of cruelty, and of ungodly confidence in a victory
over the world, by worldly power and the employment of worldly means,"
and that this book "belongs to the historical records of the revelation
made to Israel, only in so far as it helps to fill up the chasm between
the times of the prophets and the days of our Lord." "The book itself
and its position in the canon plainly testify, that the people to whom
the victory over the world was promised, separated themselves farther
and farther from communion with the holy God, trusted to their own arm
and to worldly power, and could not, therefore, but be worsted in their
contest with the empire of the times." Such a verdict is justified
neither by the circumstance, that the Jews, who reject Christ's
redemption, understand and over-estimate this book in a carnal manner,
nor by the fact, that the name of God does not once occur therein. With
respect to the first point, the book itself is not to blame for being
misused by Jews who have not accepted the redemption which is by Christ,
to nourish a fanatical hatred of all Gentiles. Even if Esther and
Mordochai were filled with a spirit of revenge toward the Gentiles, no
reproach could in consequence be cast on the book of Esther, which
neither praises nor recommends their actions or behaviour, but simply
relates what took place without blame or approval. But neither are the
accusations raised against Esther and Mordochai founded in truth. The
means they took for the deliverance and preservation of their people
were in accordance with the circumstances stated. For if the edict
promulgated by Haman, and commanding the extermination of the Jews,
could not, according to the prevailing law of the Medo-Persians, be
repealed, there was no other means left to Mordochai for the
preservation of his countrymen from the destruction that threatened
them, than the issue of a counter-edict permitting the Jews to fight for
their lives against all enemies who should attack them, and conceding to
them the same rights against their foes as had been granted to the
latter against the Jews by the edict of Haman. The bloodshed which might
and must ensue would be the fault neither of Mordochai nor Esther, but
of Haman alone. And though Mordochai had irritated the haughty Haman by
refusing him adoration, yet no Jew who was faithful to the commands of
his God could render to a man that honour and adoration which are due to
the Lord only. Besides, even if the offence of which he was thereby
guilty against Haman might have incited the latter to punish him
individually, it could offer no excuse for the massacre of the entire
Jewish nation. As for the second point, viz., the non-mention of the
name of God in this book, we have already remarked, 3, that this
omission is not caused by a lack of devoutness of reverence, the
narrative itself presenting features which lead to an opposite
conclusion. In the answer which Mordochai sends to Esther's objection to
appear before the king unbidden, "If thou holdest thy peace, there shall
arise help and deliverance for the Jews from another place," is
expressed the assured belief that God would not leave the Jews to
perish. To this must be added, both that the Jews express their deep
sorrow at the edict of Haman by fasting and lamentation ([Est
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)), and that Queen Esther not only
prepares for her difficult task of appearing before the king by fasting
herself, but also begs to be assisted by the fasting of all the Jews in
Susa ([Est 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016)). Now fasting was a
penitential exercise, and the only form of common worship practised by
Jews dwelling among Gentiles; and this penitential exercise was always
combined with prayer even among the heathen (comp. [Jon
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005).), though prayer and calling upon
God might not be expressly mentioned. Finally, the occasion of this
conflict between Jews and Gentiles was a religious one, viz., the
refusal of adoration to a man, from fear of transgressing the first
commandment. All these things considered, we may with Sthelin
appropriate what Lutz in his bibl. Hermeneutik, p. 386, says concerning
this book: "A careful survey will suffice to show, that the religious
principle predominates in the book of Esther, and that there is a
religious foundation to the view taken of the occurrence. For it is
represented as providential, as an occurrence in which, although the
name of God is unmentioned, a higher Power, a Power on the side of
Israel, prevails. Even in single features a closer inspection will
plainly recognise a religious tone of feeling, while the whole book is
pervaded by religious moral earnestness." It is this religious
foundation which has obtained and secured its position in the canon of
the inspired books of the O.T. The book is a memorial of the
preservation of the Jewish people, during their subjection to a
universal empire, by means of a special and providential disposition of
secular events, and forms in this respect a supplement to the books of
Ezra and Nehemiah, which relate the restoration of the Jewish community
to the land of their fathers.

On the additions to the book of Esther in the Alexandrinian version,
which Luther, after the example of Jerome, excluded from the book and
relegated to the Apocrypha under the title of Stcke in Esther, comp. my
Lehrb. der Einleitung, 237, and O. F. Fritzsche's kurzgef. exeget. Hdb.
zu den Apokryphen des N. T. p. 68f.

For the exegetic literature, see Lehrb. der Einl. v. 150. Comp. also E.
Ph. L. Calmberg, liber Esterae interpretatione latina brevique
commentario illustr., Hamb. 1837, 4, and Bertheau's Commentary, quoted
p. 12.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 1](est001)

</div>
