<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo002)  [Next](exo004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 3:0</span></span>

Call of Moses,and His Return to Egypt - Exodus 3 And 4

Call of Moses. - Whilst the children of Israel were groaning under the
oppression of Egypt, God had already prepared the way for their
deliverance, and had not only chosen Moses to be the saviour of His
people, but had trained him for the execution of His designs.

[Exodus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 3:1</span></span>

When Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, he drove
them on one occasion behind the desert, and came to the mountains of
Horeb. רעה היה, lit. "he was feeding:" the participle expresses the
continuance of the occupation. המּדבּר אחר does not mean ad interiora
deserti (Jerome); but Moses drove the sheep from Jethro's home as far as
Horeb, so that he passed through a desert with the flock before he
reached the pasture land of Horeb. For "in this, the most elevated
ground of the peninsula, you find the most fertile valleys, in which
even fruit-trees grow. Water abounds in this district; consequently it
is the resort of all the Bedouins when the lower countries are dried up"
(Rosenmller). Jethro's home was separated from Horeb, therefore, by a
desert, and is to be sought to the south-east, and not to the
north-east. For it is only a south-easterly situation that will explain
these two facts: First, that when Moses returned from Midian to Egypt,
he touched again at Horeb, where Aaron, who had come from Egypt, met him
([Exo 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#027)); and, secondly, that the
Israelites never came upon any Midianites on their journey through the
desert, whilst the road of Hobab the Midianite separated from theirs as
soon as they departed from Sinai ([Num
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#030)).

(Note: The hypothesis, that, after the calling of Moses, this branch of
the Midianites left the district they had hitherto occupied, and sought
out fresh pasture ground, probably on the eastern side of the Elanitic
Gulf, is as needless as it is without support.)

Horeb is called the Mount of God by anticipation, with reference to the
consecration which it subsequently received through the revelation of
God upon its summit. The supposition that it had been a holy locality
even before the calling of Moses, cannot be sustained. Moreover, the
name is not restricted to one single mountain, but applies to the
central group of mountains in the southern part of the peninsula (vid.,
[Exo 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)). Hence the spot where God
appeared to Moses cannot be precisely determined, although tradition has
very suitably given the name Wady Shoeib, i.e., Jethro's Valley, to the
valley which bounds the Jebel Musa towards the east, and separates it
from the Jebel ed Deir, because it is there that Moses is supposed to
have fed the flock of Jethro. The monastery of Sinai, which is in this
valley, is said to have been built upon the spot where the thorn-bush
stood, according to the tradition in Antonini Placent. Itinerar. c. 37,
and the annals of Eutychius (vid., Robinson, Palestine).

[Exodus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 3:2</span></span>

Here, at Horeb, God appeared to Moses as the Angel of the Lord "in a
flame of fire out of the midst of the thorn-bush" (סנה, βάτος, rubus),
which burned in the fire and was not consumed. אכּל, in combination with
איננּוּ, must be a participle for מאכּל. When Moses turned aside from
the road or spot where he was standing, "to look at this great sight"
(מראה), i.e., the miraculous vision of the bush that was burning and yet
not burned up, Jehovah called to him out of the midst of the thorn-bush,
"Moses, Moses (the reduplication as in [Gen
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011)), draw not nigh hither: put off
thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy
ground" (אדמה). The symbolical meaning of this miraculous vision, - that
is to say, the fact that it was a figurative representation of the
nature and contents of the ensuing message from God, - has long been
admitted. The thorn-bush in contrast with the more noble and lofty trees
([Jdg 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#015)) represented the people of
Israel in their humiliation, as a people despised by the world. Fire and
the flame of fire were not "symbols of the holiness of God;" for, as the
Holy One, "God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all" ([Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)), He "dwells in the light which no
man can approach unto" ([Ti1 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016));
and that not merely according to the New Testament, but according to the
Old Testament view as well, as is evident from [Isa
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#017), where "the Light of Israel" and
"the Holy One of Israel" are synonymous. But "the Light of Israel became
fire, and the Holy One a flame, and burned and consumed its thorns and
thistles." Nor is "fire, from its very nature, the source of light,"
according to the scriptural view. On the contrary, light, the condition
of all life, is also the source of fire. The sun enlightens, warms, and
burns ([Job 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028); Sol. [Sol
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006)); the rays of the sun produce
warmth, heat, and fire; and light was created before the sun. Fire,
therefore, regarded as burning and consuming, is a figurative
representation of refining affliction and destroying punishment ([Co1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011).), or a symbol of the chastening
and punitive justice of the indignation and wrath of God. It is in fire
that the Lord comes to judgment ([Dan
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009); [Eze
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013), [Eze
1:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027); [Rev
1:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014)). Fire sets forth the fiery
indignation which devours the adversaries ([Heb
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027)). He who "judges and makes war
in righteousness' has eyes as a flame of fire ([Rev
19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)). Accordingly, the burning
thorn-bush represented the people of Israel as they were burning in the
fire of affliction, the iron furnace of Egypt ([Deu
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020)). Yet, though the thorn-bush was
burning in the fire, it was not consumed; for in the flame was Jehovah,
who chastens His people, but does not give them over unto death ([Psa
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)). The God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob had come down to deliver His people out of the hand of the
Egyptians ([Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008)). Although the
affliction of Israel in Egypt proceeded from Pharaoh, yet was it also a
fire which the Lord had kindled to purify His people and prepare it for
its calling. In the flame of the burning bush the Lord manifested
Himself as the "jealous God, who visits the sins of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generations of them that hate Him,
and showeth mercy unto thousands of them that love Him and keep His
commandments" ([Exo 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); [Deu
5:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#009)), who cannot tolerate the
worship of another god ([Exo 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014)),
and whose anger burns against idolaters, to destroy them ([Deu
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#015)). The "jealous God" was a
"consuming fire" in the midst of Israel ([Deu
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)). These passages show that the
great sight which Moses saw not only had reference to the circumstances
of Israel in Egypt, but was a prelude to the manifestation of God on
Sinai for the establishment of the covenant (Exo 19 and 20), and also a
representation of the relation in which Jehovah would stand to Israel
through the establishment of the covenant made with the fathers. For
this reason it occurred upon the spot where Jehovah intended to set up
His covenant with Israel. But, as a jealous God, He also "takes
vengeance upon His adversaries" ([Nah
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002).). Pharaoh, who would not let
Israel go, He was about to smite with all His wonders ([Exo
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#020)), whilst He redeemed Israel with
outstretched arm and great judgments ([Exo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006)). - The transition from the Angel
of Jehovah ([Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)) to Jehovah ([Exo
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)) proves the identity of the two;
and the interchange of Jehovah and Elohim, in [Exo
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004), precludes the idea of Jehovah
being merely a national God. The command of God to Moses to put off his
shoes, may be accounted for from the custom in the East of wearing shoes
or sandals merely as a protection from dirt. No Brahmin enters a pagoda,
no Moslem a mosque, without first taking off at least his overshoes
(Rosenm. Morgenl. i. 261; Robinson, Pal. ii. p. 373); and even in the
Grecian temples the priests and priestesses performed the service
barefooted (Justin, Apol. i. c. 62; Bhr, Symbol. ii. 96). when entering
other holy places also, the Arabs and Samaritans, and even the Yezidis
of Mesopotamia, take off their shoes, that the places may not be defiled
by the dirt or dust upon them (vid., Robinson, Pal. iii. 100, and
Layard's Nineveh and its Remains). The place of the burning bush was
holy because of the presence of the holy God, and putting off the shoes
was intended to express not merely respect for the place itself, but
that reverence which the inward man ([Eph
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016)) owes to the holy God.

[Exodus 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 3:6</span></span>

Jehovah then made Himself known to Moses as the God of his fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, reminding him through that name of the
promises made to the patriarchs, which He was about to fulfil to their
seed, the children of Israel. In the expression, "thy father," the three
patriarchs are classed together as one, just as in [Exo
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#004) ("my father"), "because each of
them stood out singly in distinction from the nation, as having received
the promise of seed directly from God" (Baumgarten). "And Moses hid his
face, for he was afraid to look upon God." The sight of the holy God no
sinful man can bear (cf. [Kg1 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#012)).

[Exodus 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 3:7</span></span>

Jehovah had seen the affliction of His people, had heard their cry under
their taskmasters, and had come down (ירד, vid., [Gen
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005)) to deliver them out of the hand
of the Egyptians, and to bring them up to a good and broad land, to the
place of the Canaanites; and He was about to send Moses to Pharaoh to
bring them forth. The land to which the Israelites were to be taken up
is called a "good" land, on account of its great fertility ([Deu
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007).), and a "broad" land, in contrast
with the confinement and oppression of the Israelites in Egypt. The
epithet "good" is then explained by the expression, "a land flowing with
milk and honey" (זבת, a participle of זוּב in the construct state; vid.,
Ges. 135); a proverbial description of the extraordinary fertility and
loveliness of the land of Canaan (cf. [Exo
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017); [Exo
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005); [Exo
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#014), etc.). Milk and honey are the
simplest and choicest productions of a land abounding in grass and
flowers, and were found in Palestine in great abundance even when it was
in a desolate condition ([Isa 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015),
[Isa 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022); see my Comm. on [Jos
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#006)). The epithet broad is explained
by an enumeration of the six tribes inhabiting the country at that time
(cf. [Gen 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015). and [Gen
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#020), [Gen
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#021)).

[Exodus 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 3:11</span></span>

To the divine commission Moses made this reply: "Who am I, that I should
go to Pharaoh, and bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?"
Some time before he had offered himself of his own accord as a deliverer
and judge; but now he had learned humility in the school of Midian, and
was filled in consequence with distrust of his own power and fitness.
The son of Pharaoh's daughter had become a shepherd, and felt himself
too weak to go to Pharaoh. But God met this distrust by the promise, "I
will be with thee," which He confirmed by a sign, namely, that when
Israel was brought out of Egypt, they should serve (עבד, i.e., worship)
God upon that mountain. This sign, which was to be a pledge to Moses of
the success of his mission, was one indeed that required faith itself;
but, at the same time, it was a sign adapted to inspire both courage and
confidence. God pointed out to him the success of his mission, the
certain result of his leading the people out: Israel should serve Him
upon the very same mountain in which He had appeared to Moses. As surely
as Jehovah had appeared to Moses as the God of his fathers, so surely
should Israel serve Him there. The reality of the appearance of God
formed the pledge of His announcement, that Israel would there serve its
God; and this truth was to till Moses with confidence in the execution
of the divine command. The expression "serve God" (λατρεύειν τῷ Θεῷ,
lxx) means something more than the immolare of the Vulgate, or the
"sacrifice" of Luther; for even though sacrifice formed a leading
element, or the most important part of the worship of the Israelites,
the patriarchs before this had served Jehovah by calling upon His name
as well as offering sacrifice. And the service of Israel at Mount Horeb
consisted in their entering into covenant with Jehovah (Exo 24); not
only in their receiving the law as the covenant nation, but their
manifesting obedience by presenting free-will offerings for the building
of the tabernacle ([Exo 36:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#001); [Num
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001)).

(Note: Kurtz follows the Lutheran rendering "sacrifice," and understands
by it the first national sacrifice; and then, from the significance of
the first, which included potentially all the rest, supposes the
covenant sacrifice to be intended. But not only is the original text
disregarded here, the fact is also overlooked, that Luther himself has
translated עבד correctly, to "serve," in every other place. And it is
not sufficient to say, that by the direction of God ([Exo
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018)) Moses first of all asked Pharaoh
for permission merely to go a three days' journey into the wilderness to
sacrifice to their God ([Exo 5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001)),
in consequence of which Pharaoh afterwards offered to allow them to
sacrifice ([Exo 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#003)) within the land,
and at a still later period outside ([Exo
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#021).). For the fact that Pharaoh
merely spoke of sacrificing may be explained on the ground that at first
nothing more was asked. But this first demand arose from the desire on
the part of God to make known His purposes concerning Israel only step
by step, that it might be all the easier for the hard heart of the king
to grant what was required. But even if Pharaoh understood nothing more
by the expression "serve God" than the offering of sacrifice, this would
not justify us in restricting the words which Jehovah addressed to
Moses, "When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall
serve God upon this mountain," to the first national offering, or to the
covenant sacrifice.)

[Exodus 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 3:13</span></span>

When Moses had been thus emboldened by the assurance of divine
assistance to undertake the mission, he inquired what he was to say, in
case the people asked him for the name of the God of their fathers. The
supposition that the people might ask the name of their fathers' God is
not to be attributed to the fact, that as the Egyptians had separate
names for their numerous deities, the Israelites also would want to know
the name of their own God. For, apart from the circumstance that the
name by which God had revealed Himself to the fathers cannot have
vanished entirely from the memory of the people, and more especially of
Moses, the mere knowledge of the name would not have been of much use to
them. The question, "What is His name?" presupposed that the name
expressed the nature and operations of God, and that God would manifest
in deeds the nature expressed in His name. God therefore told him His
name, or, to speak more correctly, He explained the name יהוה, by which
He had made Himself known to Abraham at the making of the covenant ([Gen
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007)), in this way, אהיה אשׁר אהיה, "I
am that I am," and designated Himself by this name as the absolute God
of the fathers, acting with unfettered liberty and self-dependence. This
name precluded any comparison between the God of the Israelites and the
deities of the Egyptians and other nations, and furnished Moses and his
people with strong consolation in their affliction, and a powerful
support to their confidence in the realization of His purposes of
salvation as made known to the fathers. To establish them in this
confidence, God added still further: "This is My name for ever, and My
memorial unto all generations;" that is to say, God would even manifest
Himself in the nature expressed by the name Jehovah, and by this He
would have all generations both know and revere Him. שׁם, the name,
expresses the objective manifestation of the divine nature; זבר,
memorial, the subjective recognition of that nature on the part of men.
דּר דּר, as in [Exo 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#016) and [Pro
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#024). The repetition of the same word
suggests the idea of uninterrupted continuance and boundless duration
(Ewald, 313a). The more usual expression is ודר ידר, [Deu
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007); [Psa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#006); [Psa
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#011); or דּרים דּר, [Psa
72:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#005); [Psa
102:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025); [Isa
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#008).

[Exodus 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 3:16</span></span>

With the command, "Go and gather the elders of Israel together," God
then gave Moses further instructions with reference to the execution of
his mission. On his arrival in Egypt he was first of all to inform the
elders, as the representatives of the nation (i.e., the heads of the
families, households, and tribes), of the appearance of God to him, and
the revelation of His design, to deliver His people out of Egypt and
bring them to the land of the Canaanites. He was then to go with them to
Pharaoh, and make known to him their resolution, in consequence of this
appearance of God, to go a three days' journey into the wilderness and
sacrifice to their God. The words, "I have surely visited," point to the
fulfilment of the last words of the dying Joseph ([Gen
50:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024)). עלינוּ נקרה ([Exo
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018)) does not mean "He is named upon
us" (lxx, Onk., Jon.), nor "He has called us" (Vulg., Luth.). The latter
is grammatically wrong, for the verb is Niphal, or passive; and though
the former has some support in the parallel passage in [Exo
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#003), inasmuch as נקרא is the verb used
there, it is only in appearance, for if the meaning really were "His
name is named upon (over) us," the word שׁמו (שׁם) would not be omitted
(vid., [Deu 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010); [Ch2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#014)). The real meaning is, "He has
met with us," from נקרה, obruam fieri, ordinarily construed with אל, but
here with על, because God comes down from above to meet with man. The
plural us is used, although it was only to Moses that God appeared,
because His appearing had reference to the whole nation, which was
represented before Pharaoh by Moses and the elders. In the words
נלכה־נא, "we will go, then," equivalent to "let us go," the request for
Pharaoh's permission to go out is couched in such a form as to answer to
the relation of Israel to Pharaoh. He had no right to detain them, but
he had a right to consent to their departure, as his predecessor had
formerly done to their settlement. Still less had he any good reason for
refusing their request to go a three days' journey into the wilderness
and sacrifice to their God, since their return at the close of the
festival was then taken for granted. But the purpose of God was, that
Israel should not return. Was it the case, then, that the delegates were
"to deceive the king," as Knobel affirms! By no means. God knew the hard
heart of Pharaoh, and therefore directed that no more should be asked at
first than he must either grant, or display the hardness of his heart.
Had he consented, God would then have made known to him His whole
design, and demanded that His people should be allowed to depart
altogether. But when Pharaoh scornfully refused the first and smaller
request (Exo 5), Moses was instructed to demand the entire departure of
Israel from the land ([Exo 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#010)), and
to show the omnipotence of the God of the Hebrews before and upon
Pharaoh by miracles and heavy judgments ([Heb
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#008).). Accordingly, Moses persisted in
demanding permission for the people to go and serve their God ([Exo
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#016); [Exo
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001); [Exo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001), [Exo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013); [Exo
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#003)); and it was not till Pharaoh
offered to allow them to sacrifice in the land that Moses replied, "We
will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to
Jehovah our God" ([Exo 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#027)); but,
observe, with this proviso, "as He shall command us," which left, under
the circumstances, no hope that they would return. It was an act of
mercy to Pharaoh, therefore, on the one hand, that the entire departure
of the Israelites was not demanded at the very first audience of Moses
and the representatives of the nation; for, had this been demanded, it
would have been far more difficult for him to bend his heart in
obedience to the divine will, than when the request presented was as
trifling as it was reasonable. And if he had rendered obedience to the
will of God in the smaller, God would have given him strength to be
faithful in the greater. On the other hand, as God foresaw his
resistance ([Exo 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#019)), this
condescension, which demanded no more than the natural man could have
performed, was also to answer the purpose of clearly displaying the
justice of God. It was to prove alike to Egyptians and Israelites that
Pharaoh was "without excuse," and that his eventual destruction was the
well-merited punishment of his obduracy.

(Note: "This moderate request was made only at the period of the earlier
plagues. It served to put Pharaoh to the proof. God did not come forth
with His whole plan and desire at first, that his obduracy might appear
so much the more glaring, and find no excuse in the greatness of the
requirement. Had Pharaoh granted this request, Israel would not have
gone beyond it; but had not God foreseen, what He repeatedly says
(compare, for instance, [Exo 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018)),
that he would not comply with it, He would not thus have presented it;
He would from the beginning have revealed His whole design. Thus
Augustine remarks (Quaest. 13 in Ex.)." Hengstenberg, Diss. on the
Pentateuch. vol. ii. p. 427, Ryland's translation. Clark, 1847.)

חזקה ביד ולא, "not even by means of a strong hand;" "except through
great power" is not the true rendering, ולא does not mean ἐὰν μὴ, nisi.
What follows, - viz., the statement that God would so smite the
Egyptians with miracles that Pharaoh would, after all, let Israel go
([Exo 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#020)), - is not really at
variance with this, the only admissible rendering of the words. For the
meaning is, that Pharaoh would not be willing to let Israel depart even
when he should be smitten by the strong hand of God; but that he would
be compelled to do so against his will, would be forced to do so by the
plagues that were about to fall upon Egypt. Thus even after the ninth
plague it is still stated ([Exo
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#027)), that "Pharaoh would (אבה) not
let them go;" and when he had given permission, in consequence of the
last plague, and in fact had driven them out ([Exo
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031)), he speedily repented, and
pursued them with his army to bring them back again ([Exo
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005).); from which it is clearly to be
seen that the strong hand of God had not broken his will, and yet Israel
was brought out by the same strong hand of Jehovah.

[Exodus 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 3:21</span></span>

Not only would God compel Pharaoh to let Israel go; He would not let His
people go out empty, but, according to the promise in [Gen
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014), with great substance. "I will
give this people favour in the eyes of the Egyptians;" that is to say,
the Egyptians should be so favourably disposed towards them, that when
they solicited of their neighbours clothes and ornaments of gold and
silver, their request should be granted. "So shall ye spoil the
Egyptians." What is here foretold as a promise, the Israelites are
directed to do in [Exo 11:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#002); and
according to [Exo 12:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035), it was
really carried out. Immediately before their departure from Egypt, the
Israelites asked (ישׁאלוּ) the Egyptians for gold and silver ornaments
(כּלים not vessels, either for sacrifice, the house, or the table, but
jewels; cf. [Gen 24:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#053); [Exo
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#022); [Num
31:50](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050)) and clothes; and God gave them
favour in the eyes of the Egyptians, so that they gave them to them. For
אשּׁה שׁאלה, "Let every woman ask of her (female) neighbour and of her
that sojourneth in her house" (בּיתהּ גּרת, from which it is evident
that the Israelites did not live apart, but along with the Egyptians),
we find in [Exo 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#002), "Let every man
ask of his neighbour, and every woman of her (female) neighbour." -
ושׂמתּם, "and put them upon your sons and daughters." על שׂוּם, to put
on, applied to clothes and ornaments in [Lev
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#008) and [Gen
41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042). This command and its execution
have frequently given occasion to the opponents of the Scriptures to
throw contempt upon the word of God, the asking being regarded as
borrowing, and the spoiling of the Egyptians as purloining. At the same
time, the attempts made to vindicate this purloining from the wickedness
of stealing have been in many respects unsatisfactory.

(Note: For the different views as to the supposed borrowing of the gold
and silver vessels, see Hengstenberg, Dissertations on the Pentateuch,
vol. ii. pp. 419ff., and Kurtz, History of the Old Covenant, vol. ii.
319ff.)

But the only meaning of שׁאל is to ask or beg,

(Note: Even in [Kg2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#006); see my
commentary on the passage.)

and השׁאיל, which is only met with in [Exo
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036) and [Sa1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#028), does not mean to lend, but to
suffer to ask, to hear and grant a request. ישׁאלוּם ([Exo
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036)), lit., they allowed them to
ask; i.e., "the Egyptians did not turn away the petitioners, as not
wanting to listen to them, but received their petition with good-will,
and granted their request. No proof can be brought that השׁאיל means to
lend, as is commonly supposed; the word occurs again in [Sa1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#028), and there it means to grant or
give" (Knobel on [Exo 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036)). Moreover
the circumstances under which the שׁאל and השׁאיל took place, were quite
at variance with the idea of borrowing and lending. For even if Moses
had not spoken without reserve of the entire departure of the
Israelites, the plagues which followed one after another, and with which
the God of the Hebrews gave emphasis to His demand as addressed through
Moses to Pharaoh, "Let My people go, that they may serve Me," must have
made it evident to every Egyptian, that all this had reference to
something greater than a three days' march to celebrate a festival. And
under these circumstances no Egyptian could have cherished the thought,
that the Israelites were only borrowing the jewels they asked of them,
and would return them after the festival. What they gave under such
circumstances, they could only give or present without the slightest
prospect of restoration. Still less could the Israelites have had merely
the thought of borrowing in their mind, seeing that God had said to
Moses, "I will give the Israelites favour in the eyes of the Egyptians;
and it will come to pass, that when ye go out, ye shall not go out
empty" ([Exo 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#021)). If, therefore, it
is "natural to suppose that these jewels were festal vessels with which
the Egyptians furnished the poor Israelites for the intended feast," and
even if "the Israelites had their thoughts directed with all seriousness
to the feast which they were about to celebrate to Jehovah in the
desert" (Baumgarten); their request to the Egyptians cannot have
referred to any borrowing, nor have presupposed any intention to restore
what they received on their return. From the very first the Israelites
asked without intending to restore, and the Egyptians granted their
request without any hope of receiving back, because God had made their
hearts favourably disposed to the Israelites. The expressions את־מצרים
נצּלתּם in [Exo 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022), and וינצּלוּ in
[Exo 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036), are not at variance with
this, but rather require it. For נצל does not mean to purloin, to steal,
to take away secretly by cunning and fraud, but to plunder ([Ch2
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#025)), as both the lxx (σκυλεύειν)
and Vulgate (spoliare) have rendered it. Rosenmller, therefore, is
correct in his explanation: "Et spoliabitis Aegyptios, ita ut ab
Aegyptiis, qui vos tam dura servitute oppresserunt, spolia auferetis."
So also is Hengstenberg, who says, "The author represents the Israelites
as going forth, laden as it were with the spoils of their formidable
enemy, trophies of the victory which God's power had bestowed on their
weakness. While he represents the gifts of the Egyptians as spoils which
God had distributed to His host (as Israel is called in [Exo
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041)), he leads us to observe that
the bestowment of these gifts, which outwardly appeared to be the effect
of the good-will of the Egyptians, if viewed more deeply, proceeded from
another Giver; that the outwardly free act of the Egyptians was effected
by an inward divine constraint which they could not withstand"
(Dissertations, vol. ii. p. 431). - Egypt had spoiled Israel by the
tributary labour so unjustly enforced, and now Israel carried off the
spoil of Egypt-a prelude to the victory which the people of God will one
day obtain in their conflict with the power of the world (cf. [Zac
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 4](exo004)

</div>
