<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo034)  [Next](exo036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001)

[Exodus 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 35:1</span></span>

Preliminaries to the Work. - Ex 35:1-29. After the restoration of the
covenant, Moses announced to the people the divine commands with
reference to the holy place of the tabernacle which was to be built. He
repeated first of all ([Exo 35:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001))
the law of the Sabbath according to [Exo
31:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013), and strengthened it by the
announcement, that on the Sabbath no fire was to be kindled in their
dwelling, because this rule was to be observed even in connection with
the work to be done for the tabernacle. (For a fuller comment, see at
[Exo 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#009).). Then, in accordance with
the command of Jehovah, he first of all summoned the whole nation to
present freewill-offerings for the holy things to be prepared ([Exo
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#004), [Exo
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#005)), mentioning one by one all the
materials that would be required ([Exo
35:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#005), as in [Exo
25:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#003)); and after that he called upon
those who were endowed with understanding to prepare the different
articles, as prescribed in ch. 25-30, mentioning these also one by one
([Exo 35:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#011)), even down to the pegs
of the dwelling and court ([Exo
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#019)), and "their cords," i.e., the
cords required to fasten the tent and the hangings round the court to
the pegs that were driven into the ground, which had not been mentioned
before, being altogether subordinate things. (On the "cloths of
service," [Exo 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#019), see at [Exo
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#010).) In [Exo
35:20-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#020) we have an account of the
fulfilment of this command. The people went from Moses, i.e., from the
place where they were assembled round Moses, away to their tents, and
willingly offered the things required as a heave-offering for Jehovah;
every one "whom his heart lifted up," i.e., who felt himself inclined
and stirred up in his heart to do this. The men along with (על as in
[Gen 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#012); see Ewald, 217) the women
brought with a willing heart all kinds of golden rings and jewellery:
chak, lit., hook, here a clasp or ring; nezem, an ear or nose-ring ([Gen
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004); [Gen
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#047)); tabbaath, a finger-ring;
cumaz, globulus aureus, probably little golden balls strung together
like beads, which were worn by the Israelites and Midianites ([Num
31:50](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050)) as an ornament round the wrist
and neck, as Diod. Sic. relates that they were by the Arabians (3, 44).
"All kinds of golden jewellery, and every one who had waved (dedicated)
a wave (offering) of gold to Jehovah," sc., offered it for the work of
the tabernacle. The meaning is, that in addition to the many varieties
of golden ornaments, which were willingly offered for the work to be
performed, every one brought whatever gold he had set apart as a
wave-offering (a sacrificial gift) for Jehovah. הניף to wave, lit., to
swing or move to and fro, is used in connection with the sacrificial
ritual to denote a peculiar ceremony, through which certain portions of
a sacrifice, which were not intended for burning upon the altar, but for
the maintenance of the priests ([Num
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#011)), were consecrated to the Lord,
or given up to Him in a symbolical manner (see at [Lev
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#030)). Tenuphah, the wave-offering,
accordingly denoted primarily those portions of the sacrificial animal
which were allotted to the priests as their share of the sacrifices; and
then, in a more general sense, every gift or offering that was
consecrated to the Lord for the establishment and maintenance of the
sanctuary and its worship. In this wider sense the term tenuphah
(wave-offering) is applied both here and in [Exo
38:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#024), [Exo
38:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#029) to the gold and copper presented
by the congregation for the building of the tabernacle. So that it does
not really differ from terumah, a lift of heave-offering, as every gift
intended for the erection and maintenance of the sanctuary was called,
inasmuch as the offerer lifted it off from his own property, to dedicate
it to the Lord for the purposes of His worship. Accordingly, in [Exo
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#024) the freewill-offerings of the
people in silver and gold for the erection of the tabernacle are called
terumah; and in [Exo 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#006), all the
gifts of metal, wood, leather, and woven materials, presented by the
people for the erection of the tabernacle, are called קדשׁ תּרוּמת. (On
heaving and the heave-offering, see at [Exo
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#002) and [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009).)

[Exodus 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 35:25</span></span>

All the women who understood it (were wise-hearted, as in [Exo
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#003)) spun with their hands, and
presented what they spun, viz., the yarn required for the blue and red
purple cloth, the crimson and the byssus; from which it is evident that
the coloured cloths were dyed in the yarn or in the wool, as was the
case in Egypt according to different specimens of old Egyptian cloths
(see Hengstenberg, Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 144). Other women
spun goats' hair for the upper or outer covering of the tent ([Exo
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007).). Spinning was done by the women
in very early times (Plin. hist. n. 8, 48), particularly in Egypt, where
women are represented on the monuments as busily engaged with the
spindle (see Wilkinson, Manners ii. p. 60; iii. p. 133, 136), and at a
later period among the Hebrews ([Pro
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#019)). At the present day the women
in the peninsula of Sinai spin the materials for their tents from
camels' and goats' hair, and prepare sheep's wool for their clothing
(Rppell, Nubien, p. 202); and at Neswa, in the province of Omn, the
preparation of cotton yarn is the principal employment of the women
(Wellstedt, i. p. 90). Weaving also was, and still is to a great extent,
a woman's work (cf. [Kg2 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#007)); it is
so among the Arab tribes in the Wady Gharandel, for example (Russegger,
iii. 24), and in Nubia (Burckhardt, Nub. p. 211); but at Neswa the
weaving is done by the men (Wellstedt). The woven cloths for the
tabernacle were prepared by men, partly perhaps because the weaving in
Egypt was mostly done by the men (Herod. 2, 35; cf. Hengstenberg, p.
143), but chiefly for this reason, that the cloths for the hangings and
curtains were artistic works, which the women did not understand, but
which the men had learned in Egypt, where artistic weaving was carried
out to a great extent (Wilkinson, iii. pp. 113ff.).

(Note: For drawings of the Egyptian weaving-stool, see Wilkinson, iii.
p. 135; also Hartmann, die Hebrerinn am Putztisch i. Taf. 1.)

[Exodus 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 35:27</span></span>

The precious stones for the robes of the high priest, and the spices for
the incense and anointing oil, were presented by the princes of the
congregation, who had such costly things in their possession.

[Exodus 35:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 35:30</span></span>

Moses then informed the people that God had called Bezaleel and Aholiab
as master-builders, to complete the building and all the work connected
with it, and had not only endowed them with His Spirit, that they might
draw the plans for the different works and carry them out, but "had put
it into his (Bezaleel's) heart to teach" ([Exo
35:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#034)), that is to say, had qualified
him to instruct labourers to prepare the different articles under his
supervision and guidance. "He and Aholiab" ([Exo
35:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#034)) are in apposition to "his
heart:" into his and Aholiab's heart (see Ges. 121, 3; Ewald, 311 a).
The concluding words in [Exo 35:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#035) are
in apposition to אתם (them): "them hath He filled with wisdom...as
performers of every kind of work and inventors of designs," i.e., that
they may make every kind of work and may invent designs. In [Exo
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#001), ועשׂה with vav consec. is
dependent upon what precedes, and signifies either, "and so will make,"
or, so that he will make (see Ewald, 342 b). The idea is this,
"Bezaleel, Aholiab, and the other men who understand, into whom Jehovah
has infused (בּ נתן) wisdom and understanding, that they may know how to
do, shall do every work for the holy service (worship) with regard to (ל
as in [Exo 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038), etc.) all that
Jehovah has commanded."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 36](exo036)

</div>
