<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo017)  [Next](exo019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#001)

[Exodus 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 18:1</span></span>

The Amalekites had met Israel with hostility, as the prototype of the
heathen who would strive against the people and kingdom of God. But
Jethro, the Midianitish priest, appeared immediately after in the camp
of Israel, not only as Moses' father-in-law, to bring back his wife and
children, but also with a joyful acknowledgement of all that Jehovah had
done to the Israelites in delivering them from Egypt, to offer
burnt-offerings to the God of Israel, and to celebrate a sacrificial
meal with Moses, Aaron, and all the elders of Israel; so that in the
person of Jethro the first-fruits of the heathen, who would hereafter
seek the living God, entered into religious fellowship with the people
of God. As both the Amalekites and Midianites were descended from
Abraham, and stood in blood-relationship to Israel, the different
attitudes which they assumed towards the Israelites foreshadowed and
typified the twofold attitude which the heathen world would assume
towards the kingdom of God. (On Jethro, see [Exo
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#018); on Moses' wife and sons, see
[Exo 2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#021); and on the expression in
[Exo 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#002), "after he had sent her
back," [Exo 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#026).) - Jethro came to
Moses "into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God." The
mount of God is Horeb ([Exo 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001)); and
the place of encampment is Rephidim, at Horeb, i.e., at the spot where
the Sheikh valley opens into the plain of er Rahah ([Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)). This part is designated as a
wilderness; and according to Robinson (1, pp. 130, 131) the district
round this valley and plain is "naked desert," and "wild and desolate."
The occasion for Jethro the priest to bring back to his son-in-law his
wife and children was furnished by the intelligence which had reached
him, that Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt ([Exo
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#001)), and, as we may obviously
supply, had led them to Horeb. When Moses sent his wife and sons back to
Jethro, he probably stipulated that they were to return to him on the
arrival of the Israelites at Horeb. For when God first called Moses at
Horeb, He foretold to him that Israel would be brought to this mountain
on its deliverance from Egypt ([Exo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012)).

(Note: Kurtz (Hist. of O. C. iii. 46, 53) supposes that it was chiefly
the report of the glorious result of the battle with Amalek which led
Jethro to resolve to bring Moses' family back to him. There is no
statement, however, to this effect in the biblical text, but rather the
opposite, namely, that what Jethro had heard of all that God had done to
Moses and Israel consisted of the fact that Jehovah had brought Israel
out of Egypt. Again, there are not sufficient grounds for placing the
arrival of Jethro at the camp of Israel, in the desert of Sinai and
after the giving of the law, as Ranke has done. For the fact that the
mount of God is mentioned as the place of encampment at the time, is an
argument in favour of Rephidim, rather than against it, as we have
already shown. And we can see no force in the assertion that the
circumstances, in which we find the people, point rather to the longer
stay at Sinai, than to the passing halt at Rephidim. For how do we know
that the stay at Rephidim was such a passing one, that it would not
afford time enough for Jethro's visit? It is true that, according to the
ordinary assumption, only half a month intervened between the arrival of
the Israelites in the desert of Sin and their arrival in the desert of
Sinai; but within this space of time everything might have taken place
that is said to have occurred on the march from the former to the latter
place of encampment. It is not stated in the biblical text that seven
days were absorbed in the desert of Sin alone, but only that the
Israelites spent a Sabbath there, and had received manna a few days
before, so that three or four days (say from Thursday to Saturday
inclusive) would amply suffice for all that took place. If the
Israelites, therefore, encamped there in the evening of the 15th, they
might have moved farther on the morning of the 19th or 20th, and after a
two days' journey by Dofkah and Alush have reached Rephidim on the 21st
or 22nd. They could then have fought the battle with the Amalekites the
following day, so that Jethro might have come to the camp on the 24th or
25th, and held the sacrificial meal with the Israelites the next day. In
that case there would still be four or five days left for him to see
Moses sitting in judgment a whole day long ([Exo
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013)), and for the introduction of
the judicial arrangements proposed by Jethro; - amply sufficient time,
inasmuch as one whole day would suffice for the sight of the judicial
sitting, which is said to have taken place the day after the sacrificial
meal ([Exo 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013)). And the election of
judges on the part of the people, for which Moses gave directions in
accordance with Jethro's advice, might easily have been carried out in
two days. For, on the one hand, it is most probable that after Jethro
had watched this severe and exhausting occupation of Moses for a whole
day, he spoke to Moses on the subject the very same evening, and laid
his plan before him; and on the other hand, the execution of this plan
did not require a very long time, as the people were not scattered over
a whole country, but were collected together in one camp. Moreover,
Moses carried on all his negotiations with the people through the elders
as their representatives; and the judges were not elected in modern
fashion by universal suffrage, but were nominated by the people, i.e.,
by the natural representatives of the nation, from the body of elders,
according to their tribes, and then appointed by Moses himself. - Again,
it is by no means certain that Israel arrived at the desert of Sinai on
the first day of the third month, and that only half a month (15 or 16
days) elapsed between their arrival in the desert of sin and their
encamping at Sinai (cf. [Exo 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)).
And lastly, though Kurtz still affirms that Jethro lived on the other
side of the Elanitic Gulf, and did not set out till he heard of the
defeat of the Amalekites, in which case a whole month might easily
intervene between the victory of Israel and the arrival of Jethro, the
two premises upon which this conclusion is based, are assumptions
without foundation, as we have already shown at [Exo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001) in relation to the former, and
have just shown in relation to the latter.)

[Exodus 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 18:6</span></span>

When Jethro announced his arrival to Moses ("he said," sc., through a
messenger), he received his father-in-law with the honour due to his
rank; and when he had conducted him to his tent, he related to him all
the leading events connected with the departure from Egypt, and all the
troubles they had met with on the way, and how Jehovah had delivered
them out of them all. Jethro rejoiced at this, and broke out in praise
to Jehovah, declaring that Jehovah was greater than all gods, i.e., that
He had shown Himself to be exalted above all gods, for God is great in
the eyes of men only when He makes known His greatness through the
display of His omnipotence. He then gave a practical expression to his
praise by a burnt-offering and slain-offering, which he presented to
God. The second כּי in [Exo 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#011) is
only an emphatic repetition of the first, and אשׁר בּדּבר is not
dependent upon ידעתּי, but upon גּדול nopu tub, or upon הגדּיל
understood, which is to be supplied in thought after the second כּי:
"That He has proved Himself great by the affair in which they (the
Egyptians) dealt proudly against them (the Israelites)." Compare [Neh
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#010), from which it is evident, that
to refer these words to the destruction of Pharaoh and his army in the
Red Sea as a punishment for their attempt to destroy the Israelites in
the water ([Exo 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022)) is too
contracted an interpretation; and that they rather relate to all the
measures adopted by the Egyptians for the oppression and detention of
the Israelites, and signify that Jehovah had shown Himself great above
all gods by all the plagues inflicted upon Egypt down to the destruction
of Pharaoh and his army in the Red Sea.

[Exodus 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 18:12</span></span>

The sacrifices, which Jethro offered to God, were applied to a
sacrificial meal, in which Moses joined, as well as Aaron and all the
elders. Eating bread before God signified the holding of a sacrificial
meal, which was eating before God, because it was celebrated in a holy
place of sacrifice, where God was supposed to be present.

[Exodus 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 18:13</span></span>

The next day Jethro saw how Moses was occupied from morning till evening
in judging the people, who brought all their disputes to him, that he
might settle them according to the statutes of God. על עמד: as in [Gen
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#008). The people came to Moses "to
seek or inquire of God" ([Gen 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#015)),
i.e., to ask for a decision from God: in most cases, this means to
inquire through an oracle; here it signifies to desire a divine decision
as to questions in dispute. By judging or deciding the cases brought
before him, Moses made known to the people the ordinances and laws of
God. For every decision was based upon some law, which, like all true
justice here on earth, emanated first of all from God. This is the
meaning of [Gen 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016), and not, as
Knobel supposes, that Moses made use of the questions in dispute, at the
time they were decided, as good opportunities for giving laws to the
people. Jethro condemned this plan ([Gen
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#018).) as exhausting, wearing out
(נבל lit., to fade away, [Psa 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002)),
both for Moses and the people: for the latter, inasmuch as they not only
got wearied out through long waiting, but, judging from [Gen
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023), very often began to take the
law into their own hands on account of the delay in the judicial
decision, and so undermined the well-being of the community at large;
and for Moses, inasmuch as the work was necessarily too great for him,
and he could not continue for any length of time to sustain such a
burden alone ([Gen 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#018)). The
obsolete form of the inf. const. עשׂהוּ for עשׂתו is only used here, but
is not without analogies in the Pentateuch. Jethro advised him ([Gen
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019).) to appoint judged from the
people for all the smaller matters in dispute, so that in future only
the more difficult cases, which really needed a superior or divine
decision, would be brought to him that he might lay them before God. "I
will give thee counsel, and God be with thee (i.e., help thee to carry
out this advice): Be thou to the people האלהים מוּל, towards God," i.e.,
lay their affairs before God, take the place of God in matters of
judgment, or, as Luther expresses it, "take charge of the people before
God." To this end, in the first place, he was to instruct the people in
the commandments of God, and their own walk and conduct (הזהיר with a
double accusative, to enlighten, instruct; שדרך the walk, the whole
behaviour; מעשׂה particular actions); secondly, he was to select able
men (חיל אנשׁי men of moral strength, [Kg1
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#052)) as judges, men who were
God-fearing, sincere, and unselfish (gain-hating), and appoint them to
administer justice to the people, by deciding the simpler matters
themselves, and only referring the more difficult questions to him, and
so to lighten his own duties by sharing the burden with these judges.
מעליך הקל ([Gen 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#022)) "make light of
(that which lies) upon thee." If he would do this, and God would command
him, he would be able to stand, and the people would come to their
place, i.e., to Canaan, in good condition (בּשׁלום). The apodosis cannot
begin with וצוּך, "then God will establish thee," for צוּה never has
this meaning; but the idea is this, "if God should preside over the
execution of the plan proposed."

[Exodus 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 18:24</span></span>

Moses followed this sage advice, and, as he himself explains in [Deu
1:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#012), directed the people to
nominate wise, intelligent, and well-known men from the heads of the
tribes, whom he appointed as judges, instructing them to administer
justice with impartiality and without respect of persons.

[Exodus 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 18:25</span></span>

The judges chosen were arranged as chiefs (שׂרים) over thousands,
hundreds, fifties, and tens, after the analogy of the military
organization of the people on their march ([Num
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014)), in such a manner, however,
that this arrangement was linked on to the natural division of the
people into tribes, families, etc. (see my Archologie, 140). For it is
evident that the decimal division was not made in an arbitrary manner
according to the number of heads, from the fact that, on the one hand,
the judges were chosen from the heads of their tribes and according to
their tribes ([Deu 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#013)); and on the
other hand, the larger divisions of the tribes, viz., the families
(mishpachoth), were also called thousands ([Num
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#015); [Num
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#004); [Jos
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#014), etc.), just because the number
of their heads of families would generally average about a thousand; so
that in all probability the hundreds, fifties, and tens denote smaller
divisions of the nation, in which there were about this number of
fathers. Thus in Arabic, for example, "the ten" is a term used to
signify a family (cf. Hengstenberg, Dissertations v. ii. 343, and my
Arch. 149). The difference between the harder or greater matters and the
smaller matters consisted in this: questions which there was not
definite law to decide were great or hard; whereas, on the other hand,
those which could easily be decided from existing laws or general
principles of equity were simple or small. (Vide Joh. Selden de
Synedriis i. c. 16, in my Arch. 149, Not. 3, where the different views
are discussed respecting the relative positions and competency of the
various judges, about which there is no precise information given in the
law.) So far as the total number of judges is concerned, all that can be
affirmed with certainty is, that the estimated number of 600 judges over
thousands, 6000 over hundreds, 12,000 over fifties, and 60,000 over
tens, in all 78,600 judges, which is given by Grotius and in the Talmud,
and according to which there must have been a judge for every seven
adults, is altogether erroneous (cf. J. Selden l.c. pp. 339ff.). For if
the thousands answered to the families (Mishpachoth), there cannot have
been a thousand males in every one; and in the same way the hundreds,
etc., are not to be understood as consisting of precisely that number of
persons, but as larger or smaller family groups, the numerical strength
of which we do not know. And even if we did know it, or were able to
estimate it, this would furnish no criterion by which to calculate the
number of the judges, for the text does not affirm that every one of
these larger or smaller family groups had a judge of its own; in fact,
the contrary may rather be inferred, from the fact that, according to
[Deu 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#015), the judges were chosen out
of the heads of the tribes, so that the number of judges must have been
smaller than that of the heads, and can hardly therefore have amounted
to many hundreds, to say nothing of many thousands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 19](exo019)

</div>
