<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo011)  [Next](exo013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

[Exodus 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 12:1</span></span>

Institution of the Passover. - The deliverance of Israel from the
bondage of Egypt was at hand; also their adoption as the nation of
Jehovah ([Exo 6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006)).

But for this a divine consecration was necessary, that their outward
severance from the land of Egypt might be accompanied by an inward
severance from everything of an Egyptian or heathen nature. This
consecration was to be imparted by the Passover-a festival which was to
lay the foundation for Israel's birth ([Hos
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005)) into the new life of grace and
fellowship with God, and to renew it perpetually in time to come. This
festival was therefore instituted and commemorated before the exodus
from Egypt. Vv. 1-28 contain the directions for the Passover: viz., [Exo
12:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001) for the keeping of the feast
of the Passover before the departure from Egypt, and [Exo
12:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015) for the seven days' feast of
unleavened bread. In [Exo 12:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)
Moses communicates to the elders of the nation the leading instructions
as to the former feast, and the carrying out of those instructions is
mentioned in [Exo 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#028).

[Exo 12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

By the words, "in the land of Egypt," the law of the Passover which
follows is brought into connection with the giving of the law at Sinai
and in the fields of Moab, and is distinguished in relation to the
former as the first or foundation law for the congregation of Jehovah.
The creation of Israel as the people of Jehovah ([Isa
43:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#015)) commenced with the institution
of the Passover. As a proof of this, it was preceded by the appointment
of a new era, fixing the commencement of the congregation of Jehovah.
"This month" (i.e., the present in which ye stand) "be to you the head
(i.e., the beginning) of the months, the first let it be to you for the
months of the year;" i.e., let the numbering of the months, and
therefore the year also, begin with it. Consequently the Israelites had
hitherto had a different beginning to their year, probably only a civil
year, commencing with the sowing, and ending with the termination of the
harvest (cf. [Exo 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016)); whereas the
Egyptians most likely commenced their year with the overflowing of the
Nile at the summer solstice (cf. Lepsius, Chron. 1, pp. 148ff.). The
month which was henceforth to be the first of the year, and is
frequently so designated ([Exo 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002),
[Exo 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017); [Lev
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005), etc.), is called Abib (the
ear-month) in [Exo 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004); [Exo
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015); [Exo
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#018); [Deu
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001), because the corn was then in
ear; after the captivity it was called Nisan ([Neh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001); [Est
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007)). It corresponds very nearly to
our April.

[Exo 12:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003)

Arrangements for the Passover. - "All the congregation of Israel" was
the nation represented by its elders (cf. [Exo
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021), and my bibl. Arch. ii. p. 221).
"On the tenth of this (i.e., the first) month, let every one take to
himself שׂה (a lamb, lit., a young one, either sheep or goats; [Exo
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005), and [Deu
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004)), according to fathers' houses"
(vid., [Exo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014)), i.e., according to
the natural distribution of the people into families, so that only the
members of one family or family circle should unite, and not an
indiscriminate company. In [Exo 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)
mishpachoth is used instead. "A lamb for the house," בּית, i.e., the
family forming a household.

[Exo 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#004)

But if "the house be too small for a lamb" (lit., "small from the
existence of a lamb," מן comparative: משּׂה היות is an existence which
receives its purpose from the lamb, which answers to that purpose, viz.,
the consumption of the lamb, i.e., if a family is not numerous enough to
consume a lamb), "let him (the house-father) and his nearest neighbour
against his house take (sc., a lamb) according to the calculation of the
persons." מכסה computatio ([Lev
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#023)), from כּסס computare; and מכס,
the calculated amount or number ([Num
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#028)): it only occurs in the
Pentateuch. "Every one according to the measure of his eating shall ye
reckon for the lamb:" i.e., in deciding whether several families had to
unite, in order to consume one lamb, they were to estimate how much each
person would be likely to eat. Consequently more than two families might
unite for this purpose, when they consisted simply of the father and
mother and little children. A later custom fixed ten as the number of
persons to each paschal lamb; and Jonathan has interpolated this number
into the text of his Targum.

[Exo 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005)

The kind of lamb: תּמים integer, uninjured, without bodily fault, like
all the sacrifices ([Lev 22:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)); a
male like the burnt-offerings ([Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003), [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011)); שׁנה בּן one year old
(ἐνιαύσιος, lxx). This does not mean "standing in the first year, viz.,
from the eighth day of its life to the termination of the first year"
(Rabb. Cler., etc.), a rule which applied to the other sacrifices only
([Exo 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029); [Lev
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027)). The opinion expressed by Ewald
and others, that oxen were also admitted at a later period, is quite
erroneous, and cannot be proved from [Deu
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002), or [Ch2
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#024) and [Ch2
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#007). As the lamb was intended as a
sacrifice ([Exo 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027)), the
characteristics were significant. Freedom from blemish and injury not
only befitted the sacredness of the purpose to which they were devoted,
but was a symbol of the moral integrity of the person represented by the
sacrifice. It was to be a male, as taking the place of the male
first-born of Israel; and a year old, because it was not till then that
it reached the full, fresh vigour of its life. "Ye shall take it out
from the sheep or from the goats:" i.e.,, as Theodoret explains it, "He
who has a sheep, let him slay it; and he who has no sheep, let him take
a goat." Later custom restricted the choice to the lamb alone; though
even in the time of Josiah kids were still used as well ([Ch2
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#007)).

[Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006)

"And it shall be to you for preservation (ye shall keep it) until the
fourteenth day, and then...slay it at sunset." Among the reasons
commonly assigned for the instruction to choose the lamb on the 10th,
and keep it till the 14th, which Jonathan and Rashi supposed to refer to
the Passover in Egypt alone, there is an element of truth in the one
given most fully by Fagius, "that the sight of the lamb might furnish an
occasion for conversation respecting their deliverance from Egypt,...and
the mercy of God, who had so graciously looked upon them;" but this
hardly serves to explain the interval of exactly four days. Hoffmann
supposes it to refer to the four doroth ([Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016)), which had elapsed since Israel
was brought to Egypt, to grow into a nation. The probability of such an
allusion, however, depends upon just what Hoffmann denies without
sufficient reason, viz., upon the lamb being regarded as a sacrifice, in
which Israel consecrated itself to its God. It was to be slain by "the
whole assembly of the congregation of Israel:" not by the whole
assembled people, as though they gathered together for this purpose, for
the slaughtering took place in every house ([Exo
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007)); the meaning is simply, that the
entire congregation, without any exception, was to slay it at the same
time, viz., "between the two evenings" ([Num
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#003), [Num
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#005), [Num
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011)), or "in the evening at sunset"
([Deu 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#006)). Different opinions have
prevailed among the Jews from a very early date as to the precise time
intended. Aben Ezra agrees with the Caraites and Samaritans in taking
the first evening to be the time when the sun sinks below the horizon,
and the second the time of total darkness; in which case, "between the
two evenings" would be from 6 o'clock to 7:20. Kimchi and Rashi, on the
other hand, regard the moment of sunset as the boundary between the two
evenings, and Hitzig has lately adopted their opinion. According to the
rabbinical idea, the time when the sun began to descend, viz., from 3 to
5 o'clock, was the first evening, and sunset the second; so that
"between the two evenings" was from 3 to 6 o'clock. Modern expositors
have very properly decided in favour of the view held by Aben Ezra and
the custom adopted by the Caraites and Samaritans, from which the
explanation given by Kimchi and Rashi does not materially differ. It is
true that this argument has been adduced in favour of the rabbinical
practice, viz., that "only by supposing the afternoon to have been
included, can we understand why the day of Passover is always called the
14th ([Lev 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); [Num
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#003), etc.);" and also, that "if the
slaughtering took place after sunset, it fell on the 15th Nisan, and not
the 14th." But both arguments are based upon an untenable assumption.
For it is obvious from [Lev 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#032),
where the fast prescribed for the day of atonement, which fell upon the
10th of the 7th month, is ordered to commence on the evening of the 9th
day, "from even to even," that although the Israelites reckoned the day
of 24 hours from the evening sunset to sunset, in numbering the days
they followed the natural day, and numbered each day according to the
period between sunrise and sunset. Nevertheless there is no formal
disagreement between the law and the rabbinical custom. The expression
in [Deu 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#006), "at (towards) sunset,"
is sufficient to show that the boundary line between the two evenings is
not to be fixed precisely at the moment of sunset, but only somewhere
about that time. The daily evening sacrifice and the incense offering
were also to be presented "between the two evenings" ([Exo
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039), [Exo
29:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#041); [Exo
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008); [Num
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#004)). Now as this was not to take
place exactly at the same time, but to precede it, they could not both
occur at the time of sunset, but the former must have been offered
before that. Moreover, in later times, when the paschal lamb was slain
and offered at the sanctuary, it must have been slain and offered before
sunset, if only to give sufficient time to prepare the paschal meal,
which was to be over before midnight. It was from these circumstances
that the rabbinical custom grew up in the course of time, and the lax
use of the word evening, in Hebrew as well as in every other language,
left space enough for this. For just as we do not confine the term
morning to the time before sunset, but apply it generally to the early
hours of the day, so the term evening is not restricted to the period
after sunset. If the sacrifice prescribed for the morning could be
offered after sunrise, the one appointed for the evening might in the
same manner be offered before sunset.

[Exo 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007)

Some of the blood was to be put (נתן as in [Lev
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#018), where יתּן is distinguished from
הזּה, to sprinkle, in [Lev 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#017)) upon
the two posts and the lintel of the door of the house in which the lamb
was eaten. This blood was to be to them a sign ([Exo
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013)); for when Jehovah passed
through Egypt to smite the first-born, He would see the blood, and would
spare these houses, and not permit the destroyer to enter them ([Exo
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013), [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023)). The two posts with the lintel
represented the door ([Exo 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023)),
which they surrounded; and the doorway through which the house was
entered stood for the house itself, as we may see from the frequent
expression "in thy gates," for in thy towns ([Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010); [Deu
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014); [Deu
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#017), etc.). The threshold, which
belonged to the door quite as much as the lintel, was not to be smeared
with blood, in order that the blood might not be trodden under foot. But
the smearing of the door-posts and lintel with blood, the house was
expiated and consecrated on an altar. That the smearing with blood was
to be regarded as an act of expiation, is evident from the simple fact,
that a hyssop-bush was used for the purpose ([Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)); for sprinkling with hyssop is
never prescribed in the law, except in connection with purification in
the sense of expiation ([Lev 14:49](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#049).;
[Num 19:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#018)). In Egypt the
Israelites had no common altar; and for this reason, the houses in which
they assembled for the Passover were consecrated as altars, and the
persons found in them were thereby removed from the stroke of the
destroyer. In this way the smearing of the door-posts and lintel became
a sign to Israel of their deliverance from the destroyer. Jehovah made
it so by His promise, that He would see the blood, and pass over the
houses that were smeared with it. Through faith in this promise, Israel
acquired in the sign a firm pledge of its deliverance. The smearing of
the doorway was relinquished, after Moses (not Josiah, as Vaihinger
supposes, cf. [Deu 16:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#005)) had
transferred the slaying of the lambs to the court of the sanctuary, and
the blood had been ordered to be sprinkled upon the altar there.

[Exo 12:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008)

With regard to the preparation of the lamb for the meal, the following
directions were given: "They shall eat the lamb in that night" (i.e.,
the night following the 14th), and none of it נא ("underdone" or raw),
or בּשׁל ("boiled," - lit., done, viz., בּמּים מבשּׁל, done in water,
i.e., boiled, as בּשׁל does not mean to be boiled, but to become ripe or
done, [Joe 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013)); "but roasted with
fire, even its head on (along with) its thighs and entrails;" i.e., as
Rashi correctly explains it, "undivided or whole, so that neither head
nor thighs were cut off, and not a bone was broken ([Exo
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046)), and the viscera were roasted
in the belly along with the entrails," the latter, of course, being
first of all cleansed. On כּרעים and קרב see [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009). These regulations are all to be
regarded from one point of view. The first two, neither underdone nor
boiled, were connected with the roasting of the animal whole. As the
roasting no doubt took place on a spit, since the Israelites while in
Egypt can hardly have possessed such ovens of their own, as are
prescribed in the Talmud and are met with in Persia, the lamb would be
very likely to be roasted imperfectly, or underdone, especially in the
hurry that must have preceded the exodus ([Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)). By boiling, again, the
integrity of the animal would have been destroyed, partly through the
fact that it could never have been got into a pot whole, as the
Israelites had no pots or kettles sufficiently large, and still more
through the fact that, in boiling, the substance of the flesh is more or
less dissolved. For it is very certain that the command to roast was not
founded upon the hurry of the whole procedure, as a whole animal could
be quite as quickly boiled as roasted, if not even more quickly, and the
Israelites must have possessed the requisite cooking utensils. It was to
be roasted, in order that it might be placed upon the table undivided
and essentially unchanged. "Through the unity and integrity of the lamb
given them to eat, the participants were to be joined into an undivided
unity and fellowship with the Lord, who had provided them with the meal"
(cf. [Co1 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017)).

(Note: See my Archologie i. p. 386. Baehr (Symb. 2, 635) has given the
true explanation: "By avoiding the breaking of the bones, the animal was
preserved in complete integrity, undisturbed and entire ([Psa
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#020)). The sacrificial lamb to be
eaten was to be thoroughly and perfectly whole, and at the time of
eating was to appear as a perfect whole, and therefore as one; for it is
not what is dissected, divided, broken in pieces, but only what is
whole, that is eo ipso one. There was not other reason for this, than
that all who took part in this one whole animal, i.e., all who ate of
it, should look upon themselves as one whole, one community, like those
who eat the New Testament Passover, the body of Christ ([Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)), of whom the apostle says ([Co1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017)), "There is one bread, and so
we, being many, are one body: for we are all partakers of one body." The
preservation of Christ, so that not a bone was broken, had the same
signification; and God ordained this that He might appear as the true
paschal lamb, that was slain for the sins of the world.")

They were to eat it with מצות (ἄζυμα, azymi panes; lxx, Vulg.), i.e.,
(not sweet, or parched, but) pure loaves, nor fermented with leaven; for
leaven, which sets the dough in fermentation, and so produces impurity,
was a natural symbol of moral corruption, and was excluded from the
sacrifices therefore as defiling ([Lev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011)).

"Over (upon) bitter herbs they shall eat it." מררים, πικρίδες (lxx),
lactucae agrestes (Vulg.), probably refers to various kinds of bitter
herbs. Πικρίς, according to Aristot. Hist. an. 9, 6, and Plin. h. n. 8,
41, is the same as lactuca silvestris, or wild lettuce; but in Dioscor.
2, 160, it is referred to as the wild σέρις or κιχώριον, i.e., wild
endive, the intubus or intubum of the Romans. As lettuce and endive are
indigenous in Egypt, and endive is also met with in Syria from the
beginning of the winter months to the end of March, and lettuce in April
and May, it is to these herbs of bitter flavor that the term merorim
chiefly applies; though others may also be included, as the Arabs apply
the same term to Scorzonera orient., Picris scabra, Sonclus oler.,
Hieracium uniflor., and others (Forsk. flor. cxviii. and 143); and in
the Mishnah, Pes. 2, 6, five different varieties of bitter herbs are
reckoned as merorim, though it is difficult to determine what they are
(cf. Bochart, Hieroz. 1, pp. 691ff., and Cels. Hierobot. ii. p. 727). By
על (upon) the bitter herbs are represented, both here and in [Num
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011), not as an accompaniment to the
meat, but as the basis of the meal. על does not signify along with, or
indicate accompaniment, not even in [Exo
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#022); but in this and other similar
passages it still retains its primary signification, upon or over. It is
only used to signify accompaniment in cases where the ideas of
protection, meditation, or addition are prominent. If, then, the bitter
herbs are represented in this passage as the basis of the meal, and the
unleavened bread also in [Num 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011), it
is evident that the bitter herbs were not intended to be regarded as a
savoury accompaniment, by which more flavour was imparted to the sweeter
food, but had a more profound signification. The bitter herbs were to
call to mind the bitterness of life experienced by Israel in Egypt ([Exo
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014)), and this bitterness was to be
overpowered by the sweet flesh of the lamb. In the same way the
unleavened loaves are regarded as forming part of the substance of the
meal in [Num 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011), in accordance with
their significance in relation to it (vid., [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015)). There is no discrepancy
between this and [Deu 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003), where the
mazzoth are spoken of as an accompaniment to the flesh of the sacrifice;
for the allusion there is not to the eating of the paschal lamb, but to
sacrificial meals held during the seven days' festival.

[Exo 12:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010)

The lamb was to be all eaten wherever this was possible; but if any was
left, it was to be burned with fire the following day, - a rule
afterwards laid down for all the sacrificial meals, with one solitary
exception (vid., [Lev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#015)). They were
to eat it בּחפּזון, "in anxious flight" (from חפז trepidare, [Psa
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023); to flee in terror, [Deu
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#003); [Kg2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#015)); in travelling costume
therefore, - with "the loins girded," that they might not be impeded in
their walking by the long flowing dress ([Kg2
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#029)), - with "shoes (Sandals) on
their feet," that they might be ready to walk on hard, rough roads,
instead of barefooted, as they generally went (cf. [Jos
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#005), [Jos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#013); Bynaeus de calceis ii. 1, 7; and
Bochart, Hieroz. i. pp. 686ff.), and "staff in hand" ([Gen
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#011)). The directions in [Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011) had reference to the paschal
meal in Egypt only, and had no other signification than to prepare the
Israelites for their approaching departure. But though "this preparation
was intended to give the paschal meal the appearance of a support for
the journey, which the Israelites were about to tale," this by no means
exhausts its signification. The divine instructions close with the
words, "it is פּסח to Jehovah;" i.e., what is prescribed is a pesach
appointed by Jehovah, and to be kept for Him (cf. [Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010), "Sabbath to Jehovah;" [Exo
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#005), "feast to Jehovah"). The word
פּסח, Aram. פסחא, Gr. πάσχα, is derived from פּסח, lit., to leap or hop,
from which these two meanings arise: (1) to limp ([Kg1
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021); [Sa2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#004), etc.); and (2) to pass over,
transire (hence Tiphsah, a passage over, [Kg1
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#024)). It is for the most part used
figuratively for ὑπερβαίνειν, to pass by or spare; as in this case,
where the destroying angel passed by the doors and houses of the
Israelites that were smeared with blood. From this, pesach (ὑπέρβασις,
Aquil. in [Exo 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011); ὑπερβασία,
Joseph. Ant. ii. 14, 6) came afterwards to be used for the lamb, through
which, according to divine appointment, the passing by or sparing had
been effected ([Exo 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021), [Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027); [Ch2
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#001), [Ch2
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013), etc.); then for the preparation
of the lamb for a meal, in accordance with the divine instructions, or
for the celebration of this meal (thus here, [Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011); [Lev
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); [Num
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007), etc.); and then, lastly, it was
transferred to the whole seven days' observance of the feast of
unleavened bread, which began with this meal ([Deu
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001)), and also to the sacrifices
which were to be offered at that feast ([Deu
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002); [Ch2
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#001), [Ch2
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#007), etc.). The killing of the lamb
appointed for the pesach was a זבח, i.e., a slain-offering, as Moses
calls it when making known the command of God to the elders ([Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027)); consequently the eating of it
was a sacrificial feast ("the sacrifice of the feast of the Passover,"
[Exo 34:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#025)). For זבח is never applied
to slaying alone, as שׁחט is. Even in [Pro
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#001) and [Sa1
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#024), which Hoffmann adduces in
support of this meaning, it signifies "to sacrifice" only in a
figurative or transferred sense. At the first Passover in Egypt, it is
true, there was no presentation (הקריב), because Israel had not altar
there. But the presentation took place at the very first repetition of
the festival at Sinai ([Num 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007)). The
omission of this in Egypt, on account of the circumstances in which they
were placed, constituted no essential difference between the first
"sacrifice of the Passover" and the repetitions of it; for the choice of
the lamb four days before it was slain, was a substitute for the
presentation, and the sprinkling of the blood, which was essential to
every sacrifice, was effected in the smearing of the door-posts and
lintel. The other difference upon which Hofmann lays stress, viz., that
at all subsequent Passovers the fat of the animal was burned upon the
altar, is very questionable. For this custom cannot be proved from the
Old Testament, though it is prescribed in the Mishnah.

(Note: In the elaborate account of the Passover under Josiah, in 2 Chron
35, we have, it is true, an allusion to the presentation of the
burnt-offering and fat ([Ch2 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#014));
but the boiling of the offerings in pots, caldrons, and pans is also
mentioned, along with the roasting of the Passover ([Ch2
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013)); from which it is very obvious,
that in this account the offering of burnt and slain-offerings is
associated with the preparation of the paschal lamb, and the paschal
meal is not specially separated from the sacrificial meals of the seven
days' feast; just as we find that the king and the princes give the
priests and Levites not only lambs and kids, but oxen also, for the
sacrifices and sacrificial meals of this festival (see my Archologie,
81, 8).)

But even if the burning of the fat of the paschal lamb had taken place
shortly after the giving of the law, on the ground of the general
command in [Lev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017); [Lev
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#023). (for this is not taken for
granted in [Exo 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#018), as we shall
afterwards show), this difference could also be accounted for from the
want of an altar in Egypt, and would not warrant us in refusing to admit
the sacrificial character of the first Passover. For the appointment of
the paschal meal by God does not preclude the idea that it was a
religious service, nor the want of an altar the idea of sacrifice, as
Hoffmann supposes. All the sacrifices of the Jewish nation were minutely
prescribed by God, so that the presentation of them was the consequence
of divine instructions. And even though the Israelites, when holding the
first Passover according to the command of God, merely gave expression
to their desire to participate in the deliverance from destruction and
the redemption of Egypt, and also to their faith in the word and promise
of God, we must neither measure the signification of this divine
institution by that fact, nor restrict it to this alone, inasmuch as it
is expressly described as a sacrificial meal.

[Exo 12:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012)

In [Exo 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012) and [Exo
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013) the name pesach is explained. In
that night Jehovah would pass through Egypt, smite all the first-born of
man and beast, execute judgment upon all the gods of Egypt, and pass
over (פּסח) the Israelites. In what the judgment upon all the gods of
Egypt consisted, it is hard to determine. The meaning of these words is
not exhausted by Calvin's remark: "God declared that He would be a judge
against the false gods, because it was most apparent then, now little
help was to be found in them, and how vain and fallacious was their
worship." The gods of Egypt were spiritual authorities and powers,
δαιμόνια, which governed the life and spirit of the Egyptians. Hence the
judgment upon them could not consist of the destruction of idols, as Ps.
Jonathan's paraphrase supposes: idola fusa colliquescent, lapidea
concidentur, testacea confringentur, lignea in cinerem redigentur. For
there is nothing said about this; but in v. 29 the death of the
first-born of men and cattle alone is mentioned as the execution of the
divine threat; and in [Num 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#004) also
the judgment upon the gods is connected with the burial of the
first-born, without special reference to anything besides. From this it
seems to follow pretty certainly, that the judgments upon the gods of
Egypt consisted in the slaying of the first-born of man and beast. But
the slaying of the first-born was a judgment upon the gods, not only
because the impotence and worthlessness of the fancied gods were
displayed in the consternation produced by this stroke, but still more
directly in the fact, that in the slaying of the king's son and many of
the first-born animals, the gods of Egypt, which were worshipped both in
their kings and also in certain sacred animals, such as the bull Apis
and the goat Nendes, were actually smitten themselves.

[Exo 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013)

To the Israelites, on the other hand, the blood upon the houses in which
they were assembled would be a sign and pledge that Jehovah would spare
them, and no plague should fall upon them to destroy (cf. [Eze
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#031); not "for the destroyer," for
there is no article with למשׁחית).

[Exo 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)

That day (the evening of the 14th) Israel was to keep "for a
commemoration as a feast to Jehovah," consecrated for all time, as an
"eternal ordinance," לדרתיכם "in your generations," i.e., for all ages,
דּרת denoting the succession of future generations (vid., [Exo
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#024)). As the divine act of Israel's
redemption was of eternal significance, so the commemoration of that act
was to be an eternal ordinance, and to be upheld as long as Israel
should exist as the redeemed people of the Lord, i.e., to all eternity,
just as the new life of the redeemed was to endure for ever. For the
Passover, the remembrance of which was to be revived by the constant
repetition of the feast, was the celebration of their birth into the new
life of fellowship with the Lord. The preservation from the stroke of
the destroyer, from which the feast received its name, was the
commencement of their redemption from the bondage of Egypt, and their
elevation into the nation of Jehovah. The blood of the paschal lamb was
atoning blood; for the Passover was a sacrifice, which combined in
itself the signification of the future sin-offerings and
peace-offerings; in other words, which shadowed forth both expiation and
quickening fellowship with God. The smearing of the houses of the
Israelites with the atoning blood of the sacrifice set forth the
reconciliation of Israel and its God, through the forgiveness and
expiation of its sins; and in the sacrificial meal which followed, their
communion with the Lord, i.e., their adoption as children of God, was
typically completed. In the meal the sacrificium became a sacramentum,
the flesh of the sacrifice a means of grace, by which the Lord adopted
His spared and redeemed people into the fellowship of His house, and
gave them food for the refreshing of their souls.

[Exo 12:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015)

Judging from the words "I brought out" in [Exo
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#017), Moses did not receive
instructions respecting the seven days' feast of Mazzoth till after the
exodus from Egypt; but on account of its internal and substantial
connection with the Passover, it is placed here in immediate association
with the institution of the paschal meal. "Seven days shall he eat
unleavened bread, only (אך) on the first day (i.e., not later than the
first day) he shall cause to cease (i.e., put away) leaven out of your
houses." The first day was the 15th of the month (cf. [Lev
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#006); [Num
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#017)). On the other hand, when
בּראשׁון is thus defined in [Exo
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018), "on the 14th day of the month
at even," this may be accounted for from the close connection between
the feast of Mazzoth and the feast of Passover, inasmuch as unleavened
bread was to be eaten with the paschal lamb, so that the leaven had to
be cleared away before this meal. The significance of this feast was in
the eating of the mazzoth, i.e., of pure unleavened bread (see [Exo
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008)). As bread, which is the
principal means of preserving life, might easily be regarded as the
symbol of life itself, so far as the latter is set forth in the means
employed for its own maintenance and invigoration, so the mazzoth, or
unleavened loaves, were symbolical of the new life, as cleansed from the
leaven of a sinful nature. But if the eating of mazzoth was to shadow
forth the new life into which Israel was transferred, any one who ate
leavened bread at the feast would renounce this new life, and was
therefore to be cut off from Israel, i.e., "from the congregation of
Israel" ([Exo 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019)).

[Exo 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016)

On the first and seventh days, a holy meeting was to be held, and labour
to be suspended. מקרא־קדשׁ is not indictio sancti, proclamatio
sanctitatis (Vitringa), but a holy assembly, i.e., a meeting of the
people for the worship of Jehovah ([Eze
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#003), [Eze
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#009)). מקרא, from קרא to call, is that
which is called, i.e., the assembly ([Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005); [Neh
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008)). No work was to be done upon
these days, except what was necessary for the preparation of food; on
the Sabbath, even this was prohibited ([Exo
35:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#002)). Hence in [Lev
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007), the "work" is called "servile
work," ordinary handicraft.

[Exo 12:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#017)

"Observe the Mazzoth" (i.e., the directions given in [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015) and [Exo
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016) respecting the feast of
Mazzoth), "for on this very day I have brought your armies out of the
land of Egypt." This was effected in the night of the 14th-15th, or
rather at midnight, and therefore in the early morning of the 15th Abib.
Because Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt on the 15th Abib,
therefore Israel was to keep Mazzoth for seven days. Of course it was
not merely a commemoration of this event, but the exodus formed the
groundwork of the seven days' feast, because it was by this that Israel
had been introduced into a new vital element. For this reason the
Israelites were to put away all the leaven of their Egyptian nature, the
leaven of malice and wickedness ([Co1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)), and by eating pure and holy
bread, and meeting for the worship of God, to show that they were
walking in newness of life. This aspect of the feast will serve to
explain the repeated emphasis laid upon the instructions given
concerning it, and the repeated threat of extermination against either
native or foreigner, in case the law should be disobeyed ([Exo
12:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018)). To eat leavened bread at
this feast, would have been a denial of the divine act, by which Israel
was introduced into the new life of fellowship with Jehovah. גּר, a
stranger, was a non-Israelite who lived for a time, or possibly for his
whole life, in the midst of the Israelitish nation, but without being
incorporated into it by circumcision. הארץ אזרח, a tree that grows upon
the soil in which it was planted; hence indigena, the native of a
country. This term was applied to the Israelites, "because they had
sprung from Isaac and Jacob, who were born in the land of Canaan, and
had received it from God as a permanent settlement" (Clericus). The
feast of Mazzoth, the commemoration of Israel's creation as the people
of Jehovah ([Isa 43:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#015)), was fixed
for seven days, to stamp upon it in the number seven the seal of the
covenant relationship. This heptad of days was made holy through the
sanctification of the first and last days by the holding of a holy
assembly, and the entire suspension of work. The beginning and the end
comprehended the whole. In the eating of unleavened bread Israel
laboured for meat for the new life ([Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)), whilst the seal of worship was
impressed upon this new life in the holy convocation, and the suspension
of labour was the symbol of rest in the Lord.

[Exo 12:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)

Of the directions given by Moses to the elders of the nation, the
leading points only are mentioned here, viz., the slaying of the lamb
and the application of the blood ([Exo
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021), [Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)). The reason for this is then
explained in [Exo 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023), and the rule
laid down in [Exo 12:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#024) for its
observance in the future.

[Exo 12:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)

"Withdraw and take:" משׁך is intransitive here, to draw away, withdraw,
as in [Jdg 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006); [Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014); [Jdg
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#037). אזוב אגדּת: a bunch or bundle
of hyssop: according to Maimonides, "quantum quis comprehendit manu
sua." אזוב (ὕσσωπος) was probably not the plant which we call hyssop,
the hyssopus officinalis, for it is uncertain whether this is to be
found in Syria and Arabia, but a species of origanum resembling hyssop,
the Arabian zter, either wild marjoram or a kind of thyme, Thymus
serpyllum, mentioned in Forsk. flora Aeg. p. 107, which is very common
in Syria and Arabia, and is called zter, or zatureya, the pepper or bean
plant. "That is in the bason;" viz the bason in which the blood had been
caught when the animal was killed. והגּעתּם, "and let it reach to, i.e.,
strike, the lintel:" in ordinary purifications the blood was sprinkled
with the bunch of hyssop ([Lev 14:51](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#051);
[Num 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#018)). The reason for the
command not to go out of the door of the house was, that in this night
of judgment there would be no safety anywhere except behind the
blood-stained door.

[Exo 12:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023)

(cf. [Exo 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013)). "He will not suffer
(יתּן) the destroyer to come into your houses:" Jehovah effected the
destruction of the first-born through המּשׁחית, the destroyer, or
destroying angel, ὁ ὁλοθρεύων ([Heb
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#028)), i.e., not a fallen angel, but
the angel of Jehovah, in whom Jehovah revealed Himself to the patriarchs
and Moses. This is not at variance with [Psa
78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049); for the writer of this psalm
regards not only the slaying of the first-born, but also the pestilence
([Exo 9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)), as effected through the
medium of angels of evil: though, according to the analogy of [Sa1
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#017), המּשׁחית might certainly be
understood collectively as applying to a company of angels. [Exo
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#024). "This word," i.e., the
instructions respecting the Passover, they were to regard as an
institution for themselves and their children for ever (עד־עולם in the
same sense as עולם, [Gen 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007), [Gen
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013)); and when dwelling in the
promised land, they were to explain the meaning of this service to their
sons. The ceremony is called עבדה, "service," inasmuch as it was the
fulfilment of a divine command, a performance demanded by God, though it
promoted the good of Israel.

[Exo 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027)

After hearing the divine instructions, the people, represented by their
elders, bowed and worshipped; not only to show their faith, but also to
manifest their gratitude for the deliverance which they were to receive
in the Passover.

[Exo 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#028)

They then proceeded to execute the command, that through the obedience
of faith they might appropriate the blessing of this "service."

[Exodus 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 12:29</span></span>

Death of the first-born, and Release of Israel. - The last blow
announced to Pharaoh took place in "the half of the night," i.e., at
midnight, when all Egypt was lying in deep sleep ([Mat
25:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#005)), to startle the king and his
people out of their sleep of sin. As all the previous plagues rested
upon a natural basis, it might seem a probable supposition that this was
also the case here, whilst the analogy of [Sa2
24:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015) might lead us to think of a
pestilence as the means employed by the destroying angel. In that case
we should find the heightening of the natural occurrence into a miracle
in the fact, that the first-born both of man and beast, and they alone,
were all suddenly slain, whilst the Israelites remained uninjured in
their houses. This view would be favoured, too, by the circumstance,
that not only are pestilences of frequent occurrence in Egypt, but they
are most fatal in the spring months. On a closer examination, however,
the circumstances mentioned tell against rather than in favour of such a
supposition. In [Sa2 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015), the
pestilence is expressly alluded to; here it is not. The previous plagues
were nearly all brought upon Egypt by Moses' staff, and with most of
them the natural sources are distinctly mentioned; but the last plague
came direct from Jehovah without the intervention of Moses, certainly
for no other reason than to make it apparent that it was a purely
supernatural punishment inflicted by His own omnipotence. The words,
"There was not a house where there was not one dead," are to be taken
literally, and not merely "as a general expression;" though, of course,
they are to be limited, according to the context, to all the houses in
which there were first-born of man or beast. The term "first-born" is
not to be extended so far, however, as to include even heads of families
who had children of their own, in which case there might be houses, as
Lapide and others suppose, where the grandfather, the father, the son,
and the wives were all lying dead, provided all of them were first-born.
The words, "From the son of Pharaoh, who will sit upon his throne, to
the son of the prisoners in the prison" ([Exo
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029) compared with [Exo
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#015)), point unquestionably to those
first-born sons alone who were not yet fathers themselves. But even with
this limitation the blow was so terrible, that the effect produced upon
Pharaoh and his people is perfectly intelligible.

[Exo 12:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030)

The very same night Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron, and gave them
permission to depart with their people, their children, and their
cattle. The statement that Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron is not at
variance with [Exo 10:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028); and there
is no necessity to resort to Calvin's explanation, "Pharaoh himself is
said to have sent for those whom he urged to depart through the medium
of messengers from the palace." The command never to appear in his sight
again did not preclude his sending for them under totally different
circumstances. The permission to depart was given unconditionally, i.e.,
without involving an obligation to return. This is evident from the
words, "Get you forth from among my people," compared with [Exo
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#008), [Exo
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#024), "Go ye, serve Jehovah," and
[Exo 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#025), "Go ye, sacrifice to your
God in the land." If in addition to this we bear in mind, that although
at first, and even after the fourth plague ([Exo
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#027)), Moses only asked for a three
days' journey to hold a festival, yet Pharaoh suspected that they would
depart altogether, and even gave utterance to this suspicion, without
being contradicted by Moses ([Exo
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#028), and [Exo
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#010)); the words "Get you forth from
among my people" cannot mean anything else than "depart altogether."
Moreover, in [Exo 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#001) it was foretold
to Moses that the result of the last blow would be, that Pharaoh would
let them go, or rather drive them away; so that the effect of this blow,
as here described, cannot be understood in any other way. And this is
really implied in Pharaoh's last words, "Go, and bless me also;" whereas
on former occasions he had only asked them to intercede for the removal
of the plagues ([Exo 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#008), [Exo
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#028); [Exo
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#028); [Exo
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#017)). בּרך, to bless, indicates a
final leave-taking, and was equivalent to a request that on their
departure they would secure or leave behind the blessing of their God,
in order that henceforth no such plague might ever befall him and his
people. This view of the words of the king is not at variance either
with the expression "as ye have said" in [Exo
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031), which refers to the words
"serve the Lord," or with the same words in [Exo
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#032), for there they refer to the
flock and herds, or lastly, with the circumstance that Pharaoh pursued
the Israelites after they had gone, with the evident intention of
bringing them back by force ([Exo
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005).), because this resolution is
expressly described as a change of mind consequent upon renewed
hardening ([Exo 14:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004)).

[Exo 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#033)

"And Egypt urged the people strongly (על חזק to press hard,
κατεβιάζοντο, lxx) to make haste, to send them out of the land;" i.e.,
the Egyptians urged the Israelites to accelerate their departure, "for
they said (sc., to themselves), "We are all dead," i.e., exposed to
death. So great was their alarm at the death of the first-born.

[Exo 12:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#034)

This urgency of the Egyptians compelled the Israelites to take the
dough, which they were probably about to bake for their journey, before
it was leavened, and also their kneading-troughs bound up in their
clothes (cloths) upon their shoulders. שׂמלה, ἱμάτιον, was a large
square piece of stuff or cloth, worn above the under-clothes, and could
be easily used for tying up different things together. The Israelites
had intended to leaven the dough, therefore, as the command to eat
unleavened bread for seven days had not been given to them yet. But
under the pressure of necessity they were obliged to content themselves
with unleavened bread, or, as it is called in [Deu
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003), "the bread of affliction,"
during the first days of their journey. But as the troubles connected
with their departure from Egypt were merely the introduction to the new
life of liberty and grace, so according to the counsel of God the bread
of affliction was to become a holy food to Israel; the days of their
exodus being exalted by the Lord into a seven days' feast, in which the
people of Jehovah were to commemorate to all ages their deliverance from
the oppression of Egypt. The long-continued eating of unleavened bread,
on account of the pressure of circumstances, formed the historical
preparation for the seven days' feast of Mazzoth, which was instituted
afterwards. Hence this circumstance is mentioned both here and in [Exo
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#039). On [Exo
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035), [Exo
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036), see [Exo
3:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#021).

[Exodus 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 12:37</span></span>

Departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt. - The starting-point
was Ramses, from which they proceeded to Succoth ([Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)), thence to Etham at the end of
the desert ([Exo 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020)), and from that
by a curve to Hachiroth, opposite to the Red Sea, from which point they
passed through the sea ([Exo 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002),
[Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021).). Now, if we take these
words simply as they stand, Israel touched the border of the desert of
Arabia by the second day, and on the third day reached the plain of Suez
and the Red Sea. But they could not possibly have gone so far, if Ramses
stood upon the site of the modern Belbeis. For though the distance from
Belbeis to Suez by the direct road past "Rejm el Khail is only a little
more than 15 geographical miles, and a caravan with camels could make
the journey in two days, this would be quite impossible for a whole
nation travelling with wives, children, cattle, and baggage. Such a
procession could never have reached Etham, on the border of the desert,
on their second day's march, and then on the third day, by a circuitous
course "of about a day's march in extent," have arrived at the plain of
Suez between Ajiruud and the sea. This is admitted by Kurtz, who
therefore follows v. Raumer in making a distinction between a stage and
a day's journey, on the ground that מסּע signifies the station or place
of encampment, and not a day's journey. But the word neither means
station nor place of encampment. It is derived from נסע to tear out
(sc., the pegs of the tent), hence to take down the tent; and denotes
removal from the place of encampment, and the subsequent march (cf. [Num
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)). Such a march might indeed
embrace more than a day's journey; but whenever the Israelites travelled
more than a day before pitching their tents, it is expressly mentioned
(cf. [Num 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033), and [Num
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#008), with [Exo
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)). These passages show very
clearly that the stages from Ramses to Succoth, thence to Etham, and
then again to Hachiroth, were a day's march each. The only question is,
whether they only rested for one night at each of these places. The
circumstances under which the Israelites took their departure favour the
supposition, that they would get out of the Egyptian territory as
quickly as possible, and rest no longer than was absolutely necessary;
but the gathering of the whole nation, which was not collected together
in one spot, as in a camp, at the time of their departure, and still
more the confusion, and interruptions of various kinds, that would
inevitably attend the migration of a whole nation, render it probable
that they rested longer than one night at each of the places named. This
would explain most simply, how Pharaoh was able to overtake them with
his army at Hachiroth. But whatever our views on this point may be, so
much is certain, that Israel could not have reached the plain of Suez in
a three days' march from Belbeis with the circuitous route by Etham, and
therefore that their starting-point cannot have been Belbeis, but must
have been in the neighbourhood of Heropolis; and there are other things
that favour this conclusion. There is, first, the circumstance that
Pharaoh sent for Moses the very same night after the slaying of the
first-born, and told him to depart. Now the Pentateuch does not mention
Pharaoh's place of abode, but according to [Psa
78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012) it was Zoan, i.e., Tanis, on the
eastern bank of the Tanitic arm of the Nile. Abu Keishib (or Heroopolis)
is only half as far from Tanis as Belbeis, and the possibility of Moses
appearing before the king and returning to his own people between
midnight and the morning is perfectly conceivable, on the supposition
that Moses was not in Heroopolis itself, but was staying in a more
northerly place, with the expectation that Pharaoh would send a message
to him, or send for him, after the final blow. Again, Abu Keishib was on
the way to Gaza; so that the Israelites might take the road towards the
country of the Philistines, and then, as this was not the road they were
to take, turn round at God's command by the road to the desert ([Exo
13:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)). Lastly, Etham could be
reached in two days from the starting-point named.

(Note: The different views as to the march of the Israelites from
Raemses to their passage through the sea, are to be found in the Studien
und Kritiken, 1850, pp. 328ff., and in Kurtz, ii. pp. 361ff.)

On the situation of Succoth and Etham, see [Exo
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020).

The Israelites departed, "about 600,000 on foot that were men." רגלי (as
in [Num 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#021), the infantry of an
army) is added, because they went out as an army ([Exo
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041)), and none are numbered but
those who could bear arms, from 20 years old and upwards; and הגּברים
because of מטּף לבד, "beside the little ones," which follows. טף is used
here in its broader sense, as in [Gen
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#012); [Num
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016), [Num
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#024), and applies to the entire
family, including the wife and children, who did not travel on foot, but
on beasts of burden and in carriages ([Gen
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#017)). The number given is an
approximative one. The numbering at Sinai gave 603,550 males of 20 years
old and upwards ([Num 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#046)), and
22,000 male Levites of a month old and upwards ([Num
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#039)). Now if we add the wives and
children, the total number of the people may have been about two million
souls. The multiplication of the seventy souls, who went down with Jacob
to Egypt, into this vast multitude, is not so disproportionate to the
430 years of their sojourn there, as to render it at all necessary to
assume that the numbers given included not only the descendants of the
seventy souls who went down with Jacob, but also those of "several
thousand man-servants and maid-servants" who accompanied them. For,
apart from the fact, that we are not warranted in concluding, that
because Abraham had 318 fighting servants, the twelve sons of Jacob had
several thousand, and took them with them into Egypt; even if the
servants had been received into the religious fellowship of Israel by
circumcision, they cannot have reckoned among the 600,000 who went out,
for the simple reason that they are not included in the seventy souls
who went down to Egypt; and in [Exo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005) the number of those who came out
is placed in unmistakeable connection with the number of those who went
in. If we deduct from the 70 souls the patriarch Jacob, his 12 sons,
Dinah, Asher's daughter Zerah, the three sons of Levi, the four
grandsons of Judah and Benjamin, and those grandsons of Jacob who
probably died without leaving any male posterity, since their
descendants are not mentioned among the families of Israel, there remain
41 grandsons of Jacob who founded families, in addition to the Levites.
Now, if we follow [Ch1 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#020)., where
ten or eleven generations are mentioned between Ephraim and Joshua, and
reckon 40 years as a generation, the tenth generation of the 41
grandsons of Jacob would be born about the year 400 of the sojourn in
Egypt, and therefore be over 20 years of age at the time of the exodus.
Let us assume, that on an average there were three sons and three
daughters to every married couple in the first six of these generations,
two sons and two daughters in the last four, and we shall find, that in
the tenth generation there would be 478,224 sons about the 400th year of
the sojourn in Egypt, who would therefore be above 20 years of age at
the time of the exodus, whilst 125,326 men of the ninth generation would
be still living, so that there would be 478,224 + 125,326, or 603,550
men coming out of Egypt, who were more than 20 years old. But though our
calculation is based upon no more than the ordinary number of births, a
special blessing from God is to be discerned not only in this
fruitfulness, which we suppose to have been uninterrupted, but still
more in the fact, that the presumed number of children continued alive,
and begot the same number of children themselves; and the divine grace
was peculiarly manifest in the fact, that neither pestilence nor other
evils, nor even the measures adopted by the Pharaohs for the suppression
of Israel, could diminish their numbers or restrain their increase. If
the question be asked, how the land of Goshen could sustain so large a
number, especially as the Israelites were not the only inhabitants, but
lived along with Egyptians there, it is a sufficient reply, that
according to both ancient and modern testimony (cf. Robinson, Pal. i. p.
78), this is the most fertile province in all Egypt, and that we are not
so well acquainted with the extent of the territory inhabited by the
Israelites, as to be able to estimate the amount of its produce.

[Exo 12:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038)

In typical fulfilment of the promise in [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003), and no doubt induced by the
signs and wonders of the Lord in Egypt to seek their good among the
Israelites, a great crowd of mixed people (רב ערב) attached themselves
to them, whom Israel could not shake off, although they afterwards
became a snare to them ([Num 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004)).
ערב: lit., a mixture, ἐπίμικτος sc., λαός (lxx), a swarm of foreigners;
called אספסף in [Num 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004), a medley,
or crowd of people of different nations. According to [Deu
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010), they seem to have occupied a
very low position among the Israelites, and to have furnished the nation
of God with hewers of wood and drawers of water. - On [Exo
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029), see [Exo
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#034).

[Exo 12:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040)

The sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt had lasted 430 years. This number
is not critically doubtful, nor are the 430 years to be reduced to 215
by an arbitrary interpolation, such as we find in the lxx, ἡ δὲ
κατοίκησις τῶν υἱῶν Ἰσραήλ ἥν κατῷκησαν (Cod. Alex. αὐτοὶ καὶ οί πατέρες
αὐτῶν) ἐν γῇ Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ ἐν γῇ Χαναάν, κ.τ.λ. This chronological
statement, the genuineness of which is placed beyond all doubt by
Onkelos, the Syriac, Vulgate, and other versions, is not only in harmony
with the prediction in [Gen 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013),
where the round number 400 is employed in prophetic style, but may be
reconciled with the different genealogical lists, if we only bear in
mind that the genealogies do not always contain a complete enumeration
of all the separate links, but very frequently intermediate links of
little historical importance are omitted, as we have already seen in the
genealogy of Moses and Aaron ([Exo
6:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018)). For example, the fact that
there were more than the four generations mentioned in [Exo
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#016). between Levi and Moses, is
placed beyond all doubt, not only by what has been adduced at [Exo
6:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018), but by a comparison with
other genealogies also. Thus, in [Num
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#029)., [Exo
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001); [Jos
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#003), we find six generations from
Joseph to Zelophehad; in [Rut 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018).,
[Ch1 2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#005), there are also six from
Judah to Nahshon, the tribe prince in the time of Moses; in [Ch1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#018) there are seven from Judah to
Bezaleel, the builder of the tabernacle; and in [Ch1
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#020)., nine or ten are given from
Joseph to Joshua. This last genealogy shows most clearly the
impossibility of the view founded upon the Alexandrian version, that the
sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt lasted only 215 years; for ten
generations, reckoned at 40 years each, harmonize very well with 430
years, but certainly not with 215.

(Note: The Alexandrian translators have arbitrarily altered the text to
suit the genealogy of Moses in [Exo
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#016)., just as in the genealogies of
the patriarchs in Gen 5 and 11. The view held by the Seventy became
traditional in the synagogue, and the Apostle Paul followed it in [Gal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017), where he reckoned the interval
between the promise to Abraham and the giving of the law as 430 years,
the question of chronological exactness having no bearing upon his
subject at the time.)

The statement in [Exo 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041), "the
self-same day," is not to be understood as relating to the first day
after the lapse of the 430 years, as though the writer supposed that it
was on the 14th Abib that Jacob entered Egypt 430 years before, but
points back to the day of the exodus, mentioned in [Exo
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014), as compared with [Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)., i.e., the 15th Abib (cf. [Exo
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051) and [Exo
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004)). On "the hosts of Jehovah," see
[Exo 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004).

[Exo 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#042)

This day therefore was שׁמּרים ליל, "a preservation-night of the Lord,
to bring them out of the land of Egypt." The apax legomenon שׁמּרים does
not mean "celebration, from שׁמר to observe, to honour" (Knobel), but
"preservation," from שׁמר to keep, to preserve; and ליהוה is the same as
in [Exo 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027). "This same night is
(consecrated) to the Lord as a preservation for all children of Israel
in their families." Because Jehovah had preserved the children of Israel
that night from the destroyer, it was to be holy to them, i.e., to be
kept by them in all future ages to the glory of the Lord, as a
preservation.

[Exodus 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">exo 12:43</span></span>

Regulations Concerning the Participants in the Passover. - These
regulations, which were supplementary to the law of the Passover in [Exo
12:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003), were not communicated before
the exodus; because it was only by the fact that a crowd of foreigners
attached themselves to the Israelites, that Israel was brought into a
connection with foreigners, which needed to be clearly defined,
especially so far as the Passover was concerned, the festival of
Israel's birth as the people of God. If the Passover was still to retain
this signification, of course no foreigner could participate in it. This
is the first regulation. But as it was by virtue of a divine call, and
not through natural descent, that Israel had become the people of
Jehovah, and as it was destined in that capacity to be a blessing to all
nations, the attitude assumed towards foreigners was not to be an
altogether repelling one. Hence the further directions in [Exo
12:44](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#044) : purchased servants, who had
been politically incorporated as Israel's property, were to be entirely
incorporated by circumcision, so as even to take part in the Passover.
But settlers, and servants working for wages, were not to eat of it, for
they stood in a purely external relation, which might be any day
dissolved. בּ אכל, lit., to eat at anything, to take part in the eating
([Lev 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#011)). The deeper ground fore
this was, that in this meal Israel was to preserve and celebrate its
unity and fellowship with Jehovah. This was the meaning of the
regulations, which were repeated in [Exo
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046) and [Exo
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#047) from [Exo
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#004), [Exo
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#009), and [Exo
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010), where they had been already
explained. If, therefore, a foreigner living among the Israelites wished
to keep the Passover, he was first of all to be spiritually incorporated
into the nation of Jehovah by circumcision ([Exo
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048)). פס ועשׂה: "And he has made
(i.e., made ready) a passover to Jehovah, let every male be circumcised
to him (i.e., he himself, and the male members of his house), and then
he may draw near (sc., to Jehovah) to keep it." The first עשׂה denotes
the wish or intention to do it, the second, the actual execution of the
wish. The words בּן־נכר, גּר, תּושׁב and שׂכיר, are all indicative of
non-Israelites. בּן־נכר was applied quite generally to any foreigner
springing from another nation; גּר was a foreigner living for a shorter
or longer time in the midst of the Israelites; תּושׁב, lit., a dweller,
settler, was one who settled permanently among the Israelites, without
being received into their religious fellowship; שׂכיר was the
non-Israelite, who worked for an Israelite for wages.

[Exodus 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">exo 12:49</span></span>

There was one law with reference to the Passover which was applicable
both to the native and the foreigner: no uncircumcised man was to be
allowed to eat of it.

[Exodus 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">exo 12:50</span></span>

[Exo 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#050) closes the instructions
concerning the Passover with the statement that the Israelites carried
them out, viz., in after times (e.g., [Num
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#005)); and in [Exo
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051) the account of the exodus from
Egypt is also brought to a close. All that Jehovah promised to Moses in
[Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006) and [Exo
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#026) had now been fulfilled. But
although v. 51 is a concluding formula, and so belongs to the account
just closed, Abenezra was so far right in wishing to connect this verse
with the commencement of the following chapter, that such concluding
formulae generally serve to link together the different incidents, and
therefore not only wind up what goes before, but introduce what has yet
to come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 13](exo013)

</div>
