<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo005)  [Next](exo007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001)

[Exodus 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 6:1</span></span>

Equipment of Moses and Aaron as Messengers of Jehovah. - [Exo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001). In reply to the complaining
inquiry of Moses, Jehovah promised him the deliverance of Israel by a
strong hand (cf. [Exo 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#019)), by which
Pharaoh would be compelled to let Israel go, and even to drive them out
of his land. Moses did not receive any direct answer to the question,
"Why hast Thou so evil-entreated this people?" He was to gather this
first of all from his own experience as the leader of Israel. For the
words were strictly applicable here: "What I do thou knowest not now,
but thou shalt know hereafter" ([Joh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007)). If, even after the miraculous
deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt and their glorious march
through the desert, in which they had received so many proofs of the
omnipotence and mercy of their God, they repeatedly rebelled against the
guidance of God, and were not content with the manna provided by the
Lord, but lusted after the fishes, leeks, and onions of Egypt (Num 11);
it is certain that in such a state of mind as this, they would never
have been willing to leave Egypt and enter into a covenant with Jehovah,
without a very great increase in the oppression they endured in Egypt. -
The brief but comprehensive promise was still further explained by the
Lord ([Exo 6:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002)), and Moses was
instructed and authorized to carry out the divine purposes in concert
with Aaron ([Exo 6:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#010), [Exo
6:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#028); [Exo
7:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)). The genealogy of the two
messengers is then introduced into the midst of these instructions ([Exo
6:14-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014)); and the age of Moses is
given at the close ([Exo 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007)). This
section does not contain a different account of the calling of Moses,
taken from some other source than the previous one; it rather
presupposes Exo 3-5, and completes the account commenced in Exo 3 of the
equipment of Moses and Aaron as the executors of the divine will with
regard to Pharaoh and Israel. For the fact that the first visit paid by
Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh was simply intended to bring out the attitude
of Pharaoh towards the purposes of Jehovah, and to show the necessity
for the great judgments of God, is distinctly expressed in the words,
"Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh." But before these
judgments commenced, Jehovah announced to Moses ([Exo
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002)), and through him to the people,
that henceforth He would manifest Himself to them in a much more
glorious manner than to the patriarchs, namely, as Jehovah; whereas to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, He had only appeared as El Shaddai. The
words, "By My name Jehovah was I now known to them," do not mean,
however, that the patriarchs were altogether ignorant of the name
Jehovah. This is obvious from the significant use of that name, which
was not an unmeaning sound, but a real expression of the divine nature,
and still more from the unmistakeable connection between the explanation
given by God here and [Gen 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001). When
the establishment of the covenant commenced, as described in Gen 15,
with the institution of the covenant sign of circumcision and the
promise of the birth of Isaac, Jehovah said to Abram, "I am El Shaddai,
God Almighty," and from that time forward manifested Himself to Abram
and his wife as the Almighty, in the birth of Isaac, which took place
apart altogether from the powers of nature, and also in the
preservation, guidance, and multiplication of his seed. It was in His
attribute as El Shaddai that God had revealed His nature to the
patriarchs; but now He was about to reveal Himself to Israel as Jehovah,
as the absolute Being working with unbounded freedom in the performance
of His promises. For not only had He established His covenant with the
fathers ([Exo 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#004)), but He had also
heard the groaning of the children of Israel, and remembered His
covenant ([Exo 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#005); וגם - וגם, not
only - but also). The divine promise not only commences in [Exo
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002), but concludes at [Exo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008), with the emphatic expression, "I
Jehovah," to show that the work of Israel's redemption resided in the
power of the name Jehovah. In [Exo 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#004)
the covenant promises of [Gen 17:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007);
[Gen 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#003); [Gen
35:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011), are all brought together;
and in [Exo 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#005) we have a repetition
of [Exo 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#024), with the emphatically
repeated אני (I). On the ground of the erection of His covenant on the
one hand, and, what was irreconcilable with that covenant, the bondage
of Israel on the other, Jehovah was not about to redeem Israel from its
sufferings and make it His own nation. This assurance, which God would
carry out by the manifestation of His nature as expressed in the name
Jehovah, contained three distinct elements: (a) the deliverance of
Israel from the bondage of Egypt, which, because so utterly different
from all outward appearances, is described in three parallel clauses:
bringing them out from under the burdens of the Egyptians; saving them
from their bondage; and redeeming them with a stretched-out arm and with
great judgments; - (b) the adoption of Israel as the nation of God; -
(c) the guidance of Israel into the land promised to the fathers ([Exo
6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006)). נטוּיה זרוע, a stretched-out
arm, is most appropriately connected with גּדלים שׁפטים, great
judgments; for God raises, stretches out His arm, when He proceeds in
judgment to smite the rebellious. These expressions repeat with greater
emphasis the "strong hand" of [Exo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001), and are frequently connected with
it in the rhetorical language of Deuteronomy (e.g., [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034); [Deu
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015); [Deu
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#019)). The "great judgments" were the
plagues, the judgments of God, by which Pharaoh was to be compelled to
let Israel go.

[Exodus 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 6:7</span></span>

The adoption of Israel as the nation of God took place at Sinai ([Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)). וגו נשׁאתי אשׁר, "with regard
to which I have lifted up My hand to give it" ([Exo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008)). Lifting up the hand (sc.,
towards heaven) is the attitude of swearing ([Deu
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#040) cf. [Gen
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022)); and these words point back to
[Gen 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016). and [Gen
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#003) (cf. [Gen
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#007) and [Gen
50:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024)).

[Exodus 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 6:9</span></span>

When Moses communicated this solemn assurance of God to the people, they
did not listen to him רוּה מּקּצר, lit., "for shortness of breath;" not
"from impatience" (like קצר־רוּח, [Pro
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#029), in contrast to אפּים ארך), but
from anguish, inward pressure, which prevents a man from breathing
properly. Thus the early belief of the Israelites was changed into the
despondency of unbelief through the increase of their oppression. This
result also produced despondency in Moses' mind, so that he once more
declined the commission, which followed the promise, viz., to go to
Pharaoh and demand that he would let Israel go out of his land ([Exo
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#011)). If the children of Israel would
not listen to him, how should Pharaoh hear him, especially as he was
uncircumcised in the lips ([Exo 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#012))?
שׁפתים ערל is one whose lips are, as it were, covered with a foreskin,
so that he cannot easily bring out his words; in meaning the same as
"heavy of mouth" in [Exo 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010). The
reply of God to this objection is given in [Exo
7:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001). For, before the historian gives
the decisive answer of Jehovah which removed all further hesitation on
the part of Moses, and completed his mission and that of Aaron to
Pharaoh, he considers it advisable to introduce the genealogy of the two
men of God, for the purpose of showing clearly their genealogical
relation to the people of Israel.

[Exodus 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 6:13</span></span>

[Exo 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#013) forms a concluding summary,
and prepares the way for the genealogy that follows, the heading of
which is given in [Exo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014).

(Note: The organic connection of this genealogy with the entire
narrative has been so conclusively demonstrated by Ranke, in his
Unterss. ub. d. Pent. i. p. 68ff. and ii. 19ff., that even Knobel has
admitted it, and thrown away the fragmentary hypothesis.)

[Exodus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 6:14</span></span>

The Genealogy of Moses and Aaron. - "These are their (Moses' and
Aaron's) father's-houses." בּית־אבות father's-houses (not fathers'
house) is a composite noun, so formed that the two words not only denote
one idea, but are treated grammatically as one word, like בּית־עצבּים
idol-houses ([Sa1 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#009)), and
בּית־בּמות high-place-houses (cf. Ges. 108, 3; Ewald, 270c). Father's
house was a technical term applied to a collection of families, called
by the name of a common ancestor. The father's-houses were the larger
divisions into which the families (mishpachoth), the largest
subdivisions of the tribes of Israel, were grouped. To show clearly the
genealogical position of Levi, the tribe-father of Moses and Aaron,
among the sons of Jacob, the genealogy commences with Reuben, the
first-born of Jacob, and gives the names of such of his sons and those
of Simeon as were the founders of families ([Gen
46:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#009)). Then follows Levi; and not
only are the names of his three sons given, but the length of his life
is mentioned ([Exo 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#016)), also that of
his son Kohath and his descendant Amram, because they were the
tribe-fathers of Moses and Aaron. But the Amram mentioned in [Exo
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#020) as the father of Moses, cannot be
the same person as the Amram who was the son of Kohath ([Exo
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018)), but must be a later descendant.
For, however the sameness of names may seem to favour the identity of
the persons, if we simply look at the genealogy before us, a comparison
of this passage with [Num 3:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#027) will
show the impossibility of such an assumption. "According to [Num
3:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#027), the Kohathites were divided
(in Moses' time) into the four branches, Amramites, Izharites,
Hebronites, and Uzzielites, who consisted together of 8600 men and boys
(women and girls not being included). Of these, about a fourth, or 2150
men, would belong to the Amramites. Now, according to [Exo
18:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#003), Moses himself had only two
sons. Consequently, if Amram the son of Kohath, and tribe-father of the
Amramites, was the same person as Amram the father of Moses, Moses must
have had 2147 brothers and brothers' sons (the brothers' daughters, the
sisters, and their daughters, not being reckoned at all). But as this is
absolutely impossible, it must be granted that Amram the son of Kohath
was not the father of Moses, and that an indefinitely long list of
generations has been omitted between the former and his descendant of
the same name" (Tiele, Chr. des A. T. p. 36).

(Note: The objections of M. Baumgarten to these correct remarks have
been conclusively met by Kurtz (Hist. of O. C. vol. ii. p. 144). We find
a similar case in the genealogy of Ezra in [Ezr
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#003), which passes over from Azariah
the son of Meraioth to Azariah the son of Johanan, and omits five links
between the two, as we may see from [Ch1
6:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#007). In the same way the genealogy
before us skips over from Amram the son of Kohath to Amram the father of
Moses without mentioning the generations between.)

The enumeration of only four generations, viz., Levi, Iohath, Amram,
Moses, is unmistakeably related to [Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016), where it is stated that the
fourth generation would return to Canaan. Amram's wife Jochebed, who is
merely spoken of in general terms as a daughter of Levi (a Levitess) in
[Exo 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001) and [Num
26:59](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#059), is called here the דּודה "aunt"
(father's sister) of Amram, a marriage which was prohibited in the
Mosaic law ([Lev 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#012)), but was
allowed before the giving of the law; so that there is no reason for
following the lxx and Vulgate, and rendering the word, in direct
opposition to the usage of the language, patruelis, the father's
brother's daughter. Amram's sons are placed according to their age:
Aaron, then Moses, as Aaron was three years older than his brother.
Their sister Miriam was older still (vid., [Exo
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#004)). In the lxx, Vulg., and one
Hebrew MS, she is mentioned here; but this is a later interpolation. In
[Exo 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#021). not only are the sons of
Aaron mentioned ([Exo 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#023)), but those
of two of Amram's brothers, Izhar and Uzziel ([Exo
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#021), [Exo
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#022)), and also Phinehas, the son of
Aaron's son Eleazar ([Exo 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#025)); as
the genealogy was intended to trace the descent of the principal
priestly families, among which again special prominence is given to
Aaron and Eleazar by the introduction of their wives. On the other hand,
none of the sons of Moses are mentioned, because his dignity was limited
to his own person, and his descendants fell behind those of Aaron, and
were simply reckoned among the non-priestly families of Levi. The
Korahites and Uzzielites are mentioned, but a superior rank was assigned
to them in the subsequent history to that of other Levitical families
(cf. Num 16-17; [Num 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#011), and [Num
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#030) with [Lev
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#004)). Aaron's wife Elisheba was of
the princely tribe of Judah, and her brother Naashon was a tribe-prince
of Judah (cf. [Num 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#003)). אבות ראשׁי
([Exo 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#025)), a frequent abbreviation
for בית־אבות ראשׁי, heads of the father's-houses of the Levites. In [Exo
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#026) and [Exo
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#027), with which the genealogy closes,
the object of introducing it is very clearly shown in the expression,
"These are that Aaron and Moses," at the beginning of [Exo
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#026); and again, "These are that Moses
and Aaron," at the close of [Exo 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#027).
The reversal of the order of the names is also to be noticed. In the
genealogy itself Aaron stands first, as the elder of the two; in the
conclusion, which leads over to the historical narrative that follows,
Moses takes precedence of his elder brother, as being the divinely
appointed redeemer of Israel. On the expression, "according to their
armies," see [Exo 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004).

[Exodus 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 6:28</span></span>

In [Exo 6:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#028) the thread of the
history, which was broken off at [Exo
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#012), is again resumed. דּבּר בּיום,
on the day, i.e., at the time, when God spake. יום is the construct
state before an entire clause, which is governed by it without a
relative particle, as in [Lev 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#035);
[Sa1 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#015) (vid., Ewald, 286i).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 7](exo007)

</div>
