<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo024)  [Next](exo026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 25:0</span></span>

Directions Concerning the Sanctuaryand Priesthood - Exodus 25-31

To give a definite external form to the covenant concluded with His
people, and construct a visible bond of fellowship in which He might
manifest Himself to the people and they might draw near to Him as their
God, Jehovah told Moses that the Israelites were to erect Him a
sanctuary, that He might dwell in the midst of them ([Exo
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#008)). The construction and
arrangement of this sanctuary were determined in all respects by God
Himself, who showed to Moses, when upon the mountain, a pattern of the
dwelling and its furniture, and prescribed with great minuteness both
the form and materials of all the different parts of the sanctuary and
all the things required for the sacred service. If the sanctuary was to
answer its purpose, the erection of it could not be left to the
inventive faculty of any man whatever, but must proceed from Him, who
was there to manifest Himself to the nation, as the Holy One, in
righteousness and grace. The people could only carry out what God
appointed, and could only fulfil their covenant duty, by the readiness
with which they supplied the materials required for the erection of the
sanctuary and completed the work with their own hands. The divine
directions extended to all the details, because they were all of
importance in relation to the design of God. The account therefore is so
elaborate, that it contains a description not only of the directions of
God with reference to the whole and every separate part (ch. 25-31), but
also of the execution of the work in all its details (ch. 35-40).

The following is the plan upon which this section is arranged. After the
command of God to the people to offer gifts for the sanctuary about to
be erected, which forms the introduction to the whole ([Exo
25:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001)), the further directions
commence with a description of the ark of the covenant, which Jehovah
had appointed as His throne in the sanctuary, that is to say, as it
were, with the sanctuary in the sanctuary ([Exo
25:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010)). Then follow - (1) the table
of shew-bread and the golden candlestick (Ex 25:23-40), as the two
things by means of which the continual communion of Israel with Jehovah
was to be maintained; (2) the construction of the dwelling, with an
account of the position to be occupied by the three things already named
(ch. 26); (3) the altar of burnt-offering, together with the court which
was to surround the holy dwelling (Ex 27:1-19). This is immediately
followed by the command respecting the management of the candlestick
([Exo 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020), [Exo
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021)), which prepares the way for an
account of the institution of the priesthood, and the investiture and
consecration of the priests (ch. 28 and 29), and by the directions as to
the altar of incense, and the service to be performed at it ([Exo
30:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001)); after which, there only
remain a few subordinate instructions to complete the whole (Ex
30:11-31:17). "The description of the entire sanctuary commences,
therefore," as Ranke has aptly observed, "with the ark of the law, the
place of the manifestation of Jehovah, and terminates with the altar of
incense, which stood immediately in front of it." The dwelling was
erected round Jehovah's seat, and round this the court. The priests
first of all presented the sacrifices upon the altar of burnt-offering,
and then proceeded into the holy place and drew near to Jehovah. The
highest act in the daily service of the priests was evidently this
standing before Jehovah at the altar of incense, which was only
separated by the curtain from the most holy place.

[Exodus 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 25:1</span></span>

[Exo 25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001)

(cf. [Exo 35:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001)). The Israelites were
to bring to the Lord a heave-offering (תּרוּמה from רוּם, a gift lifted,
or heaved by a man from his own property to present to the Lord; see at
[Lev 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009)), "on the part of every one
whom his heart drove," i.e., whose heart was willing (cf. לבּו נדיב [Exo
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#005), [Exo
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#022)): viz., gold, silver, brass,
etc.

[Exo 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#004)

תּכלת, ὑάκινθος, purple of a dark blue shade, approaching black rather
than bright blue. ארגּמן, πορφύρα (Chald. ארגּון, 2 Chron, [Exo
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#006); [Dan
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007), [Dan
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#016); - Sanskrit, rgaman or rgavan,
colore rubro praeditus), true purple of a dark red colour. שׁני תּולעת,
literally the crimson prepared from the dead bodies and nests of the
glow-worm,

(Note: Glanzwurm: "the Linnean name is coccus ilicis. It frequents the
boughs of a species of ilex; on these it lays its eggs in groups, which
become covered with a kind of down." Smith's Dictionary, Art. Colours. -
Tr.)

then the scarlet-red purple, or crimson. שׁשׁ, βύσσος, from שׁוּשׁ to be
white, a fine white cotton fabric, not linen, muslin, or net. עזים
goats, here goats' hair (τρίχες αἰγείαι, lxx).

[Exo 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005)

מאדּמים אלים ערת rams' skins reddened, i.e., dyed red. תּחשׁ is either
the seal, phoca, or else, as this is not known to exist in the Arabian
Gulf, the φῶκος = φώκαινα of the ancients, as Knobel supposes, or κῆτος
θαλάσσιον ὅμοιον δελφῖνι, the sea-cow (Manati, Halicora), which is found
in the Red Sea, and has a skin that is admirably adapted for sandals.
Hesychius supposes it to have been the latter, which is probably the
same as the large fish Tn or Atm, that is caught in the Red Sea, and
belongs to the same species as the Halicora (Robinson, Pal. i. p. 170);
as its skin is also used by the Bedouin Arabs for making sandals
(Burckhardt, Syr. p. 861). In the Manati the upper skin differs from the
under; the former being larger, thicker, and coarser than the latter,
which is only two lines in thickness and very tough, so that the skin
would be well adapted either for the thick covering of tents or for the
finer kinds of ornamental sandals ([Eze
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010)). שׁטּים עצי acacia-wood. שׁטּה
for שׁנטה, the true acacia (acacia vera), which grows in Egypt and on
the Arabian peninsula into a tree of the size of a nut-tree, or even
larger;

(Note: See Abdallatif's Merkwrdigkeiten Aegyptens, and Rosenmller,
Althk. iv. i. pp. 278-9. This genuine acacia, Sont, must not be
confounded, according to Robinson (Pal. 2, 350), with the Acacia
gumnifera (Talh). Seetzen also makes a distinction between the Thollhh,
the Szont of the Egyptians, and the Szeil, and between an acacia which
produces gum and one which does not; but he also observes that the same
tree is called both Thollhh and Szeil in different places. He then goes
on to say that he did not find a single tree large enough to furnish
planks of ten cubits in length and one and a half in breadth for the
construction of the ark (he means, of the tabernacle), and he therefore
conjectures that the Israelites may have gone to Egypt for the materials
with which to build the tabernacle. But he has overlooked the fact, that
it is not stated in the text of the Bible that the boards of the
tabernacle, which were a cubit and a half in breadth, were cut from one
plank of the breadth named; and also that the trees in the valleys of
the peninsula of Sinai are being more and more sacrificed to the
charcoal trade of the Bedouin Arabs (see p. 366), and therefore that no
conclusion can be drawn from the present condition of the trees as to
what they were in the far distant antiquity.)

the only tree in Arabia deserta from which planks could be cut, and the
wood of which is very light and yet very durable.

[Exo 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#006)

Oil for the candlestick (see at [Exo
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020)). בּשׂמים perfumes, spices for
the anointing oil (see at [Exo
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#022).), and for the incense (הסּמּים,
lit., the scents, because the materials of which it was composed were
not all of them fragrant; see at [Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034).).

[Exo 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#007)

Lastly, precious stones, שׁהם אבני probably beryls (see at [Gen
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#012)), for the ephod ([Exo
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#009)), and מלּאים אבני, lit., stones
of filling, i.e., jewels that are set (see [Exo
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#016).). On ephod (אפד), see at [Exo
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006); and on חשׁן, at [Exo
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015). The precious stones were
presented by the princes of the congregation ([Exo
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#027)).

[Exo 25:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#008)

With these freewill-offerings they were to make the Lord a sanctuary,
that He might dwell in the midst of them (see at [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022)). "According to all that I let
thee see (show thee), the pattern of the dwelling and the pattern of all
its furniture, so shall ye make it." The participle מראה does not refer
to the past; and there is nothing to indicate that it does, either in
[Exo 25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040), where "in the mount"
occurs, or in the use of the preterite in [Exo
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#030); [Exo
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#008). It does not follow from the
expression, "which is showed thee in the mount," that Moses had already
left the mountain and returned to the camp; and the use of the preterite
in the passages last named may be simply explained, either on the
supposition that the sight of the pattern or model of the whole building
and its component parts preceded the description of the different things
required for the completion of the building, or that the instructions to
make the different parts in such and such a way, pointed to a time when
the sight of the model really belonged to the past. On the other hand,
the model for the building could not well be shown to Moses, before he
had been told that the gifts to be made by the people were to be devoted
to the building of a sanctuary. תּבנית, from בּנה to build, lit., a
building, then a figure of anything, a copy of representation of
different things, [Deu 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#017).; a
drawing or sketch, [Kg2 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010) : it
never means the original, not even in [Psa
144:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#012), as Delitzsch supposes (see his
Com. on [Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)). In such passages as
[Ch1 28:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#011), [Ch1
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#019), where it may be rendered plan,
it does not signify an original, but simply means a model or drawing,
founded upon an idea, or taken from some existing object, according to
which a building was to be constructed. Still less can the object
connected with תבנית in the genitive be understood as referring to the
original, from which the תבנית was taken; so that we cannot follow the
Rabbins in their interpretation of this passage, as affirming that the
heavenly originals of the tabernacle and its furniture had been shown to
Moses in a vision upon the mountain. What was shown to him was simply a
picture or model of the earthly tabernacle and its furniture, which were
to be made by him. Both [Act 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044) and
[Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005) are perfectly reconcilable
with this interpretation of our verse, which is the only one that can be
grammatically sustained. The words of Stephen, that Moses was to make
the tabernacle κατὰ τὸν τύπον ὅν ἑωράκει, "according to the fashion that
he had seen," are so indefinite, that the text of Exodus must be adduced
to explain them. And when the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews cites
the words, "See that thou make all things κατὰ τὸν τύπον τὸν δειχθέντα
σοι ἐν τῷ ὄρει" (according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount),
from [Exo 25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040) of this chapter, as a
proof the Levitical priests only served the type and shadow of heavenly
things (τῶν ἐπουρανίων); it is true, his words may be understood as
showing that he regarded the earthly tabernacle with all its
arrangements as only the counterpart and copy of a heavenly original.
But this interpretation is neither necessary nor well founded. For
although the author, by following the Sept., in which בּתניתם is
rendered κατὰ τὸν τύπον, the suffix being dropped, leaves it just a
possible thing to understand the τύπος shown to Moses as denoting a
heavenly tabernacle (or temple); yet he has shown very clearly that this
was not his own view, when he explains the "patterns of things in the
heavens" (ὑποδείγματα τῶν ἐν οὐρανοῖς) and "the true" things (τὰ
ἀληθινά) of both the tabernacle and its furniture as denoting the
"heaven" (οὐρανός) into which Christ had entered, and not any temple in
heaven. If the ἐπουράνια are heaven itself, the τύπος showed to Moses
cannot have been a temple in heaven, but either heaven itself, or, more
probably still, as there could be no necessity for this to be shown to
Moses in a pictorial representation, a picture of heavenly things or
divine realities, which was shown to Moses that he might copy and embody
it in the earthly tabernacle.

(Note: The conclusion drawn by Delitzsch (Hebrerbrief, p. 337), that
because the author does not refer to anything between the ἐπουράνια and
their ἀντίτυπα ([Exo 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#024)), the τύπος
can only have consisted of the ἐπουράνια themselves, is a mistake. All
that the premises preclude, is the intervention of any objective
reality, or third material object, but not the introduction of a
pictorial representation, through which Moses was shown how to copy the
heavenly realities and embody them in an earthly form. The earthly tent
would no more be a copy of the copy of a heavenly original in this case,
than a palace built according to a model is a copy of that model.
Moreover, Delitzsch himself thinks it is "not conceivable that, when
Moses was favoured with a view of the heavenly world, it was left to him
to embody what he saw in a material form, to bring it within the limits
of space." He therefore assumes, both for the reason assigned, and
because "no mortal has ever looked directly at heavenly things," that
"inasmuch as what was seen could not be directly reflected in the mirror
of his mind, not to mention the retina of his eye, it was set before him
in a visible form, and according to the operation of God who showed it,
in a manner adapted to serve as a model of the earthly sanctuary to be
erected." Thus he admits that it is true that Moses did not see the
heavenly world itself, but only a copy of it that was shown to him by
God.)

If we understand the verse before us in this sense, it merely expresses
what is already implied in the fact itself. If God showed Moses a
picture or model of the tabernacle, and instructed him to make
everything exactly according to this pattern, we must assume that in the
tabernacle and its furniture heavenly realities were to be expressed in
earthly forms; or, to put it more clearly, that the thoughts of God
concerning salvation and His kingdom, which the earthly building was to
embody and display, were visibly set forth in the pattern shown. The
symbolical and typical significance of the whole building necessarily
follows from this, though without our being obliged to imitate the
Rabbins, and seek in the tabernacle the counterpart or copy of a
heavenly temple. What these divine thoughts were that were embodied in
the tabernacle, can only be gathered from the arrangement and purpose of
the whole building and its separate parts; and upon this point the
description furnishes so much information, that when read in the light
of the whole of the covenant revelation, it gives to all the leading
points precisely the clearness that we require.

[Exodus 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 25:10</span></span>

The Ark of the Covenant (cf. [Exo
37:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#001)). - They were to make an ark
(ארון) of acacia-wood, two cubits and a half long, one and a half broad,
and one and a half high, and to plate it with pure gold both within and
without. Round about it they were to construct a golden זר, i.e.,
probably a golden rim, encircling it like an ornamental wreath. They
were also to cast four golden rings and fasten them to the four feet
(פּעמת walking feet, feet bent as if for walking) of the ark, two on
either side; and to cut four poles of acacia-wood and plate them with
gold, and put them through the rings for carrying the ark. The poles
were to remain in the rings, without moving from them, i.e., without
being drawn out, that the bearers might not touch the ark itself ([Num
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015)).

[Exodus 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 25:16</span></span>

Into this ark Moses was to put "the testimony" (העדת; cf. [Exo
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#020)). This is the name given to the
two tables of stone, upon which the ten words spoken by God to the whole
nation were written, and which Moses was to receive from God ([Exo
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)). Because these ten words were
the declaration of God upon the basis of which the covenant was
concluded ([Exo 34:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#027); [Deu
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013); [Deu
10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001)), these tables were called the
tables of testimony (ch. [Exo 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018);
[Exo 34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029)), or tables of the covenant
([Deu 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009); [Deu
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#015)).

[Exodus 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 25:17</span></span>

In addition to this, Moses was to make a capporeth (ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα,
lxx; propitiatorium, Vulg.), an atoning covering. The meaning operculum,
lid (Ges.), cannot be sustained, notwithstanding the fact that the
capporeth was placed upon the ark ([Exo
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021)) and covered the tables laid
within it; for the verb כפר has not the literal signification of
covering or covering up either in Kal or Piel. In Kal it only occurs in
[Gen 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#014), where it means to pitch or
tar; in Piel it is only used in the figurative sense of covering up sin
or guilt, i.e., of making atonement. [Ch1
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#011) is decisive on this point, where
the holy of holies, in which the capporeth was, is called הכּפּרת בּית,
which cannot possibly mean the covering-house, but must signify the
house of atonement. The force of this passage is not weakened by the
remark made by Delitzsch and others, to the effect that it was only in
the later usage of the language that the idea of covering gave place to
that of the covering up or expiation of sin; for neither in the earlier
nor earliest usage of the language can the supposed primary meaning of
the word be anywhere discovered. Knobel's remark has still less force,
viz., that the ark must have had a lid, and it must have been called a
lid. For if from the very commencement this lid had a more important
purpose than that of a simple covering, it might also have received its
name from this special purpose, even though this was not fully explained
to the Israelites till a later period in the giving of the law ([Lev
16:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)). It must, however, have been
obvious to every one, that it was to be something more than the mere lid
of the ark, from the simple fact that it was not to be made, like the
ark, of wood plated with gold, but to be made of pure gold, and to have
two golden cherubs upon the top. The cherubim were to be made of gold
מקשׁה (from קשׁה to turn), i.e., literally, turned work (cf. [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)), here, according to Onkelos,
נגיד opus ductile, work beaten with the hammer and rounded, so that the
figures were not solid but hollow (see Bhr, i. p. 380).

[Exodus 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 25:19</span></span>

"Out of the capporeth shall ye make the cherubs at its two ends," i.e.,
so as to form one whole with the capporeth itself, and be inseparable
from it.

[Exodus 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 25:20</span></span>

"And let the cherubs be stretching out wings on high, screening (סככים,
συσκιάζοντες) with their wings above the capporeth, and their faces
(turned) one to the other; towards the capporeth let the faces of the
cherubs be." That is to say, the cherubs were to spread out their wings
in such a manner as to form a screen over the capporeth, with their
faces turned towards one another, but inclining or stooping towards the
capporeth. The reason for this is given in [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022). There - viz., above the
capporeth that was placed upon the ark containing the testimony -
Jehovah would present Himself to Moses (נועד, from יעד to appoint, to
present one's self to a person at an appointed place, to meet with him),
and talk with him "from above the capporeth, out from between the two
cherubs upon the ark of testimony, all that I shall command thee for the
sons of Israel" (cf. [Exo 29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042)).
Through this divine promise and the fulfilment of it ([Exo
40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035); [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001); [Num
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001); [Num
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019)), the ark of the covenant
together with the capporeth became the throne of Jehovah in the midst of
His chosen people, the footstool of the God of Israel ([Ch1
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002), cf. [Psa
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007); [Psa
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005); [Lam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#001)). The ark, with the tables of the
covenant as the self-attestation of God, formed the foundation of this
throne, to show that the kingdom of grace which was established in
Israel through the medium of the covenant, was founded in justice and
righteousness ([Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015); [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002)). The gold plate upon the ark
formed the footstool of the throne for Him, who caused His name, i.e.,
the real presence of His being, to dwell in a cloud between the two
cherubim above their outspread wings; and there He not only made known
His will to His people in laws and commandments, but revealed Himself as
the jealous God who visited sin and showed mercy ([Exo
20:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); [Exo
34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)), - the latter more especially
on the great day of atonement, when, through the medium of the blood of
the sin-offering sprinkled upon and in front of the capporeth, He
granted reconciliation to His people for all their transgressions in all
their sin ([Lev 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#014).). Thus the
footstool of God became a throne of grace ([Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016), cf. [Exo
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#005)), which received its name
capporeth or ἱλαστήριον from the fact that the highest and most perfect
act of atonement under the Old Testament was performed upon it. Jehovah,
who betrothed His people to Himself in grace and mercy for an
everlasting covenant ([Hos 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002)), was
enthroned upon it, above the wings of the two cherubim, which stood on
either side of His throne; and hence He is represented as "dwelling
(between) the cherubim" הכּרבים ישׁב ([Sa1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#004); [Sa2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002); [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002), etc.). The cherubs were not
combinations of animal forms, taken from man, the lion, the ox, and the
eagle, as many have inferred from Ezek 1 and 10, for even the composite
beings which Ezekiel saw with four faces had a human figure ([Eze
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005)); but they are to be regarded as
figures made in a human form, and not in a kneeling posture, but,
according to the analogy of [Ch2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#013),
standing upright. Consequently, as the union of four faces in one cherub
is peculiar to Ezekiel, and the cherubs of the ark of the covenant, like
those of Solomon's temple, had but one face each, not only did the human
type form the general basis of these figures, but in every respect, with
the exception of the wings, they were made in the likeness of men. And
this is the only form which would answer the purpose for which they were
intended, viz., to represent the cherubim, or heavenly spirits, who were
stationed to prevent the return of the first man to the garden of Eden
after his expulsion thence, and keep the way to the tree of life.
Standing upon the capporeth of the ark of the covenant, the typical
foundation of the throne of Jehovah, which Ezekiel saw in the vision as
רקיע דּמוּת רקי "the likeness of a firmament" ([Eze
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022), [Eze
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025)), with their wings outspread and
faces lowered, they represented the spirits of heaven, who surround
Jehovah, the heavenly King, when seated upon His throne, as His most
exalted servants and the witnesses of His sovereign and saving glory; so
that Jehovah enthroned above the wings of the cherubim was set forth as
the God of Hosts who is exalted above all the angels, surrounded by the
assembly or council of the holy ones ([Psa
89:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)), who bow their faces towards
the capporeth, studying the secrets of the divine counsels of love ([Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)), and worshipping Him that liveth
for ever and ever ([Rev 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#010)).

[Exodus 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 25:23</span></span>

The Table of Shew-Bread (cf. [Exo
37:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#010)). - The table for the
shew-bread ([Exo 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#030)) was to be made
of acacia-wood, two cubits long, one broad, and one and a half high, and
to be plated with pure gold, having a golden wreath round, and a "finish
(מסגּרת) of a hand-breadth round about," i.e., a border of a
hand-breadth in depth surrounding and enclosing the four sides, upon
which the top of the table was laid, and into the four corners of which
the feet of the table were inserted. A golden wreath was to be placed
round this rim. As there is no article attached to זר־זהב in [Exo
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#025) (cf. [Exo
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#012)), so as to connect it with the
זר in [Exo 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#024), we must conclude
that there were two such ornamental wreaths, one round the slab of the
table, the other round the rim which was under the slab. At the four
corners of the four feet, near the point at which they joined the rim,
four rings were to be fastened for בּתּים, i.e., to hold the poles with
which the table was carried, as in the case of the ark.

[Exodus 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 25:29</span></span>

Vessels of pure gold were also to be made, to stand upon the table (cf.
[Exo 37:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#016)). קערת, τὰ τευβλία (lxx),
large deep plates, in which the shew-bread was not only brought to the
table, but placed upon it. These plates cannot have been small, for the
silver קערת, presented by Nahshon the tribe prince, weighed 130 shekels
([Num 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013)). כּפּת, from כּף a hollow
hand, small scoops, according to [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014), only ten shekels in weight, used
to put out the incense belonging to the shew-bread upon the table (cf.
[Lev 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#007) and [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014)): lxx θυΐ́σκη, i.e., according to
the Etymol. Magn., σκάφη ἡ τὰ θύματα δεχομένη. There were also two
vessels "to pour out," sc., the drink-offering, or libation of wine:
viz., קשׂות, σπονδεῖα (lxx), sacrificial spoons to make the libation of
wine with, and מנקּיּת, κύαθοι (lxx), goblets into which the wine was
poured, and in which it was placed upon the table. (See [Exo
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#016) and [Num
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#007), where the goblets are mentioned
before the sacrificial spoons.)

[Exodus 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 25:30</span></span>

Bread of the face (פּנים לחם), the mode of preparing and placing which
is described in [Lev 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005)., was to lie
continually before (לפני) Jehovah. These loaves were called "bread of
the face" (shew-bread), because they were to lie before the face of
Jehovah as a meat-offering presented by the children of Israel ([Lev
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#008)), not as food for Jehovah, but as
a symbol of the spiritual food which Israel was to prepare ([Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027), cf. [Joh
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032), [Joh
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)), a figurative representation of
the calling it had received from God; so that bread and wine, which
stood upon the table by the side of the loaves, as the fruit of the
labour bestowed by Israel upon the soil of its inheritance, were a
symbol of its spiritual labour in the kingdom of God, the spiritual
vineyard of its Lord.

[Exodus 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 25:31</span></span>

(cf. [Exo 37:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#017)). The Candlestick
was to be made of pure gold, "beaten work." מקשׁה: see [Exo
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#018). For the form תּיעשׂה instead of
תּעשׂה (which is probably the work of a copyist, who thought the reading
should be תּעשׂה in the Niphal, as the י is wanting in many MSS), see
Gesenius, Lehrgeb. p. 52, and Ewald, 83b. "Of it shall be (i.e., there
shall issue from it so as to form one complete whole) its ירך" (lit.,
the loins, the upper part of the thigh, which is attached to the body,
and from which the feet proceed, - in this case the base or pedestal,
upon which the candelabrum stood); its קנה, or reed, i.e., the hollow
stem of the candelabrum rising up from the pedestal; - "its גּבעים,"
cups, resembling the calix of a flower; - כּפתּרים, knobs, in a
spherical shape (cf. [Amo 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001); [Zep
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014)); - "and פּרחים," flowers,
ornaments in the form of buds just bursting.

[Exo 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#032)

From the sides of the candlestick, i.e., of the upright stem in the
middle, there were to be six branches, three on either side.

[Exo 25:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#033)

On each of these branches (the repetition of the same words expresses
the distributive sense) there were to be "three cups in the form of an
almond-flower, (with) knob and flower," and on the shaft of the
candlestick, or central stem, "four cups in the form of almond-flowers,
its knobs and its flowers." As both ופרח כּפתּר ([Exo
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#033)) and וּפרחיה כּפתּריה ([Exo
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#034)) are connected with the previous
words without a copula, Knobel and Thenius regard these words as
standing in explanatory apposition to the preceding ones, and suppose
the meaning to be that the flower-cups were to consist of knobs with
flowers issuing from them. But apart from the singular idea of calling a
knob or bulb with a flower bursting from it a flower-cup, [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031) decidedly precludes any such
explanation; for cups, knobs, and flowers are mentioned there in
connection with the base and stem, as three separate things which were
quite as distinct the one from the other as the base and the stem. The
words in question are appended in both verses to משׁקּדים גּבעים in the
sense of subordination; ו is generally used in such cases, but it is
omitted here before כפתר, probably to avoid ambiguity, as the two words
to be subordinated are brought into closer association as one idea by
the use of this copula. And if כפתר and פרח are to be distinguished from
נביע, the objection made by Thenius to our rendering משׁקּד
"almond-blossom-shaped," namely, that neither the almond nor the
almond-blossom has at all the shape of a basin, falls entirely to the
ground; and there is all the less reason to question this rendering, on
account of the unanimity with which it has been adopted in the ancient
versions, whereas the rendering proposed by Thenius, "wakened up, i.e.,
a burst or opened calix," has neither foundation nor probability.

[Exo 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#035)

"and every pipe under the two branches shall be out from them (be
connected with them) for the six (side) pipes going out from the
candlestick;" i.e., at the point where the three pairs of the six side
pipes or arms branched off from the main pipe or stem of the
candlestick, a knob should be so placed that the arms should proceed
from the knob, or from the main stem immediately above the knob.

[Exo 25:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#036)

"Their knobs and their pipes (i.e., the knobs and pipes of the three
pairs of arms) shall be of it (the candlestick, i.e., combined with it
so as to form one whole), all one (one kind of) beaten work, pure gold."
From all this we get the following idea of the candlestick: Upon the
vase there rose an upright central pipe, from which three side pies
branched out one above another on either side, and curved upwards in the
form of a quadrant to the level of the central stem. On this stem a
calix and a knob and blossom were introduced four separate times, and in
such a manner that there was a knob wherever the side pipes branched off
from the main stem, evidently immediately below the branches; and the
fourth knob, we may suppose, was higher up between the top branches and
the end of the stem. As there were thus four calices with a knob and
blossom in the main stem, so again there were three in each of the
branches, which were no doubt placed at equal distances from one
another. With regard to the relative position of the calix, the knob,
and the blossom, we may suppose that the spherical knob was underneath
the calix, and that the blossom sprang from the upper edge of the
latter, as if bursting out of it. The candlestick had thus seven arms,
and seven lights or lamps were to be made and placed upon them (העלה).
"And they (all the lamps) are to give light upon the opposite side of
its front" ([Exo 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037)): i.e., the
lamp was to throw its light upon the side that was opposite to the front
of the candlestick. The פּנים of the candlestick ([Exo
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037) and [Num
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#002)) was the front shown by the seven
arms, as they formed a straight line with their seven points; and עבר
does not mean the side, but the opposite side, as is evident from [Num
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#002), where we find מוּל אל instead. As
the place assigned to the candlestick was on the south side of the
dwelling-place, we are to understand by this opposite side the north,
and imagine the lamp to be so placed that the line of lamps formed by
the seven arms ran from front to back, by which arrangement the holy
place would be better lighted, than if the candlestick had stood with
the line of lamps from south to north, and so had turned all its seven
lamps towards the person entering the holy place. The lamps were the
receptacles for the wick and oil, which were placed on the top of the
arms, and could be taken down to be cleaned. The hole from which the
wick projected was not made in the middle, but at the edge, so that the
light was thrown upon one side.

[Exo 25:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#038)

The other things belonging to the candlestick were מלקחים tongs ([Isa
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006)), i.e., snuffers, and מחמּות
snuff-dishes, i.e., dishes to receive the snuff when taken from the
wicks; elsewhere the word signifies an ash-pan, or vessel used for
taking away the coal from the fire ([Exo
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#003); [Lev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#012); [Num
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#003).).

[Exo 25:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#039)

"Of a talent of pure gold (i.e., 822,000 Parisian grains) shall he make
it (the candlestick) and all these vessels," i.e., according to [Exo
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#024), all the vessels belonging to
the candlestick. From this quantity of gold it was possible to make a
candlestick of very considerable size. The size is not given anywhere in
the Old Testament, but, according to Bhr's conjecture, it corresponded
to the height of the table of shew-bread, namely, a cubit and a half in
height and the same in breadth, or a cubit and a half between the two
outside lamps.

The signification of the seven-armed candlestick is apparent from its
purpose, viz., to carry seven lamps, which were trimmed and filled with
oil every morning, and lighted every evening, and were to burn
throughout the night ([Exo 27:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020);
[Exo 30:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007); [Lev
24:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#003)). As the Israelites were to
prepare spiritual food in the shew-bread in the presence of Jehovah, and
to offer continually the fruit of their labour in the field of the
kingdom of God, as a spiritual offering to the Lord; so also were they
to present themselves continually to Jehovah in the burning lamps, as
the vehicles and media of light, as a nation letting its light shine in
the darkness of this world (cf. [Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014), [Mat
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016); [Luk
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035); [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)). The oil, through which the
lamps burned and shone, was, according to its peculiar virtue in
imparting strength to the body and restoring vital power, a
representation of the Godlike spirit, the source of all the vital power
of man; whilst the oil, as offered by the congregation of Israel, and
devoted to sacred purposes according to the command of God, is
throughout the Scriptures a symbol of the Spirit of God, by which the
congregation of God was tilled with higher light and life. By the power
of this Spirit, Israel, in covenant with the Lord, was to let its light
shine, the light of its knowledge of God and spiritual illumination,
before all the nations of the earth. In its seven arms the stamp of the
covenant relationship was impressed upon the candlestick; and the
almond-blossom with which it was ornamented represented the seasonable
offering of the flowers and fruits of the Spirit, the almond-tree
deriving its name שׁקד from the fact that it is the earliest of all the
trees in both its blossom and its fruit (cf. [Jer
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)). The symbolical character of
the candlestick is clearly indicated in the Scriptures. The prophet
Zechariah ([Zac 4:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001)) sees a golden
candlestick with seven lamps and two olive-trees, one on either side,
from which the oil-vessel is supplied; and the angel who is talking with
him informs him that the olive-trees are the two sons of oil, that is to
say, the representatives of the kingdom and priesthood, the divinely
appointed organs through which the Spirit of God was communicated to the
covenant nation. And in [Rev 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020), the
seven churches, which represent the new people of God, i.e., the
Christian Church, are shown to the holy seer in the form of seven
candlesticks standing before the throne of God. - On [Exo
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040), see at [Exo
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#009).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 26](exo026)

</div>
