<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo004)  [Next](exo006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 5:0</span></span>

Moses and Aaron Sent to Pharaoh - Exodus 5-7:7

The two events which form the contents of this section - viz., (1) the
visit of Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh to make known the commands of their
God, with the harsh refusal of their request on the part of Pharaoh, by
an increase of the tributary labours of Israel (Exo 5); and (2) the
further revelations of Jehovah to Moses, with the insertion of the
genealogies of Moses and Aaron-not only hang closely together so far as
the subject-matter is concerned, inasmuch as the fresh declarations of
Jehovah to Moses were occasioned by the complaint of Moses that his
first attempt had so signally failed, but both of them belong to the
complete equipment of Moses for his divine mission. Their visit to
Pharaoh was only preliminary in its character. Moses and Aaron simply
made known to the king the will of their God, without accrediting
themselves by miraculous signs as the messengers of Jehovah, or laying
any particular emphasis upon His demand. For this first step was only
intended to enlighten Moses as to the attitude of Pharaoh and the people
of Israel in relation to the work of God, which He was about to perform.
Pharaoh answered the demand addressed to him, that he would let the
people go for a few days to hold a sacrificial festival in the desert,
by increasing their labours; and the Israelites complained in
consequence that their good name had been made abhorrent to the king,
and their situation made worse than it was. Moses might have despaired
on this account; but he laid his trouble before the Lord, and the Lord
filled his despondent heart with fresh courage through the renewed and
strengthened promise that He would now for the first time display His
name Jehovah perfectly - that He would redeem the children of Israel
with outstretched arm and with great judgments - would harden Pharaoh's
heart, and do many signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, that the
Egyptians might learn through the deliverance of Israel that He was
Jehovah, i.e., the absolute God, who works with unlimited freedom. At
the same time God removed the difficulty which once more arose in the
mind of Moses, namely, that Pharaoh would not listen to him because of
his want of oratorical power, by the assurance, "I make thee a god for
Pharaoh, and Aaron shall be thy prophet" ([Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)), which could not fail to remove
all doubt as to his own incompetency for so great and severe a task.
With this promise Pharaoh was completely given up into Moses' power, and
Moses invested with all the plenipotentiary authority that was requisite
for the performance of the work entrusted to him.

[Exodus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 5:1</span></span>

Pharaoh's Answer to the Request of Moses and Aaron. - [Exo
5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001). When the elders of Israel had
listened with gladness and gratitude to the communications of Moses and
Aaron respecting the revelation which Moses had received from Jehovah,
that He was now about to deliver His people out of their bondage in
Egypt; Moses and Aaron proceeded to Pharaoh, and requested in the name
of the God of Israel, that he would let the people of Israel go and
celebrate a festival in the wilderness in honour of their God. When we
consider that every nation presented sacrifices to its deities, and
celebrated festivals in their honour, and that they had all their own
modes of worship, which were supposed to be appointed by the gods
themselves, so that a god could not be worshipped acceptably in every
place; the demand presented to Pharaoh on the part of the God of the
Israelites, that he would let His people go into the wilderness and
sacrifice to Him, appears so natural and reasonable, that Pharaoh could
not have refused their request, if there had been a single trace of the
fear of God in his heart. But what was his answer? "Who is Jehovah, that
I should listen to His voice, to let Israel go? I know not Jehovah."
There was a certain truth in these last words. The God of Israel had not
yet made Himself known to him. But this was no justification. Although
as a heathen he might naturally measure the power of the God by the
existing condition of His people, and infer from the impotence of the
Israelites that their God must be also weak, he would not have dared to
refuse the petition of the Israelites, to be allowed to sacrifice to
their God or celebrate a sacrificial festival, if he had had any faith
in gods at all.

[Exodus 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 5:3</span></span>

The messengers founded their request upon the fact that the God of the
Hebrews had met them (נקרא, vid., [Exo
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018)), and referred to the punishment
which the neglect of the sacrificial festival demanded by God might
bring upon the nation. פּן־יפגּענוּ: "lest He strike us (attack us) with
pestilence or sword." פּגע: to strike, hit against any one, either by
accident or with a hostile intent; ordinarily construed with בּ, also
with an accusative, [Sa1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005), and
chosen here probably with reference to נקרא = נקרה. "Pestilence or
sword:" these are mentioned as expressive of a violent death, and as the
means employed by the deities, according to the ordinary belief of the
nations, to punish the neglect of their worship. The expression "God of
the Hebrews," for "God of Israel" ([Exo
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001)), is not chosen as being "more
intelligible to the king, because the Israelites were called Hebrews by
foreigners, more especially by the Egyptians ([Exo
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#016); [Exo
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#006))," as Knobel supposes, but to
convince Pharaoh of the necessity for their going into the desert to
keep the festival demanded by their God. In Egypt they might sacrifice
to the gods of Egypt, but not to the God of the Hebrews.

[Exodus 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 5:4</span></span>

But Pharaoh would hear nothing of any worship. He believed that the wish
was simply an excuse for procuring holidays for the people, or days of
rest from their labours, and ordered the messengers off to their slave
duties: "Get you unto your burdens." For as the people were very
numerous, he would necessarily lose by their keeping holiday. He called
the Israelites "the people of the land," not "as being his own property,
because he was the lord of the land" (Baumgarten), but as the working
class, "land-people," equivalent to "common people," in distinction from
the ruling castes of the Egyptians (vid., [Jer
52:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#025) : [Eze
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#027)).

[Exodus 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 5:6</span></span>

As Pharaoh possessed neither fear of God (εὐσέβεια) nor fear of the
gods, but, in the proud security of his might, determined to keep the
Israelites as slaves, and to use them as tools for the glorifying of his
kingdom by the erection of magnificent buildings, he suspected that
their wish to go into the desert was nothing but an excuse invented by
idlers, and prompted by a thirst for freedom, which might become
dangerous to his kingdom, on account of the numerical strength of the
people. He therefore thought that he could best extinguish such desires
and attempts by increasing the oppression and adding to their labours.
For this reason he instructed his bailiffs to abstain from delivering
straw to the Israelites who were engaged in making bricks, and to let
them gather it for themselves; but yet not to make the least abatement
in the number (מתכּנת) to be delivered every day. בּעם הנּגשׂים, "those
who urged the people on," were the bailiffs selected from the Egyptians
and placed over the Israelitish workmen, the general managers of the
work. Under them there were the שׁטרים (lit., writers, γραμματεῖς lxx,
from שׁטר to write), who were chosen from the Israelites (vid., [Exo
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#014)), and had to distribute the work
among the people, and hand it over, when finished, to the royal
officers. לבנים לבן: to make bricks, not to burn them; for the bricks in
the ancient monuments of Egypt, and in many of the pyramids, are not
burnt but dried in the sun (Herod. ii. 136; Hengst. Egypt and Books of
Moses, pp. 2 and 79ff.). קשׁשׁ: a denom. verb from קשׁ, to gather
stubble, then to stubble, to gather ([Num
15:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032)). תּבן, of uncertain
etymology, is chopped straw; here, the stubble that was left standing
when the corn was reaped, or the straw that lay upon the ground. This
they chopped up and mixed with the clay, to give greater durability to
the bricks, as may be seen in bricks found in the oldest monuments (cf.
Hgst. p. 79).

[Exodus 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 5:9</span></span>

"Let the work be heavy (press heavily) upon the people, and they shall
make with it (i.e., stick to their work), and not look at lying words."
By "lying words" the king meant the words of Moses, that the God of
Israel had appeared to him, and demanded a sacrificial festival from His
people. In [Exo 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#011) special emphasis
is laid upon אתּם "ye:" "Go, ye yourselves, fetch your straw," not
others for you as heretofore; "for nothing is taken (diminished) from
your work." The word כּי for has been correctly explained by Kimchi as
supposing a parenthetical thought, et quidem alacriter vobis eundum est.

[Exodus 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 5:12</span></span>

ק לקשׁשׁ: "to gather stubble for straw;" not "stubble for, in the sense
of instead of straw," for ל is not equivalent to תּחת but to gather the
stubble left in the fields for the chopped straw required for the
bricks.

[Exodus 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 5:13</span></span>

בּיומו יום דּבר, the quantity fixed for every day, "just as when the
straw was (there)," i.e., was given out for the work.

[Exodus 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 5:14</span></span>

As the Israelites could not do the work appointed them, their
overlookers were beaten by the Egyptian bailiffs; and when they
complained to the king of this treatment, they were repulsed with
harshness, and told "Ye are idle, idle; therefore ye say, Let us go and
sacrifice to Jehovah." עמּך וחטאת: "and thy people sin;" i.e., not "thy
people (the Israelites) must be sinners," which might be the meaning of
חטא according to [Gen 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009), but "thy
(Egyptian) people sin." "Thy people" must be understood as applying to
the Egyptians, on account of the antithesis to "thy servants," which not
only refers to the Israelitish overlookers, but includes all the
Israelites, especially in the first clause. חטאת is an unusual feminine
form, for חטאה (vid., [Gen 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#011)); and
עם is construed as a feminine, as in [Jdg
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007) and [Jer
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005).

[Exodus 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 5:19</span></span>

When the Israelitish overlookers saw that they were in evil (בּרע as in
[Psa 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#006), i.e., in an evil
condition), they came to meet Moses and Aaron, waiting for them as they
came out from the king, and reproaching them with only making the
circumstances of the people worse.

[Exodus 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 5:21</span></span>

"Jehovah look upon you and judge" (i.e., punish you, because) "ye have
made the smell of us to stink in the eyes of Pharaoh and his servants,"
i.e., destroyed our good name with the king and his servants, and turned
it into hatred and disgust. ריח, a pleasant smell, is a figure employed
for a good name or repute, and the figurative use of the word explains
the connection with the eyes instead of the nose. "To give a sword into
their hand to kill us." Moses and Aaron, they imagined, through their
appeal to Pharaoh had made the king and his counsellors suspect them of
being restless people, and so had put a weapon into their hands for
their oppression and destruction. What perversity of the natural heart!
They call upon God to judge, whilst by their very complaining they show
that they have no confidence in God and His power to save. Moses turned
(ויּשׁב [Exo 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#022)) to Jehovah with the
question, "Why hast Thou done evil to this people," - increased their
oppression by my mission to Pharaoh, and yet not delivered them? "These
are not words of contumacy or indignation, but of inquiry and prayer"
(Aug. quaest. 14). The question and complaint proceeded from faith,
which flies to God when it cannot understand the dealings of God, to
point out to Him how incomprehensible are His ways, to appeal to Him to
help in the time of need, and to remove what seems opposed to His nature
and His will.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 6](exo006)

</div>
