<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo007)  [Next](exo009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001)

[Exodus 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 8:1</span></span>

The plague of Frogs, or the second plague, also proceeded from the Nile,
and had its natural origin in the putridity of the slimy Nile water,
whereby the marsh waters especially became filled with thousands of
frogs. צפרדּע is the small Nile frog, the Dofda of the Egyptians, called
rana Mosaica or Nilotica by Seetzen, which appears in large numbers as
soon as the waters recede. These frogs (הצּפרדּע in [Exo
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#006), used collectively) became a penal
miracle from the fact that they came out of the water in unparalleled
numbers, in consequence of the stretching out of Aaron's staff over the
waters of the Nile, as had been foretold to the king, and that they not
only penetrated into the houses and inner rooms ("bed-chamber"), and
crept into the domestic utensils, the beds (מטּה), the ovens, and the
kneading-troughs (not the "dough" as Luther renders it), but even got
upon the men themselves.

[Exodus 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 8:7</span></span>

This miracle was also imitated by the Egyptian augurs with their secret
arts, and frogs were brought upon the land by them. But if they were
able to bring the plague, they could not take it away. The latter is not
expressly stated, it is true; but it is evident from the fact that
Pharaoh was obliged to send for Moses and Aaron to intercede with
Jehovah to take them away. The king would never have applied to Moses
and Aaron for help if his charmers could have charmed the plague away.
Moreover the fact that Pharaoh entreated them to intercede with Jehovah
to take away the frogs, and promised to let the people go, that they
might sacrifice to Jehovah ([Exo 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#008)),
was a sign that he regarded the God of Israel as the author of the
plague. To strengthen the impression made upon the king by this plague
with reference to the might of Jehovah, Moses said to him ([Exo
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#009)), "Glorify thyself over me, when I
shall entreat for thee," i.e., take the glory upon thyself of
determining the time when I shall remove the plague through my
intercession. The expression is elliptical, and לעמר (saying) is to be
supplied, as in [Jdg 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#002). To give
Jehovah the glory, Moses placed himself below Pharaoh, and left him to
fix the time for the frogs to be removed through his intercession.

[Exodus 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 8:10</span></span>

The king appointed the following day, probably because he hardly thought
it possible for so great a work to be performed at once. Moses promised
that it should be so: "According to thy word (sc., let it be), that thou
mayest know that there is not (a God) like Jehovah our God." He then
went out and cried, i.e., called aloud and earnestly, to Jehovah
concerning the matter (דּבר על) of the frogs, which he had set, i.e.,
prepared, for Pharaoh (שׂוּם as in [Gen
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#007)). In consequence of his
intercession God took the plague away. The frogs died off (מן מוּת, to
die away out of, from), out of the houses, and palaces, and fields, and
were gathered together by bushels (חמרים from חמר, the omer, the largest
measure used by the Hebrews), so that the land stank with the odour of
their putrefaction. Though Jehovah had thus manifested Himself as the
Almighty God and Lord of the creation, Pharaoh did not keep his promise;
but when he saw that there was breathing-time (רוחה, ἀνάψυξις, relief
from an overpowering pressure), literally, as soon as he "got air," he
hardened his heart, so that he did not hearken to Moses and Aaron
(והכבּד inf. abs. as in [Gen 41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043)).

[Exodus 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 8:16</span></span>

The Gnats, or the third plague. - The כּנּם, or כּנּים (also כּנּם,
probably an old singular form, Ewald, 163f), were not "lice," but
σκνῖφες, sciniphes, a species of gnats, so small as to be hardly visible
to the eye, but with a sting which, according to Philo and Origen,
causes a most painful irritation of the skin. They even creep into the
eyes and nose, and after the harvest they rise in great swarms from the
inundated rice-fields. This plague was caused by the fact that Aaron
smote the dust of the ground with his staff, and all the dust throughout
the land of Egypt turned into gnats, which were upon man and beast ([Exo
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#017)). "Just as the fertilizing water
of Egypt had twice become a plague, so through the power of Jehovah the
soil so richly blessed became a plague to the king and his people."

[Exodus 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 8:18</span></span>

"The magicians did so with their enchantments (i.e., smote the dust with
rods), to bring forth gnats, but could not." The cause of this inability
is hardly to be sought for, as Knobel supposes, in the fact that "the
thing to be done in this instance, was to call creatures into existence,
and not merely to call forth and change creatures and things in
existence already, as in the case of the staff, the water, and the
frogs." For after this, they could neither call out the dog-flies, nor
protect their own bodies from the boils; to say nothing of the fact,
that as gnats proceed from the eggs laid in the dust or earth by the
previous generation, their production is not to be regarded as a direct
act of creation any more than that of the frogs. The miracle in both
plagues was just the same, and consisted not in a direct creation, but
simply in a sudden creative generation and supernatural multiplication,
not of the gnats only, but also of the frogs, in accordance with a
previous prediction. The reason why the arts of the Egyptians magicians
were put to shame in this case, we have to seek in the omnipotence of
God, restraining the demoniacal powers which the magicians had made
subservient to their purposes before, in order that their inability to
bring out these, the smallest of all creatures, which seemed to arise as
it were from the dust itself, might display in the sight of every one
the impotence of their secret arts by the side of the almighty creative
power of the true God. This omnipotence the magicians were compelled to
admit: they were compelled to acknowledge, "This is the finger of God."
"But they did not make this acknowledgment for the purpose of giving
glory to God Himself, but simply to protect their own honour, that Moses
and Aaron might not be thought to be superior to them in virtue or
knowledge. It was equivalent to saying, it is not by Moses and Aaron
that we are restrained, but by a divine power, which is greater than
either" (Bochart). The word Elohim is decisive in support of this view.
If they had meant to refer to the God of Israel, they would have used
the name Jehovah. The "finger of God" denotes creative omnipotence ([Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003); [Luk
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020), cf. [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018)). Consequently this miracle also
made no impression upon Pharaoh.

[Exodus 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 8:20</span></span>

As the Egyptian magicians saw nothing more than the finger of God in the
miracle which they could not imitate, that is to say, the work of some
deity, possibly one of the gods of the Egyptians, and not the hand of
Jehovah the God of the Hebrews, who had demanded the release of Israel,
a distinction was made in the plagues which followed between the
Israelites and the Egyptians, and the former were exempted from the
plagues: a fact which was sufficient to prove to any one that they came
from the God of Israel. To make this the more obvious, the fourth and
fifth plagues were merely announced by Moses to the king. They were not
brought on through the mediation of either himself or Aaron, but were
sent by Jehovah at the appointed time; no doubt for the simple purpose
of precluding the king and his wise men from the excuse which unbelief
might still suggest, viz., that they were produced by the powerful
incantations of Moses and Aaron.

[Exo 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020)

The fourth plague, the coming of which Moses foretold to Pharaoh, like
the first, in the morning, and by the water (on the bank of the Nile),
consisted in the sending of "heavy vermin," probably Dog-Flies. ערב,
literally a mixture, is rendered κυνόμυια (dog-fly) by the lxx, πάμμυια
(all-fly), a mixture of all kinds of flies, by Symmachus. These insects
are described by Philo and many travellers as a very severe scourge
(vid., Hengstenberg ut sup. p. 113). They are much more numerous and
annoying than the gnats; and when enraged, they fasten themselves upon
the human body, especially upon the edges of the eyelids, and become a
dreadful plague. כּבד: a heavy multitude, as in [Exo
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#014); [Gen
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#009), etc. These swarms were to fill
"the houses of the Egyptians, and even the land upon which they (the
Egyptians) were," i.e., that part of the land which was not occupied by
houses; whilst the land of Goshen, where the Israelites dwelt, would be
entirely spared. הפלה (to separate, to distinguish in a miraculous way)
is conjugated with an accusative, as in [Psa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004). It is generally followed by בּין
([Exo 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#004); [Exo
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#007)), to distinguish between. עמד: to
stand upon a land, i.e., to inhabit, possess it; not to exist, or live
([Exo 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#021)).

[Exo 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#023)

"And I will put a deliverance between My people and thy people." פּדוּת
does not mean διαστολή, divisio (lxx, Vulg.), but redemption,
deliverance. Exemption from this plague was essentially a deliverance
for Israel, which manifested the distinction conferred upon Israel above
the Egyptians. By this plague, in which a separation and deliverance was
established between the people of God and the Egyptians, Pharaoh was to
be taught that the God who sent this plague was not some deity of Egypt,
but "Jehovah in the midst of the land" (of Egypt); i.e., as Knobel
correctly interprets it, (a) that Israel's God was the author of the
plague; (b) that He had also authority over Egypt; and (c) that He
possessed supreme authority: or, to express it still more concisely,
that Israel's God was the Absolute God, who ruled both in and over Egypt
with free and boundless omnipotence.

[Exo 8:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#024)

This plague, by which the land was destroyed (תּשּׁחת), or desolated,
inasmuch as the flies not only tortured, "devoured" ([Psa
78:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#045)) the men, and disfigured them by
the swellings produced by their sting, but also killed the plants in
which they deposited their eggs, so alarmed Pharaoh that he sent for
Moses and Aaron, and gave them permission to sacrifice to their God "in
the land." But Moses could not consent to this restriction. "It is not
appointed so to do" (נכון does not mean aptum, conveniens, but statutum,
rectum), for two reasons: (1) because sacrificing in the land would be
an abomination to the Egyptians, and would provoke them most bitterly
([Exo 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#026)); and (2) because they
could only sacrifice to Jehovah their God as He had directed them ([Exo
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#027)). The abomination referred to did
not consist in their sacrificing animals which the Egyptians regarded as
holy. For the word תּועבה (abomination) would not be applicable to the
sacred animals. Moreover, the cow was the only animal offered in
sacrifice by the Israelites, which the Egyptians regarded as sacred. The
abomination would rather be this, that the Iran would not carry out the
rigid regulations observed by the Egyptians with regard to the cleanness
of the sacrificial animals (vid., Hengstenberg, p. 114), and in fact
would not observe the sacrificial rites of the Egyptians at all. The
Egyptians would be very likely to look upon this as an insult to their
religion and their gods; "the violation of the recognised mode of
sacrificing would be regarded as a manifestation of contempt for
themselves and their gods" (Calvin), and this would so enrage them that
they would stone the Israelites. The הן before נזבּח in [Exo
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#026) is the interjection lo! but it
stands before a conditional clause, introduced without a conditional
particle, in the sense of if, which it has retained in the Chaldee, and
in which it is used here and there in the Hebrew (e.g., [Lev
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#020)).

[Exo 8:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#028)

These reasons commended themselves to the heathen king from his own
religious standpoint. He promised, therefore, to let the people go into
the wilderness and sacrifice, provided they did not go far away, if
Moses and Aaron would release him and his people from this plague
through their intercession. Moses promised that the swarms should be
removed the following day, but told the king not to deceive them again
as he had done before ([Exo 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#008)). But
Pharaoh hardened his heart as soon as the plague was taken away, just as
he had done after the second plague ([Exo
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#015)), to which the word "also" refers
([Exo 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#032)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 9](exo009)

</div>
