<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo021)  [Next](exo023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)

[Exodus 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 22:1</span></span>

With regard to cattle-stealing, the law makes a distinction between what
had been killed or sold, and what was still alive and in the thief's
hand (or possession). In the latter case, the thief was to restore piece
for piece twofold ([Exo 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004)); in the
former, he was to restore an ox fivefold and a small animal (a sheep or
a goat) fourfold ([Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)). The
difference between the compensation for an ox and a small animal is to
be accounted for from the comparative worth of the cattle to the
possessor, which determined the magnitude of the theft and the amount of
the compensation. But the other distinctions of twofold, fourfold, and
fivefold restitution cannot be accounted for, either by supposing "that
the animal slain or sold was lost to its master, and might have been of
peculiar value to him" (Knobel), for such a consideration of personal
feelings would have been quite foreign to the law-not to mention the
fact that an animal that had been sold might be recovered by purchase;
or from the fact that "the thief in this case had carried his crime
still further" (Baumgarten), for the main thing was still the theft, not
the consumption or sale of the animal stolen. The reason can only have
lain in the educational purpose of the law: viz., in the intention to
lead the thief to repent of his crime, to acknowledge his guilt, and to
restore what he had stolen. Now, as long as he still retained the stolen
animal in his own possession, having neither consumed nor parted with
it, this was always in his power; but the possibility was gone as soon
as it had either been consumed or sold (see by Archologie, 154, Note 3).

(Note: Calvin gives the same explanation: Major in scelere obstinatio se
prodit, ubi res furtiva in quaestum conversa est, nec spes est ulla
resipiscentiae, atque ita continuo progressu duplicatur malae fidei
crimen. Fieri potest ut fur statim post delictum contremiscat: qui vero
animal occidere ausus est, aut vendere, prorsus in maleficio obduruit.)

[Exo 22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002)

Into the midst of the laws relating to theft, we have one introduced
here, prescribing what was to be done with the thief. "If the thief be
found breaking in (i.e., by night according to [Exo
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#003)), and be smitten so that he die,
there shall be no blood to him (the person smiting him); if the sun has
risen upon him (the thief breaking in), there is blood to him:" i.e., in
the latter case the person killing him drew upon himself
blood-guiltiness (דּמים lit., drops of blood, blood shed), in the former
case he did not. "The reason for this disparity between a thief by night
and one in the day is, that the power and intention of a nightly thief
are uncertain, and whether he may not have come for the purpose of
committing murder; and that by night, if thieves are resisted, they
often proceed to murder in their rage; and also that they can neither be
recognised, nor resisted and apprehended with safety" (Calovius). In the
latter case the slayer contracted blood-guiltiness, because even the
life of a thief was to be spared, as he could be punished for his crime,
and what was stolen be restored according to the regulations laid down
in [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001) and [Exo
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004). But if he had not sufficient to
make retribution, he was to be sold "for his stolen," i.e., for the
value of what he had stolen, that he might earn by his labour the
compensation to be paid.

[Exodus 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 22:5</span></span>

Injury done to another man's field or corn was also to be made good by
compensation for the injury done. If any one should consume a field or a
vineyard, and let loose his beast, so that it fed in another man's
field, he was to give the best of his field and vineyard as restitution.
These words do not refer to wilful injury, for שׁלּח does not mean to
drive in, but simply to let loose, set at liberty; they refer to injury
done from carelessness, when any one neglected to take proper care of a
beast that was feeding in his field, and it strayed in consequence, and
began grazing in another man's. Hence simple compensation was all that
was demanded; though this was to be made "from the best of his field,"
i.e., quicquid optimum habebit in agro vel vinea (Jerome).

(Note: The lxx have expanded this law by interpolating ἀποτίσει ἐκ τοῦ
ἀγροῦ αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὸ γέννημα αὐτοῦ ἐὰν δὲ πάντα τὸν ἀγρὸν καταβοσκήσῃ
before מיטב. And the Samaritan does the same. But this expansion is
proved to be an arbitrary interpolation, by the simple fact that πάντα
τὸν ἀγρόν forms no logical antithesis to ἀγρὸν ἕτερον.)

[Exo 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#006)

[Exo 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#006) also relates to
unintentional injury, arising from want of proper care: "If fire break
out and catch thorns (thorn-hedges surrounding a corn-field, [Isa
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005); Sir. 28:24), and sheaves, or the
standing seed (הקּמה the corn standing in the straw), or the field be
consumed, he that kindleth the fire shall make compensation (for the
damage done)."

[Exodus 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 22:7</span></span>

In cases of dishonesty, or the loss of property entrusted, the following
was to be the recognised right: If money or articles (כּלים, not merely
tools and furniture, but clothes and ornaments, cf. [Deu
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005); [Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)) given to a neighbour to keep
should be stolen out of his house, the thief was to restore double if he
could be found; but if he could not be discovered, the master of the
house was to go before the judicial court (האלהים אל, see [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); אל נקרב to draw near to), to see
"whether he has not stretched out his hand to his neighbour's goods."
מלאכה: lit., employment, then something earned by employment, a
possession. Before the judicial court he was to cleanse himself of the
suspicion of having fraudulently appropriated what had been entrusted to
him; and in most cases this could probably be only done by an oath of
purification. The Sept. and Vulg. both point to this by interpolating
καὶ ὀμεῖται, et jurabit ("and he shall swear"), though we are not
warranted in supplying ויּשּׁבע in consequence. For, apart from the fact
that אם־לא is not to be regarded as a particle of adjuration here, as
Rosenmller supposes, since this particle signifies "truly" when employed
in an oath, and therefore would make the declaration affirmative,
whereas the oath was unquestionably to be taken as a release from the
suspicion of fraudulent appropriation, and in case of confession an oath
was not requisite at all; - apart from all this, if the lawgiver had
intended to prescribe an oath for such a case, he would have introduced
it here, just as he has done in [Exo
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#011). If the man could free himself
before the court from the suspicion of unfaithfulness, he would of
course not have to make compensation for what was lost, but the owner
would have to bear the damage. This legal process is still further
extended in [Exo 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#009) :
על־כּל־דּבר־פּשׁע, "upon every matter of trespass" (by which we are to
understand, according to the context, unfaithfulness with regard to, or
unjust appropriation of, the property of another man, not only when it
had been entrusted, but also if it had been found), "for ox, for ass,
etc., or for any manner of lost thing, of which one says that it is this
("this," viz., the matter of trespass), the cause of both (the parties
contending about the right of possession) shall come to the judicial
court; and he whom the court (Elohim) shall pronounce guilty (of unjust
appropriation) shall give double compensation to his neighbour: only
double as in [Exo 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004) and [Exo
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007), not four or fivefold as in [Exo
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001), because the object in dispute
had not been consumed.

[Exodus 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 22:10</span></span>

If an animal entrusted to a neighbour to take care of had either died or
hurt itself (נשׁבּר, broken a limb), or been driven away by robbers when
out at grass ([Ch1 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#021); [Ch2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014), cf. [Job
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#015), [Job
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#017)), without any one (else) seeing
it, an oath was to be taken before Jehovah between both (the owner and
the keeper of it), "whether he had not stretched out his hand to his
neighbour's property," i.e., either killed, or mutilated, or disposed of
the animal. This case differs from the previous one, not only in the
fact that the animal had either become useless to the owner or was
altogether lost, but also in the fact that the keeper, if his statement
were true, had not been at all to blame in the matter. The only way in
which this could be decided, if there was ראה אין, i.e., no other
eye-witness present than the keeper himself at the time when the fact
occurred, was by the keeper taking an oath before Jehovah, that is to
say, before the judicial court. And if he took the oath, the master
(owner) of it (the animal that had perished, or been lost or injured)
was to accept (sc., the oath), and he (the accused) was not to make
reparation. "But if it had been stolen מעמּו from with him (i.e., from
his house or stable), he was to make it good," because he might have
prevented this with proper care (cf. [Gen
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#039)). On the other hand, if it had
been torn in pieces (viz., by a beast of prey, while it was out at
grass), he was not to make any compensation, but only to furnish a proof
that he had not been wanting in proper care. עד יבאהוּ "let him bring it
as a witness," viz., the animal that had been torn in pieces, or a
portion of it, from which it might be seen that he had chased the wild
beast to recover its prey (cf. [Sa1
17:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034); [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012)).

[Exodus 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 22:14</span></span>

If any one borrowed an animal of his neighbour (to use it for some kind
of work), and it got injured and died, he was to make compensation to
the owner, unless the latter were present at the time; but not if he
were. "For either he would see that it could not have been averted by
any human care; or if it could, seeing that he, the owner himself, was
present, and did not avert it, it would only be right that he should
suffer the consequence of his own neglect to afford assistance"
(Calovius). The words which follow, וגו שׂכיר אם, cannot have any other
meaning than this, "if it was hired, it has come upon his hire," i.e.,
he has to bear the injury or loss for the money which he got for letting
out the animal. The suggestion which Knobel makes with a "perhaps," that
שׂכיר refers to a hired labourer, to whom the word is applied in other
places, and that the meaning is this, "if it is a labourer for hire, he
goes into his hire, - i.e., if the hirer is a daily labourer who has
nothing with which to make compensation, he is to enter into the service
of the person who let him the animal, for a sufficiently long time to
make up for the loss," - is not only opposed to the grammar (the perfect
בּא for which יבא should be used), but is also at variance with the
context, "not make it good."

[Exodus 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 22:16</span></span>

The seduction of a girl, who belonged to her father as long as she was
not betrothed (cf. [Exo 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007)), was
also to be regarded as an attack upon the family possession. Whoever
persuaded a girl to let him lie with her, was to obtain her for a wife
by the payment of a dowry (מהר see [Gen
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#012)); and if her father refused to
give her to him, he was to weigh (pay) money equivalent to the dowry of
maidens, i.e., to pay the father just as much for the disgrace brought
upon him by the seduction of his daughter, as maidens would receive for
a dowry upon their marriage. The seduction of a girl who was betrothed,
was punished much more severely (see [Deu
22:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023)).

[Exodus 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 22:18</span></span>

The laws which follow, from [Exo 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018)
onwards, differ both in form and subject-matter from the determinations
of right which we have been studying hitherto: in form, through the
omission of the כּי with which the others were almost invariably
introduced; in subject-matter, inasmuch as they make demands upon Israel
on the ground of its election to be the holy nation of Jehovah, which go
beyond the sphere of natural right, not only prohibiting every inversion
of the natural order of things, but requiring the manifestation of love
to the infirm and needy out of regard to Jehovah. The transition from
the former series to the present one is made by the command in [Exo
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018), "Thou shalt not suffer a witch
to live;" witchcraft being, on the one hand, "the vilest way of injuring
a neighbour in his property, or even in his body and life" (Ranke),
whilst, on the other hand, employment of powers of darkness for the
purpose of injuring a neighbour was a practical denial of the divine
vocation of Israel, as well as of Jehovah the Holy One of Israel. The
witch is mentioned instead of the wizard, "not because witchcraft was
not to be punished in the case of men, but because the female sex was
more addicted to this crime" (Calovius). תחיּה לא (shalt not suffer to
live) is chosen instead of the ordinary יוּמת מות (shall surely die),
which is used in [Lev 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027) of wizards
also, not "because the lawgiver intended that the Hebrew witch should be
put to death in any case, and the foreigner only if she would not go
when she was banished" (Knobel), but because every Hebrew witch was not
to be put to death, but regard was to be had to the fact that witchcraft
is often nothing but jugglery, and only those witches were to be put to
death who would not give up their witchcraft when it was forbidden.
Witchcraft is followed in [Exo 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#019)
by the unnatural crime of lying with a beast; and this is also
threatened with the punishment of death (see [Lev
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#023), and [Lev
20:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#015)).

[Exodus 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 22:20</span></span>

Whoever offered sacrifice to strange gods instead of to Jehovah alone,
was liable to death. יחרם he shall be banned, put under the ban
(cherem), i.e., put to death, and by death devoted to the Lord, to whom
he would not devote himself in life (cf. [Lev
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#029), and my Archologie, 70).

[Exodus 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 22:21</span></span>

The Israelites were not to offer sacrifice to foreign deities; but a
foreigner himself they were not only to tolerate, but were not to vex or
oppress him, bearing in mind that they also had been foreigners in Egypt
(cf. [Exo 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#009), and [Lev
19:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#033)). - Whilst the foreigner, as
having no rights, is thus commended to the kindness of the people
through their remembrance of what they themselves had experienced in
Egypt, those members of the nation itself who were most in need of
protection (viz., widows and orphans) are secured from humiliation by an
assurance of the special care and watchfulness of Jehovah, under which
such forsaken ones stand, inasmuch as Jehovah Himself would take their
troubles upon Himself, and punish their oppressors with just
retribution. ענּה to humiliate, includes not only unjust oppression, but
every kind of cold and contemptuous treatment. The suffix in אתו ([Exo
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#023)) refers to both אלמנה and יתום,
according to the rule that when there are two or more subjects of
different genders, the masculine is employed (Ges. 148, 2). The כּי
before אם expresses a strong assurance: "yea, if he cries to Me, I will
hearken to him" (see Ewald, 330b). "Killing with the sword" points to
wars, in which men and fathers of families perish, and their wives and
children are made widows and orphans.

[Exodus 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 22:25</span></span>

If a man should lend to one of the poor of his own people, he was not to
oppress him by demanding interest; and if he gave his upper garment as a
pledge, he was to give it him back towards sunset, because it was his
only covering; as the poorer classes in the East use the upper garment,
consisting of a large square piece of cloth, to sleep in. "It is his
clothing for his skin:" i.e., it serves for a covering to his body.
"Wherein shall he lie?" i.e., in what shall be wrap himself to sleep?
(cf. [Deu 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006), [Deu
24:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010)). - With [Exo
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028). God directs Himself at once to
the hearts of the Israelites, and attacks the sins of selfishness and
covetousness, against which the precepts in [Exo
22:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021) were directed in their
deepest root, for the purpose of opposing all inward resistance to the
promotion of His commands.

[Exodus 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 22:28</span></span>

"Thou shalt not despise God, and the prince among thy people thou shalt
not curse." Elohim does not mean either the gods of other nations, as
Josephus, Philo, and others, in their dead and work-holy monotheism,
have rendered the word; or the rulers, as Onkelos and others suppose;
but simply God, deity in general, whose majesty was despised in every
break of the commandments of Jehovah, and who was to be honoured in the
persons of the rulers (cf. [Pro 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#021);
[Pe1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017)). Contempt of God consists
not only in blasphemies of Jehovah openly expressed, which were to be
punished with death ([Lev 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#011).), but
in disregard of His threats with reference to the oppression of the
poorer members of His people ([Exo
22:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022)), and in withholding from
them what they ought to receive ([Exo
22:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)). Understood in this way, the
command is closely connected not only with what precedes, but also with
what follows. The prince (נשׂיא, lit., the elevated one) is mentioned by
the side of God, because in his exalted position he has to administer
the law of God among His people, and to put a stop to what is wrong.

[Exodus 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 22:29</span></span>

"Thy fulness and thy flowing thou shalt not delay (to Me)." מלאה
fulness, signifies the produce of corn ([Deu
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009)); and דּמע (lit., tear, flowing,
liquor stillans), which only occurs here, is a poetical epithet for the
produce of the press, both wine and oil (cf. δάκρυον τῶν δένδρων, lxx;
arborum lacrimae, Plin. 11:6). The meaning is correctly given by the
lxx: ἀπαρχὰς ἅλωνος καὶ ληνοῦ σοῦ. That the command not to delay and not
to withhold the fulness, etc., relates to the offering of the
first-fruits of the field and vineyard, as is more fully defined in [Exo
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019) and [Deu
26:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#002), is evident from what follows,
in which the law given at the exodus from Egypt, with reference to the
sanctification of the first-born of man and beast ([Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002), [Exo
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#012)), is repeated and incorporated
in the rights of Israel, inasmuch as the adoption of the first-born on
the part of Jehovah was a perpetual guarantee to the whole nation of the
right of covenant fellowship. (On the rule laid down in [Exo
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030), see [Lev
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027).)

[Exodus 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 22:31</span></span>

As the whole nation sanctified itself to the Lord in the sanctification
of the first-born, the Israelites were to show themselves to be holy men
unto the Lord by not eating "flesh torn to pieces in the field," i.e.,
the flesh of an animal that had been torn to pieces by a wild beast in
the field. Such flesh they were to throw to the dogs, because eating it
would defile (cf. [Lev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 23](exo023)

</div>
