<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze026)  [Next](eze028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001)

[Ezekiel 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 27:1</span></span>

The lamentation commences with a picture of the glory of the city of
Tyre, its situation, its architectural beauty, its military strength and
defences ([Eze 27:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003)), and its
wide-spread commercial relations ([Eze
27:12-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012)); and then passes into
mournful lamentation over the ruin of all this glory ([Eze
27:26-36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026)).

Introduction and description of the glory and might of Tyre. - [Eze
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001). And the word of Jehovah came to
me, saying, [Eze 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#002). And do thou, O
son of man, raise a lamentation over Tyre, [Eze
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003). And say to Tyre, Thou who
dwellest at the approaches of the sea, merchant of the nations to many
islands, thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Tyre, thou sayest, I am perfect in
beauty. [Eze 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004). In the heart of the
seas is thy territory; thy builders have made thy beauty perfect. [Eze
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005). Out of cypresses of Senir they
built all double-plank-work for thee; they took cedars of Lebanon to
make a mast upon thee. [Eze 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#006). They
made thine oars of oaks of Bashan, thy benches they made of ivory set in
box from the islands of the Chittaeans. [Eze
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007). Byssus in embroidery from Egypt
was thy sail, to serve thee for a banner; blue and red purple from the
islands of Elishah was thine awning. [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008). The inhabitants of Sidon and
Arvad were thy rowers; thy skilful men, O Tyre, were in thee, they were
thy sailors. [Eze 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009). The elders of
Gebal and its skilful men were with thee to repair thy leaks; all the
ships of the sea and their mariners were in thee to barter thy goods.
[Eze 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010). Persian and Lydian and
Libyan were in thine army, thy men of war; shield and helmet they hung
up in thee; they gave brilliancy to thee. [Eze
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#011). The sons of Arvad and thine
army were upon thy walls round about, and brave men were upon they
towers; they hung up their shields upon thy walls round about; they have
made thy beauty perfect. - The lamentation commences with an address to
Tyre, in which its favourable situation for purposes of trade, and the
perfect beauty of which she was conscious, are placed in the foreground
([Eze 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003)). Tyre is sitting, or
dwelling, at the approaches of the sea. מבואת ים, approaches or
entrances of the sea, are harbours into which ships sail and from which
they depart, just as מבוא העיר sa t, the gate of the city, it both
entrance and exit. This description does not point to the city on the
mainland, or Old Tyre, but answers exactly to Insular Tyre with its two
harbours.

(Note: Insular Tyre possessed two harbours, a northern one called the
Sidonian, because it was on the Sidonian side, and one on the opposite
or south-eastern side, which was called the Egyptian harbour from the
direction in which it pointed. The Sidonian was the more celebrated of
the two, and consisted of an inner harbour, situated within the wall of
the city, and an outer one, formed by a row of rocks, which lay at a
distance of about three hundred paces to the north-west of the island,
and ran parallel to the opposite coast of the mainland, so as to form a
roadstead in which ships could anchor (vid., Arrian, ii. 20; Strabo,
xvi. 2. 23). This northern harbour is still held by the city of Sur,
whereas the Egyptian harbour with the south-eastern portion of the
island has been buried by the sand driven against the coasts by the
south winds, so that even the writers of the Middle Ages make no
allusion to it. (See Movers, Phnizier, II. 1, pp. 214ff.).)

ישׁבתי, with the connecting i, which is apparently confounded here after
the Aramaean fashion with the i of the feminine pronoun, and has
therefore been marked by the Masora as superfluous (vid., Ewald, 211b).
The combination of רכלת with 'אל איּים ר may be accounted for from the
primary meaning of רכל, to travel about as a merchant: thou who didst go
to the nations on many shores to carry on thy trade. Tyre itself
considers that she is perfect in her beauty, partly on account of her
strong position in the sea, and partly because of her splendid edifices.

(Note: Curtius, iv. 2: Tyrus et claritate et magnitudine ante omnes
urbes Syriae Phoenicesque memorabilis. (Cf. Strabo, xvi. 2. 22.))

In the description which follows of this beauty and glory, from [Eze
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004) onwards, Tyre is depicted
allegorically as a beautiful ship, splendidly built and equipped
throughout, and its destruction is afterwards represented as a shipwreck
occasioned by the east wind ([Eze
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026).).

(Note: Jerome recognised this allegory, and has explained it correctly
as follows: "He (the prophet) speaks τροπικῶς, as though addressing a
ship, and points out its beauty and the abundance of everything. Then,
after having depicted all its supplies, he announces that a storm will
rise, and the south wind (auster) will blow, by which great waves will
be gathered up, and the vessel will be wrecked. In all this he is
referring to the overthrow of the city by King Nabuchodonosor," etc.
Rashi and others give the same explanation.)

The words, "in the heart of the seas is thy territory" ([Eze
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004)), are equally applicable to the
city of Tyre and to a ship, the building of which is described in what
follows. The comparison of Tyre to a ship was very naturally suggested
by the situation of the city in the midst of the sea, completely
surrounded by water. As a ship, it must of necessity be built of wood.
The shipbuilders selected the finest kinds of wood for the purpose;
cypresses of Antilibanus for double planks, which formed the sides of
the vessel, and cedar of Lebanon for the mast. Senir, according to [Deu
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009), was the Amoritish name of Hermon
or Antilibanus, whereas the Sidonians called it Sirion. On the other
hand, Senir occurs in [Ch1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#023), and
Shenir in [Sol 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008), in connection with
Hermon, where they are used to denote separate portions of Antilibanus.
Ezekiel evidently uses Senir as a foreign name, which had been retained
to his own time, whereas Sirion had possibly become obsolete, as the
names had both the same meaning (see the comm. on [Deu
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009)). The naming of the places from
which the several materials were obtained for the fitting out of the
ship, serve to heighten the glory of its construction and give an ideal
character to the picture. All lands have contributed their productions
to complete the glory and might of Tyre. Cypress-wood was frequently
used by the ancients for buildings and (according to Virgil, Georg. ii.
443) also for ships, because it was exempt from the attacks of worms,
and was almost imperishable, and yet very light (Theophr. Hist. plant.
v. 8; Plinii Hist. nat. xvi. 79). לחתים, a dual form, like חמתים in [Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004); [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011), double-planks, used for the two
side-walls of the ship. For oars they chose oaks of Bashan (משּׁוט as
well as משׁוט in [Eze 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#029) from
שׁוּט, to row), and the rowing benches (or deck) were of ivory inlaid in
box. קרשׁ is used in [Exo 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#015). for
the boards or planks of the wooden walls of the tabernacle; here it is
employed in a collective sense, either for the rowing benches, of which
there were at least two, and sometimes three rows in a vessel, one above
another, or more properly, for the deck of the vessel (Hitzig). This was
made of she4n, or ivory, inlaid in wood. The ivory is mentioned first as
the most valuable material of the קרשׁ, the object being to picture the
ship as possessing all possible splendour. The expression בּתּ־אשּׁרים,
occasions some difficulty, partly on account of the use of the word בּת,
and partly in connection with the meaning of אשּׁרים , although so much
may be inferred from the context, that the allusion is to some kind of
wood inlaid with ivory, and the custom of inlaying wood with ivory for
the purpose of decoration is attested by Virgil, Aen. x. 137:

"Vel quale per artem

Inclusum buxo, aut Oricia terebintho

Lucet ebur."

But the use of בּת does not harmonize with the relation of the wood to
the ivory inserted in wood; nor can it be defended by the fact that in
[Lam 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#003) an arrow is designated "the
son of the quiver." According to this analogy, the ivory ought to have
been called the son of the Ashurim, because the ivory is inserted in the
wood, and not the wood in the ivory.

(Note: The Targum has paraphrased it in this way: דפּין דאשׁכרעין
מכבשׁין בשׁן דפיל, i.e., planks of box or pine inlaid with ivory.)

We must therefore adopt the solution proposed by R. Salomo and others -
namely, that the Masoretic division of בת־אשּׁרים into two words is
founded upon a mistake, and that it should be read as one word
בּתאשּׁרים, ivory in תּאשּׁרים, i.e., either sherbin-cedar (according to
more recent expositors), or box-wood, for which Bochart (Phal. III 5)
has decided. The fact that in [Isa
60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013) the תּאשּׁוּר is mentioned among
the trees growing upon Lebanon, whereas here the תּאשּׁרים are described
as coming from the islands of the כּתּיּם, does not furnish a decisive
argument to the contrary. We cannot determine with certainty what
species of tree is referred to, and therefore it cannot be affirmed that
the tree grew upon Lebanon alone, and not upon the islands of the
Mediterranean. כּתּיּם are the Κιτιεῖς, the inhabitants of the port of
Κίτιον in Cyprus; then the Cyprians generally; and here, as in [Jer
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010), where איּים of the כּתּיּם are
mentioned, in a still broader sense, inhabitants of Cyprus and other
islands and coast-lands of the Mediterranean. In 1 Macc. 1:1 and 8:5,
even Macedonia is reckoned as belonging to the γὴ Χεττειεῖμ or Κιτίεων.
Consequently the place from which the תּאשּׁרים were brought does not
furnish any conclusive proof that the Cyprian pine is referred to,
although this was frequently used for ship-building. There is just as
much ground for thinking of the box, as Bochart does, and we may appeal
in support of this to the fact that, according to Theophrastus, there is
no place in which it grows more vigorously than on the island of
Corsica. In any case, Ezekiel mentions it as a very valuable kind of
wood; though we cannot determine with certainty to what wood he refers,
either from the place where it grew or from the accounts of the ancients
concerning the kinds of wood that ship-builders used. The reason for
this, however, is a very simple one - namely, that the whole description
has an ideal character, and, as Hitzig has correctly observed, "the
application of the several kinds of wood to the different parts of the
ship is evidently only poetical."

The same may be said of the materials of which, according to [Eze
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007), the sails and awning of the ship
were made. Byssus in party-coloured work (רקמה, see comm. on [Exo
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#036)), i.e., woven in mixed colours,
probably not merely in stripes, but woven with figures and flowers."

(Note: See Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, III Pl. xvi., where
engravings are given of Egyptian state-ships with embroidered sails. On
one ship a large square sail is displayed in purple-red and purple-blue
checks, surrounded by a gold border. The vessel of Antony and Cleopatra
in the battle of Actium had also purple sails; and in this case the
purple sails were the sign of the admiral's ship, just as in Ezekiel
they serve as a mark of distinction (נס). See Movers, II 3, p. 165,
where the accounts of ancient writers concerning such state-ships are
collected together.)

"From Egypt;" the byssus-weaving of Egypt was celebrated in antiquity,
so that byssus-linen formed one of the principal articles of export
(vid., Movers, ut supra, pp. 317ff.). מפרשׁ, literally, spreading out,
evidently signifies the sail, which we expect to find mentioned here,
and with which the following clause, "to serve thee for a banner," can
be reconciled, inasmuch as it may be assumed either that the sails also
served for a banner, because the ships had no actual flag, like those in
Wilkinson's engraving, or that the flag (נס) being also extended is
included under the term מפרשׁ (Hitzig). The covering of the ship, i.e.,
the awning which was put up above the deck for protection from the heat
of the sun, consisted of purple (תכלת and ארגּמן, see the comm. on [Exo
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#004)) from the islands of Elishah,
i.e., of the Grecian Peloponesus, which naturally suggests the Laconian
purple so highly valued in antiquity on account of its splendid colour
(Plin. Hist. nat. ix. 36, xxi. 8). The account of the building of the
ship is followed by the manning, and the attention paid to its
condition. The words of [Eze 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008) may
be taken as referring quite as much to the ship as to the city, which
was in possession of ships, and is mentioned by name in [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008). The reference to the Sidonians
and Arvad, i.e., to the inhabitants of Aradus, a rocky island to the
north of Tripolis, as rowers, is not at variance with the latter; since
there is no need to understand by the rowers either slaves or servants
employed to row, and the Tyrians certainly drew their rowers from the
whole of the Phoenician population, whereas the chief men in command of
the ships, the captain and pilot (חבלים), were no doubt as a rule
citizens of Tyre. The introduction of the inhabitants of Gebal, i.e.,
the Byblos of the Greeks, the present Jebail, between Tripolis and
Berytus (see the comm. on [Jos 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005)),
who were noted even in Solomon's time as skilful architects (1 Kings
5:32), as repairers of the leak, decidedly favours the supposition that
the idea of the ship is still kept in the foreground; and by the naming
of those who took charge of the piloting and condition of the vessel,
the thought is expressed that all the cities of Phoenicia assisted to
maintain the might and glory of Tyre, since Tyre was supreme in
Phoenicia. It is not till [Eze 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009)
that the allegory falls into the background. Tyre now appears no longer
as a ship, but as a maritime city, into which all the ships of the sea
sail, to carry on and improve her commerce.

[Eze 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010), [Eze
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#011). Tyre had also made the best
provision for its defence. It maintained an army of mercenary troops
from foreign countries to protect its colonies and extend its
settlements, and entrusted the guarding of the walls of the city to
fighting men of Phoenicia. The hired troops specially named in [Eze
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010) are Pharas, Lud, and Phut. פּוּט
is no doubt an African tribe, in Coptic Phaiat, the Libyans of the
ancients, who had spread themselves over the whole of North Africa as
far as Mauretania (see the comm. on [Gen
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)). לוּד is not the Semitic people
of that name, the Lydians ([Gen
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022)), but here, as in [Eze
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005); [Isa
66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019), and [Jer
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009), the Hamitic people of לוּדים
([Gen 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013)), probably a general name
for the whole of the Moorish tribes, since לוּד ([Eze
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005)) and לוּדים ([Jer
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#009)) are mentioned in connection with
פּוּט as auxiliaries in the Egyptian army. There is something striking
in the reference to פּרס, the Persians. Hvernick points to the early
intercourse carried on by the Phoenicians with Persia through the
Persian Gulf, through which the former would not doubt be able to obtain
mercenary soldiers, for which it was a general rule to select tribes as
remote as possible. Hitzig objects to this, on the ground that there is
no proof that this intercourse with Persian through the Persian Gulf was
carried on in Ezekiel's time, and that even if it were, it does not
follow that there were any Persian mercenaries. He therefore proposes to
understand by פרס, Persians who had settled in Africa in the olden time.
But this settlement cannot be inferred with sufficient certainty either
from Sallust, Jug. c. 18, or from the occurrence of the African Μάκαι of
Herodotus, iv. 175, along with the Asiatic (Ptol. vi. 7. 14), to take it
as an explanation of פּרס. If we compare [Eze
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005), where Pâras is mentioned in
connection with Cush and Phut, Gomer and Togarmah, as auxiliaries in the
army of Gog, there can be no doubt that Asiatic Persians are intended
there. And we have to take the word in the same sense here; for Hitzig's
objections consist of pure conjectures which have no conclusive force.
Ezekiel evidently intends to give the names of tribes from the far-off
east, west, and south, who were enlisted as mercenaries in the military
service of Tyre. Hanging the shields and helmets in the city, to
ornament its walls, appears to have been a Phoenician custom, which
Solomon also introduced into Judah ([Kg1
10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#016), [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004)), and which is mentioned again in
the times of the Maccabees (1 Macc. 4:57). - A distinction is drawn in
[Eze 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#011) between the mercenary
troops on the one hand, and the Aradians, and הילך, thine army, the
military corps consisting of Tyrians, on the other. The latter appears
upon the walls of Tyre, because native troops were employed to watch and
defend the city, whilst the mercenaries had to march into the field. The
ἁπ. λεγ. גּמּדים (Gammâdim) signifies brave men, as Roediger has
conclusively shown from the Syrian usage, in his Addenda to Gesenius'
Thes. p. 70f. It is therefore an epitheton of the native troops of Tyre.
- With the words, "they (the troops) completed thy beauty," the picture
of the glory of Tyre is rounded off, returning to its starting-point in
[Eze 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004) and [Eze
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005).

[Ezekiel 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 27:12</span></span>

This is followed by a description of the commerce of Tyre with all
nations, who delivered their productions in the market of this
metropolis of the commerce of the world, and received the wares and
manufactures of this city in return. - [Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012). Tarshish traded with thee for
the multitude of goods of all kinds; with silver, iron, tin, and lead
they paid for thy sales. [Eze 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013).
Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants; with souls of men
and brazen vessels they made thy barter. [Eze
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#014). From the house of Togarmah they
paid horses, riding-horses, and mules for thy sales. [Eze
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015). The sons of Dedan were thy
merchants; many islands were at thy hand for commerce; ivory horns and
ebony they brought thee in payment. [Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016). Aram traded with thee for the
multitude of thy productions; with carbuncle, red purple, and
embroidery, and byssus, and corals, and rubies they paid for thy sales.
[Eze 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017). Judah and the land of
Israel, they were thy merchants; with wheat of Minnith and
confectionery, and honey and oil, and balsam they made thy barter. [Eze
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018). Damascus traded with thee in
the multitude of thy productions, for the multitude of goods of all
kinds, with wine of Chelbon and white wool. [Eze
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019). Vedan and Javan from Uzal gave
wrought iron for thy salves; cassia and calamus were for thy barter.
[Eze 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020). Vedan was thy merchant in
cloths spread for riding. [Eze 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#021).
Arabia and all the princes of Kedar, they were at thy hand for commerce;
lambs and rams and he-goats, in these they traded with thee. [Eze
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022). The merchants of Sheba and
Ragmah, they were thy merchants; with all kinds of costly spices and
with all kinds of precious stones and gold they paid for thy sales. [Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023). Haran, and Canneh, and Eden,
the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, Chilmad, were they merchants; [Eze
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#024). They were thy merchants in
splendid clothes, in purple and embroidered robes, and in treasures of
twisted yarn, in wound and strong cords for thy wares. [Eze
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#025). The ships of Tarshish were thy
caravans, thy trade, and thou wast filled and glorious in the heart of
the seas. - The enumeration of the different peoples, lands, and cities,
which carried on trade with Tyre, commences with Tarshish (Tartessus) in
the extreme west, then turns to the north, passes through the different
lands of Anterior Asia and the Mediterranean to the remotest north-east,
and ends by mentioning Tarshish again, to round off the list. But the
lands and peoples, which are mentioned in [Eze
27:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005) as furnishing produce and
manufactures for the building of Tyre, viz., Egypt and the tribes of
Northern Africa, are left out. - To avoid wearisome uniformity in the
enumeration, Ezekiel has used interchangeably the synonymous words which
the language possessed for trade, besides endeavouring to give life to
the description by a variety of turns of expression. Thus סחרתך ([Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012), [Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016), [Eze
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018)), סחריך ([Eze
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#021)), and סחרת ידך ([Eze
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015)), or סחרי ידך ([Eze
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#021)), are interchanged with רכליך
([Eze 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013), [Eze
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015), [Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017), [Eze
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022), [Eze
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#024)), רכלתך ([Eze
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020), [Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023)), and מרכּלתּך ([Eze
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#024)); and, again, נתן עזבוניך ([Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012), [Eze
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#014), [Eze
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022)), נתן ([Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016), [Eze
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019)), with נתן מערבך ([Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013), [Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017)), and בּמערבך היה ([Eze
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019)), and השׁיב אשׁכּרך ([Eze
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015)). The words סחר, participle of
סחר, and רכל, from רכל morf, signify merchants, traders, who travel
through different lands for purposes of trade. סחרת, literally, the
female trader; and סחרה, literally, trade; then used as abstract for
concrete, the tradesman or merchant. רכל, the travelling merchant. -
רכלת, the female trader, a city carrying on trade. מרכלת, trade or a
place of trade, a commercial town. עזבונים (pluralet.) does not mean a
place of trade, market, and profits (Gesenius and others); but according
to its derivation from עזב, to leave, relinquish, literally, leaving or
giving up, and as Gusset. has correctly explained it, "that which you
leave with another in the place of something else which he has given up
to you." Ewald, in accordance with this explanation, has adopted the
very appropriate rendering Absatz, or sale. נתן עזבוניך, with ב, or with
a double accusative, literally, to make thy sale with something, i.e.,
to pay or to give, i.e., pay, something as an equivalent for the sale;
'נתן בּעזב, to give something for the sale, or the goods to be sold.
מערב, barter, goods bartered with נתן, to give bartered goods, or carry
on trade by barter.

The following are the countries and peoples enumerated: - תּרשׁישׁ, the
Tyrian colony of Tarshish or Tartessus, in Hispania Baetica, which was
celebrated for its wealth in silver ([Jer
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009)), and, according to the passage
before us, also supplied iron, tin, and lead (vid., Plin. Hist. nat.
iii. 3 4, xxxiii. 6 31, xxiv. 14 41; Diod. Sic. v. 38). Further
particulars concerning Tarshish are to be found in Movers, Phoeniz. II
2, pp. 588ff., and II 3, p. 36. - Javan, i.e., Jania, Greece or Greeks.
- Tubal and Meshech are the Tibareni and Moschi of the ancients between
the Black and Caspian Seas (see the comm. on [Gen
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002)). They supplied souls of men,
i.e., slaves, and things in brass. The slave trade was carried on most
vigorously by the Ionians and Greeks (see Joel 4:6, from which we learn
that the Phoenicians sold prisoners of war to them); and both Greeks and
Romans drew their largest supplies and the best slaves from the Pontus
(for proofs of this, see Movers, II 3, pp. 81f.). It is probable that
the principal supplies of brazen articles were furnished by the Tibareni
and Moschi, as the Colchian mountains still contain an inexhaustible
quantity of copper. In Greece, copper was found and wrought in Euboea
alone; and the only other rich mines were in Cyprus (vid., Movers, II 3,
pp. 66, 67). - [Eze 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#014). "From the
house of Togarmah they paid," i.e., they of the house of Togarmah paid.
Togarmah is one of the names of the Armenians (see the comm. on [Gen
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#003)); and Strabo (XI 14. 9) mentions
the wealth of Armenia in horses, whilst that in asses is attested by
Herodotus (i. 194), so that we may safely infer that mules were also
bred there. - [Eze 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015). The sons of
Dedan, or the Dedanites, are, no doubt, the Dedanites mentioned in [Gen
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007) as descendants of Cush, who
conducted the carrying trade between the Persian Gulf and Tyre, and
whose caravans are mentioned in [Isa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013). Their relation to the Semitic
Dedanites, who are evidently intended in [Eze
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020), and by the inhabitants of Dedan
mentioned in connection with Edom in [Eze
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#013) and [Jer
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#008), is involved in obscurity (see
the comm. on [Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007)). The
combination with איּים רבּים and the articles of commerce which they
brought to Tyre, point to a people of southern Arabia settled in the
neighbourhood of the Persian Gulf. The many איּים are the islands and
coasts of Arabia on the Persian Gulf and Erythraean Sea.

(Note: Movers (II 3, pp. 303ff.) adduces still further evidence in
addition to that given above, namely, that "unquestionable traces of the
ancient name have been preserved in the region in which the ancient
Dedanites are represented as living, partly on the coast in the names
Attana, Attene, which have been modified according to well-known laws, -
the former, a commercial town on the Persian Gulf, visited by Roman
merchants (Plin. vi. 32, 147); the latter, a tract of country opposite
to the island of Tylos (Plin. l.c. 49), - and partly in the islands of
the Persian Gulf" (p. 304).)

סחרת ידך, the commerce of thy hand, i.e., as abstr. pro concr., those
who were ready to thy hand as merchants. קרנות שׁן, ivory horns. This is
the term applied to the elephants' tusks (shn) on account of their shape
and resemblance to horns, just as Pliny (Hist. nat. xviii. 1) also
speaks of cornua elephanti, although he says, in viii. 3 (4), that an
elephant's weapons, which Juba calls cornua, are more correctly to be
called dentes.

(Note: The Ethiopians also call ivory Karna nage, i.e., cornu elephanti,
and suppose that it is from horns, and not from tusks, that ivory comes
(vid., Hiob Ludolph, Hist. Aeth. I c. 10).)

The ἁπ. λεγ.. הובנים, Keri הבנים, signifies ἔβενος hebenum, ebony. The
ancients obtained both productions partly from India, partly from
Ethiopia (Plin. xii. 4 8). According to Dioscor. i. 130, the Ethiopian
ebony was preferred to the Indian. השׁיב אשׁכּר to return payment (see
the comm. on [Psa 72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010)).

In [Eze 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016), J. D. Michaelis, Ewald,
Hitzig, and others read אדם for ארם, after the lxx and Pesh., because
Aram did not lie in the road from Dedan and the איּים to Israel ([Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017)), and it is not till [Eze
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018) that Ezekiel reaches Aram.
Moreover, the corruption ארם for אדום could arise all the more readily
from the simple fact that the defective form אדם only occurs in Ezekiel
([Eze 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014)), and is altogether an
extraordinary one. These reasons are undoubtedly worthy of
consideration; still they are not conclusive, since the enumeration does
not follow a strictly geographical order, inasmuch as Damascus is
followed in [Eze 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019). by many of the
tribes of Southern Arabia, so that Aram might stand, as Hvernick
supposes, for Mesopotamian Aram, for which the articles mentioned in
[Eze 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016) would be quite as suitable
as for Edom, whose chief city Petra was an important place of commerce
and emporium for goods. רב מעשׂיך, the multitude of thy works, thy
manufactures. Of the articles of commerce delivered by ארם , the red
purple, embroidery, and בּוּץ (the Aramaean name for byssus, which
appears, according to Movers, to have originally denoted a species of
cotton), favour Aram, particularly Babylonia, rather than Edom. For the
woven fabrics of Babylonia were celebrated from the earliest times
(vid., Movers, II 3, pp. 260ff.); and Babylon was also the oldest and
most important market for precious stones (vid., Movers, p. 266). נפך is
the carbuncle (see the comm. on [Exo
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#018)). כּדכּד, probably the ruby; in
any case, a precious stone of brilliant splendour (vid., [Isa
54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012)). ראמות, corals or pearls (vid.,
Delitzsch on [Job 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#018)). - Judah
([Eze 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017)) delivered to Tyre wheat
of Minnith, i.e., according to [Jdg
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#033), an Ammonitish place, situated,
according to the Onomast., four Roman miles from Heshbon in the
direction of Philadelphia. That Ammonitis abounded in wheat, is evident
from [Ch2 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#005), although the land of
Israel also supplied the Tyrians with wheat ([Kg1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011)). The meaning of the ἁπ. λεγ.
דם̓̀בנ̓̀ב cannot be definitely ascertained. The rendering confectionery is
founded upon the Aramaean פּנק, deliciari, and the Chaldee translation,
קוליא, i.e., κολία, according to Hesychius, τὰ ἐκ μέλιτος τρωγάλια, or
sweetmeats made from honey. Jerome renders it balsamum, after the μύρων
of the lxx; and in Hitzig's opinion, Pannaga (literally, a snake) is a
name used in Sanscrit for a sweet-scented wood, which was employed in
medicine as a cooling and strengthening drug (?). Honey (from bees) and
oil are well-known productions of Palestine. צרי is balsam; whether
resina or the true balsam grown in gardens about Jericho (opobalsamum),
it is impossible to decide (see my Bibl. Archol. I p. 38, and Movers, II
3, pp. 220ff.). Damascus supplied Tyre with wine of Chelbon. חלבּון
still exists in the village of Helbn, a place with many ruins, three
hours and a half to the north of Damascus, in the midst of a valley of
the same name, which is planted with vines wherever it is practicable,
from whose grapes the best and most costly wine of the country is made
(vid., Robinson, Biblical Researches). Even in ancient times this wine
was so celebrated, that, according to Posidonius (in Athen. Deipnos. i.
22), the kings of Persia drank only Chalybonian wine from Damascus
(vid., Strabo, XV 3. 22). צמר צחר, wool of dazzling whiteness; or,
according to others, wool of Zachar, for which the Septuagint has ἔρια
ἐκ Μιλήτου, Milesian wool.

(Note: According to Movers (II 3, p. 269), צחר is the Sicharia of
Aethicus (Cosm. 108): Sicharia regio, quae postea Nabathaea, nuncupatur,
silvestris valde, ubi Ismaelitae eminus, - an earlier name for the land
of the Nabathaeans, who dwelt in olden time between Palestine and the
Euphrates, and were celebrated for their wealth in flocks of sheep.)

[Eze 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019). Various explanations have
been given of the first three words. ודן is not to be altered into דּדן,
as it has been by Ewald, both arbitrarily and unsuitably with [Eze
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020) immediately following; nor is it
to be rendered "and Dan." It is a decisive objection to this, that
throughout the whole enumeration not a single land or people is
introduced with the copula w. Vedan, which may be compared with the
Vaheb of [Num 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#014), a place also
mentioned only once, is the name of a tribe and tract of land not
mentioned elsewhere in the Old Testament. Movers (p. 302) conjectures
that it is the celebrated city of Aden (Arab. 'dn). Javan is also the
name of an Arabian place or tribe; and, according to a notice in the
Kamus, it is a place in Yemen. Tuch (Genesis, p. 210) supposes it to be
a Greek (Ionian) settlement, the founders of which had been led by their
enterprising spirit to cross the land of Egypt into Southern Arabia. For
the purpose of distinguishing this Arabian Javan from Greece itself, or
in order to define it more precisely, מעוּזל is appended, which all the
older translators have taken to be a proper name. According to the
Masoretic pointing מאוּזּה, the word is, no doubt, to be regarded as a
participle Pual of אזל, in the sense of spun, from אזל, to spin. But
apart from the fact that it would be a surprising thing to find spun
goods mentioned in connection with the trade of the Arabian tribes, the
explanation itself could not be sustained from the usage of the
language; for there is nothing in the dialects to confirm the idea that
אזל is a softened form of עזל, inasmuch as they have all עזל (Aram.) and
gzl (Arab.), and the Talmudic אזל, texere, occurs first of all in the
Gemara, and may possibly have been derived in the first instance from
the Rabbinical rendering of our מאוזל by "spun." Even the fact that the
word is written with Shurek is against this explanation rather than in
its favour; and in all probability its origin is to be traced to the
simple circumstance, that in [Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012), [Eze
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#014), [Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016) the articles of commerce are
always mentioned before נתנוּ עזבוניך, and in this verse they would
appear to be omitted altogether, unless they are covered by the word
מאוזל. But we can very properly take the following words בּרזל עשׁות as
the object of the first hemistich, since the Masoretic accentuation is
founded upon the idea that מאוזל is to be taken as the object here. We
therefore regard מאוּזל as the only admissible pointing, and take אוּזל
as a proper name, as in [Gen 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#027) :
"from Uzal," the ancient name of Sanaa, the subsequent capital of Yemen.
The productions mentioned bear this out. Forged or wrought iron, by
which Tuch (l.c. p. 260) supposes that sword-blades from Yemen are
chiefly intended, which were celebrated among the Arabs as much as the
Indian. Cassia and calamus (see the comm. on [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023) and [Exo
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#024)), two Indian productions, as
Yemen traded with India from the very earliest times. - Dedan ([Eze
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020)) is the inland people of that
name, living in the neighbourhood of Edom (cf. [Eze
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#013); see the comm. on [Eze
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015)). They furnished בּגדי, tapetes
straguli, cloths for spreading out, most likely costly riding-cloths,
like the middim of [Jdg 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010). ערב and
קדר represent the nomad tribes of central Arabia, the Bedouins. For ערב
is never used in the Old Testament for the whole of Arabia; but,
according to its derivation from ערבה, a steppe or desert, simply for
the tribes living as nomads in the desert (as in [Isa
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020); [Jer
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002); cf. Ewald, Grammat. Arab. I p.
5). Kedar, descended from Ishmael, an Arabian nomad tribe, living in the
desert between Arabia Petraea and Babylonia, the Cedrei of Pliny (see
the comm. on [Gen 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013)). They
supplied lambs, rams, and he-goats, from the abundance of their flocks,
in return for the goods obtained from Tyre.

[Jdg 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022). Next to these the merchants
of Sheba and Ragmah (רעמה) are mentioned. They were Arabs of Cushite
descent ([Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007)) in south-eastern
Arabia (Oman); for ,רעמה̔Ρεγμα, was in the modern province of Oman in the
bay of the same name in the Persian Gulf. Their goods were all kinds of
spices, precious stones, and gold, in which southern Arabia abounded.
ראשׁ כּל־בּשׂם, the chief or best of all perfumes (on this use of ראשׁ,
see the comm. on [Exo 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023); [Sol
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014)), is most likely the genuine
balsam, which grew in Yemen (Arabia felix), according to Diod. Sic. iii.
45, along with other costly spices, and grows there still; for Forskal
found a shrub between Mecca and Medina, called Abu sham, which he
believed to be the true balsam, and of which he has given a botanical
account in his Flora Aeg. pp. 79, 80 (as Amyris opobalsamum), as well as
of two other kinds. Precious stones, viz., onyx-stones, rubies, agates,
and cornelians, are still found in the mountains of Hadramaut; and in
Yemen also jaspers, crystals, and many good rubies (vid., Niebuhr,
Descript. p. 125, and Seetzen in Zach's Monatl. Corresp. xix. p. 339).
And, lastly, the wealth of Yemen in gold is too strongly attested by
ancient writers to be called in question (cf. Bochart, Phal. II 28),
although this precious metal is no found there now.

In [Eze 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023), [Eze
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#024) the trade with Mesopotamia is
mentioned. חרן, the Carrhae of the Romans in north-western Mesopotamia
(see the comm. on [Gen 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)), was
situated at the crossing of the caravan-roads which intersect
Mesopotamia; for it was at this point that the two caravan routes from
Babylonia and the Delta of the Persian Gulf joined the old military and
commercial road to Canaan (Movers, p. 247). The eastern route ran along
the Tigris, where Calneh, the later Ktesiphon, and the most important
commercial city. It is here called כּנּה (Canneh), contracted from כּלנה
(see the comm. on [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010); [Amo
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002)). The western route ran along the
Euphrates, past the cities mentioned in [Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023). עדן is not the Syrian, but the
Mesopotamian Eden ([Kg2 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#012); [Isa
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#012)), the situation of which has not
yet been determined, though Movers (p. 257) has sought for it in the
Delta of the Euphrates and Tigris. The singular circumstance that the
merchants of Sheba should be mentioned in connection with localities in
Mesopotamia, which has given rise both to arbitrary alterations of the
text and to various forced explanations, has been explained by Movers
(p. 247 compared with p. 139) from a notice of Juba in Pliny's Hist.
nat. xii. 17 (40), namely, that the Sabaeans, the inhabitants of the
spice country, came with their goods from the Persian Gulf to Carrhae,
where they held their yearly markets, and from which they were
accustomed to proceed to Gabba (Gabala in Phoenicia) and Palestinian
Syria. Consequently the merchants of Sabaea are mentioned as those who
carried on the trade between Mesopotamia and Tyre, and are not
unsuitably placed in the centre of those localities which formed the
most important seats of trade on the two great commercial roads of
Mesopotamia.

Asshur and Chilmad, as we have already observed, were on the western
road which ran along the Euphrates. כּלמד has already been discovered by
Bochart (Phal. I 18) in the Charmande of Xenophon (Anab. i. 5. 10), and
Sophaenetus (see Steph. Byz. s.v. Χαρμάνδη), a large and wealthy city in
a desert region "beyond the river Euphrates." The Asshur mentioned along
with Chilmad, in the midst of purely commercial cities, cannot be the
land of Assyria, but must be the emporium Sura (Movers, p. 252), the
present Essurieh, which stands upon the bank on this side of the
Euphrates above Thapsacus and on the caravan route, which runs from
Palmyra past Rusapha (Rezeph, [Isa
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#012); [Kg2
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#012)) to Nicephorium or Rakka, then
in a northerly direction to Haran, and bending southwards, runs along
the bank of the river in the direction of Chilmad or Charmande (Ritter,
Erdk. XI pp. 1081ff.). The articles of commerce from these emporia,
which were brought to Tyre by Sabaean caravans, consisted of מּכללים,
literally, articles of perfect beauty, either state-dresses (cf. מכלל,
[Eze 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012) and [Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)), or more generally, costly works
of art (Hvernick). The omission of the copula ו before בּגלומי is
decisive is favour of the former, as we may infer from this that 'בגל is
intended as an explanatory apposition to מּכללים. גּלומי תכלת ורקמה,
cloaks (גּלום connected with χλαμύς) of hyacinth-purple and embroidery,
for which Babylonia was celebrated (for proofs of this, see Movers, pp.
258ff.). The words which follow cannot be explained with certainty. All
that is evident is, that 'ואר 'בּחבלים חב is appended to בּגנזי בּרומים
without a copula, as 'בּגלומי וגו is to בּמּכללים in the first
hemistich, and therefore, like the latter, is intended as an explanatory
apposition. חבלים does not mean either cloths or threads, but lines or
cords. חבשׁים signifies literally bound or would up; probably twisted,
i.e., formed of several threads wound together or spun; and ארזים, firm,
compact, from Arab. arz, to be drawn together. Consequently 'גּנזי
בּרומים וגו can hardly have any other meaning than treasures of spun
yarns, i.e., the most valuable yarns formed of different threads. For
"treasures" is the only meaning which can be assigned to גּנזים with any
certainty on philological grounds, and בּרומים, from בּרם, Arab. brm,
contorsit , is either yarn spun from several or various threads, or
cloth woven from such threads. But the latter would not harmonize with
חבלים. Movers (II 3, pp. 263ff.) adopts a similar conclusion, and
adduces evidence that silk yarn, bombyx, and cotton came to Tyre through
the Mesopotamian trade, and were there dyed in the splendid Tyrian
purples, and woven into cloths, or brought for sale with the dyeing
complete. All the other explanations which have been given of these
difficult words are arbitrary and untenable; not only the Rabbinical
rendering of גּנזי בּרומים, viz., chests of damask, but that of Ewald,
"pockets of damask," and that proposed by Hartmann, Hvernick, and
others, viz., girdles of various colours, ζῶναι σκιωταί. In [Eze
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#025) the description is rounded off
with a notice of the lever of this world-wide trade. שׁרות cannot mean
"walls" in this instance, as in [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010), and like שׁוּרות in [Job
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#011), because the ships, through
which Tyre became so rich, could not be called walls. The word signifies
"caravans," after שׁוּר = Arab. sâr ([Isa
57:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#009)), corresponding to the Aramaean
שׁירא. מערבך might be regarded as an accusative of more precise
definition: caravans, with regard to (for) thy bartering trade. At the
same time it is more rhetorical to take מערבך as a second predicate:
they were thy trade, i.e., the carriers of thy trade. What the caravans
were for the emporia of trade on the mainland, the ships of Tarshish
were for Tyre, and these on the largest sea-going ships are mentioned
instar omnium. By means of these vessels Tyre was filled with goods, and
rendered weighty (נכבּד), i.e., rich and glorious. - But a tempest from
the east would destroy Tyre with all its glory.

[Ezekiel 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 27:26</span></span>

Destruction of Tyre

[Eze 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026). Thy rowers brought thee
into great waters: the east wind broke thee up in the heart of the seas.
[Eze 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#027). Thy riches and thy sales,
thy bartering wares, thy seamen and thy sailors, the repairers of thy
leaks and the treaders in thy wares, and all thy fighting men in thee,
together with all the multitude of people in thee, fell into the heart
of the seas in the day of thy fall. [Eze
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#028). At the noise of the cry of thy
sailors the places tremble. [Eze
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#029). And out of their ships come all
the oarsmen, seamen, all the sailors of the sea; they come upon the
land, [Eze 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020). And make their voice
heard over thee, and cry bitterly, and put dust upon their heads, and
cover themselves with ashes; [Eze
27:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#031). And shave themselves bald on
thy account, and gird on sackcloth, and weep for thee in anguish of soul
a bitter wailing. [Eze 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#032). They
raise over thee in their grief a lamentation, and lament over thee: Who
is like Tyre! like the destroyed one in the midst of the sea!. [Eze
27:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#033). When thy sales came forth out
of the seas, thou didst satisfy many nations; with the abundance of thy
goods and thy wares thou didst enrich kings of the earth. [Eze
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#034). Now that thou art wrecked away
from the seas in the depths of the water, thy wares and all thy company
are fallen in thee. [Eze 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#035). All
the inhabitants of the islands are amazed at thee, and their kings
shudder greatly; their faces quiver. [Eze
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#036). The traders among the nations
hiss over thee; thou hast become a terror, and art gone for ever. - The
allusion to the ships of Tarshish, to which Tyre was indebted for its
glory, serves as an introduction to a renewal in [Eze
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026) of the allegory of [Eze
27:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005); Tyre is a ship, which is
wrecked by the east wind (cf. [Psa
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008)). In Palestine (Arabia and Syria)
the east wind is characterized by continued gusts; and if it rises into
a tempest, it generally causes great damage on account of the violence
of the gusts (see Wetzstein in Delitzsch's commentary on [Job
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#001)). Like a ship broken in pieces by
the storm, Tyre with all its glory sinks into the depths of the sea. The
repetition of בּלב in [Eze 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026) and
[Eze 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#027) forms an effective contrast
to [Eze 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#025); just as the enumeration
of all the possessions of Tyre, which fall with the ship into the heart
of the sea, does to the wealth and glory in [Eze
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#025). They who manned the ship also
perish with the cargo, - "the seamen," i.e., sailors, rowers, repairers
of leaks (calkers), also the merchants on board, and the fighting men
who defended the ship and its goods against pirates, - the whole qâhâl,
or gathering of people, in the ship. The difficult expression בּכל־קהלך
can only be taken as an explanatory apposition to אשׁר בּך: all the men
who are in thee, namely, in the multitude of people in thee. [Eze
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#028). When the vessel is wrecked, the
managers of the ship raise such a cry that the migreshōth tremble. מגרשׁ
is used in [Num 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#002) for the precincts
around the Levitical cities, which were set apart as pasture ground for
the flocks; and in [Eze 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#002); [Eze
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#017), for the ground surrounding the
holy city. Consequently מגרשׁות cannot mean the suburbs of Tyre in the
passage before us, but must signify the open places on the mainland
belonging to Tyre, i.e., the whole of its territory, with the fields and
villages contained therein. The rendering "fleet," which Ewald follows
the Vulgate in adopting, has nothing to support it.

[Eze 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#029). The ruin of this wealthy
and powerful metropolis of the commerce of the world produces the
greatest consternation among all who sail upon the sea, so that they
forsake their ships, as if they were no longer safe in them, and leaving
them for the land, bewail the fall of Tyre with deepest lamentation.
השׁמיע with בּקול, as in [Psa 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007);
[Ch1 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#019), etc. For the purpose of
depicting the lamentation as great and bitter in the extreme, Ezekiel
groups together all the things that were generally done under such
circumstances, viz., covering the head with dust (cf. [Jos
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006); [Sa1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#012); and [Job
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012)) and ashes (התפּלּשׁ, to strew,
or cover oneself, not to roll oneself: see the comm. on [Mic
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010)); shaving a bald place (see [Eze
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#018) and the comm. on [Mic
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016)); putting on sackcloth; loud,
bitter weeping (בּמר, as in [Job 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#011)
and [Job 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)); and singing an
mournful dirge ([Eze 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#032).). בּניהם,
in lamento eorum; ני contracted from נהי ([Jer
9:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017); cf. הי, [Eze
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010)). The reading adopted by the lxx,
Theodot., Syr., and eleven Codd. (בּניהם) is unsuitable, as there is no
allusion to sons, but the seamen themselves raise the lamentation. The
correction proposed by Hitzig, בּפיהם, is altogether inappropriate. The
exclamation, Who is like Tyre! is more precisely defined by כּדמּה, like
the destroyed one in the midst of the sea. דּמּה, participle Pual, with
the מ dropt, as in [Kg2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#010), etc.
(vid., Ges. 52. 2, Anm. 6). It is quite superfluous to assume that there
was a noun דּמּה signifying destruction. 'בּצאת עזב has been aptly
explained by Hitzig; "inasmuch as thy wares sprang out of the sea, like
the plants and field-fruits out of the soil" (the selection of the word
השׂבּעתּ also suggested this simile); "not as being manufactured at
Tyre, and therefore in the sea, but because the sea floated the goods to
land for the people in the ships, and they satisfied the desire of the
purchasers." Tyre satisfied peoples and enriched kings with its wares,
not only by purchasing from them and paying for their productions with
money or barter, but also by the fact that the Tyrians gave a still
higher value to the raw material by the labour which they bestowed upon
them. הוניך in the plural is only met with here. - [Eze
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#034). But now Tyre with its treasures
and its inhabitants has sunk in the depths of the sea. The antithesis in
which [Eze 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#034) really stands to [Eze
27:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#033) does not warrant our altering עת
into עתּ נשׁבּרתּ, as Ewald and Hitzig propose, or adopting a different
division of the second hemistich. עת is an adverbial accusative, as in
[Eze 16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057) : "at the time of the
broken one away from the seas into the depth of the waters, thy wares
and thy people have fallen, i.e., perished." עת נשׁבּרת, tempore quo
fracta es. נשׁבּרת מימּים is intentionally selected as an antithesis to
נושׁבת מימּים in [Eze 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017). - [Eze
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#035). All the inhabitants of the
islands and their kings, i.e., the inhabitants of the (coast of the)
Mediterranean and its islands, will be thrown into consternation at the
fall of Tyre; and ([Eze 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#036)) the
merchants among the nations, i.e., the foreign nations, the rivals of
Tyre in trade, will hiss thereat; in other words, give utterance to
malicious joy. שׁמם, to be laid waste, or thrown into perturbation with
terror and amazement. רעם פנים .tnemezama dna, to tremble or quiver in
the face, i.e., to tremble so much that the terror shows itself in the
countenance. - In [Eze 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#036) Ezekiel
brings the lamentation to a close in a similar manner to the threat
contained in Ezekiel 26 (vid., [Eze
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#021)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 28](eze028)

</div>
