<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze045)  [Next](eze047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001)

[Ezekiel 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 46:1</span></span>

Sacrifices for the Sabbath and New Moon

As, according to [Eze 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#017), it
devolved upon the prince to provide and bring the sacrifices for himself
and the house of Israel; after the appointment of the sacrifices to be
offered at the yearly feasts ([Eze
45:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#018)), and before the regulation
of the sacrifices for the Sabbath and new moon ([Eze
46:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#004)), directions are given as to
the conduct of the prince at the offering of these sacrifices ([Eze
46:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001)). For although the slaughtering
and preparation of the sacrifices for the altar devolved upon the
priests, the prince was to be present at the offering of the sacrifices
to be provided by him, whereas the people were under no obligation to
appear before the Lord in the temple except at the yearly feasts.

[Eze 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001). Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, The gate of the inner court, which looks toward the east, shall
be shut the six working days, and on the Sabbath it shall be opened, and
on the day of the new moon it shall be opened. [Eze
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#002). And the prince shall come by the
way to the porch of the gate from without, and stand at the posts of the
gate, and the priests shall prepare his burnt-offering and his
peace-offerings, and he shall worship on the threshold of the gate and
then go out; but the gate shall not be shut till the evening. [Eze
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#003). And the people of the land shall
worship at the entrance of that gate on the Sabbaths and on the new
moons before Jehovah. [Eze 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#004). And
the burnt-offering which the prince shall offer to Jehovah shall consist
on the Sabbath-day of six lambs without blemish and a ram without
blemish; [Eze 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#005). And as a
meat-offering, an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs as a
meat-offering that which his hand may give, and of oil a hin to the
ephah (of meal). [Eze 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#006). And on the
day of the new moon there shall be an bullock, a young ox without
blemish, and six lambs and a ram without blemish; [Eze
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#007). And he shall put an ephah for
the bullock, and an ephah for the ram for the meat-offering, and for the
lambs as much as his hand affords, and of oil a hin for the ephah. -
[Eze 46:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001) supply and explain the
instructions given in [Eze 44:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)
concerning the outer eastern gate. As the east gate of the outer court
([Eze 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)), so also the east gate of
the inner court was to remain closed during the six working days, and
only to be opened on the Sabbaths and new moons, when it was to remain
open till the evening. The prince was to enter this inner east gate, and
to stand there and worship upon the threshold while his sacrifice was
being prepared and offered. בּוא דּרך אוּלם is to be taken as in [Eze
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#003); but מחוּץ, which is appended, is
not to be referred to the entrance into the inner court, as the
statement would be quite superfluous so far as this is concerned, since
any one who was not already in the inner court must enter the
gate-building of the inner court from without, or from the outer court.
The meaning of מחוּץ is rather that the prince was to enter, or to go
to, the gate porch of the inner court through the outer east gate. There
he was to stand at the posts of the gate and worship on the threshold of
the gate during the sacrificial ceremony; and when this was over he was
to go out again, namely, by the same way by which he entered ([Eze
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#003)). But the people who came to the
temple on the Sabbaths and new moons were to worship פּתח, i.e., at the
entrance of this gate, outside the threshold of the gate. Kliefoth in
wrong in taking פּתח in the sense of through the doorway, as signifying
that the people were to remain in front of the outer east gate, and to
worship looking at the temple through this gate and through the open
gate between. For השּׁער ההוּא roF ., hits gate, can only be the gate of
the inner court, which has been already mentioned. There is no force in
the consideration which has led Kliefoth to overlook ההוּא, and think of
the outer gate, namely, that "it would be unnatural to suppose that the
people were to come into the outer court through the outer north and
south gates, whilst the outer east gate remained shut (or perhaps more
correctly, was opened for the prince), and so stand in front of the
inner court," as it is impossible to see what there is that is unnatural
in such a supposition. On the other hand, it is unnatural to assume that
the people, who, according to [Eze
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#009), were to come through the north
and south gates into the outer court at all the מועדים to appear before
Jehovah, were not allowed to enter the court upon the Sabbaths and new
moons if they should wish to worship before Jehovah upon these days
also, but were to stand outside before the gate of the outer court. The
difference between the princes and the people, with regard to visiting
the temple upon the Sabbaths and new moons, consisted chiefly in this,
that the prince could enter by the outer east gate and proceed as far as
the posts of the middle gate, and there worship upon the threshold of
the gate, whereas the people were only allowed to come into the outer
court through the outer north and south gates, and could only proceed to
the front of the middle gate. - [Eze
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#004). The burnt-offering for the
Sabbath is considerably increased when compared with that appointed in
the Mosaic law. The law requires two yearling lambs with the
corresponding meat-offering ([Num
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#009)); Ezekiel, six lambs and one ram,
and in addition to these a meat-offering for the ram according to the
proportion already laid down in [Eze
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#024) for the festal sacrifices; and
for the lambs, מתּת ידו, a gift, a present of his hand, - that is to
say, not a handful of meal, but, according to the formula used in
alternation with it in [Eze 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#007), as
much as his hand can afford. For כּאשׁר , see [Lev
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#030); [Lev
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#026). - It is different with the
sacrifices of the new moon in [Eze
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#006) and [Eze
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#007). The law of Moses prescribed two
bullocks, one ram, and seven lambs, with the corresponding
meat-offering, and a he-goat for a sin-offering ([Num
28:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011)); the thorah of Ezekiel, on
the contrary, omits the sin-offering, and reduces the burnt-offering to
one bullock, one ram, and six lambs, together with a meat-offering,
according to the proportion already mentioned, which is peculiar to his
law. The first תּמימים in [Eze 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#006) is
a copyist's error for תּמים.

[Ezekiel 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 46:8</span></span>

On the Opening of the Temple for the People, and for the Voluntary
Offerings of the Prince. - [Eze 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#008).
And when the prince cometh, he shall go in by the way to the porch of
the gate, and by its way shall he go out. [Eze
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#009). And when the people of the land
come before Jehovah on the feast days, he who enters through the north
gate to worship shall go out through the south gate; and he who enters
through the south gate shall go out through the north gate: they shall
not return through the gate through which they entered, but go out
straight forward. [Eze 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#010). And the
prince shall enter in the midst of them, when they enter; and when they
go out, they shall go out (together). [Eze
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#011). And at the feast days and holy
days the meat-offering shall be an ephah for the bullock, an ephah for
the ram, and for the lambs what his hand may give, and of oil a hin for
the ephah. [Eze 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#012). And when the
prince prepares a voluntary burnt-offering or voluntary peace-offerings
to Jehovah, they shall open the gate that looks to the east, and he
shall prepare his burnt-offerings and his peace-offering as he does on
the Sabbath day; and when he has gone out they shall shut the gate after
his going out. - The coming of the people to worship before Jehovah has
been already mentioned in [Eze 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#003),
but only causally, with reference to the position which they were to
take behind the prince in case any individuals should come on the
Sabbaths or new moons, on which they were not bound to appear. At the
high festivals, on the other hand, every one was to come ([Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016)); and for this there follow the
necessary directions in [Eze 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#009) and
[Eze 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#010), to prevent crowding and
confusion. For the purpose of linking these directions to what comes
before, the rule already laid down in [Eze
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#002) concerning the entrance and exit
of the prince is repeated in [Eze
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#008). מועדים is supposed by the
commentators to refer to the high festivals of the first and seventh
months ([Eze 45:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#021) and [Eze
45:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#025)); but מועדים does not apply to
the same feasts as those which are called הגּים in [Eze
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#011), as we may see from the
combination of הגּים and מועדים. הגּים is the term applied to the
greater annual feasts, as distinguished from the Sabbaths, new moons,
and the day of atonement. The מועדים, on the contrary, are all the times
and days sanctified to the Lord, including even the Sabbath (see the
comm. on [Lev 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#002)). It is in this
sense that מועדים is used here in [Eze
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#009), and not הגּים, because what is
laid down concerning the entrance and exit of the people, when visiting
the temple, is not merely intended to apply to the high festivals, on
which the people were bound to appear before Jehovah, but also to such
feast days as the Sabbaths and new moons, whenever individuals from
among the people were desirous of their own free-will to worship before
the Lord. The latter cases were not to be excluded, although, as [Eze
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#010) clearly shows, the great feasts
were principally kept in mind. For the entrance and exit of the prince
in the midst of the people ([Eze
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#010)) apply to the great yearly
feasts alone. The Chetib yeetsee'uw יצאוּ in [Eze
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#009) is to be preferred to the easier
Keri יצא, and is not merely the more difficult reading, but the more
correct reading also, as two kinds of people are mentioned, - those who
entered by the north gate and those who entered by the south. Both are
to go out walking straight forward; and neither of them is to turn in
the court for the purpose of going out by the gate through which he
entered. Even in [Eze 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#010) יצאוּ is
not to be altered, as Hitzig supposes, but to be taken as referring to
the prince and the people. - In [Eze
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#011), the instructions given in [Eze
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#024); [Eze
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#005), [Eze
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#007), concerning the quantities
composing the meat-offering for the different feasts, are repeated here
as rules applicable to all festal times. בּהגּים וּבמועדים has been
correctly explained as follows: "at the feasts, and generally at all
regular (more correctly, established) seasons," cf. [Eze
45:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#017). Only the daily sacrifices are
excepted from this rule, other regulations being laid down for them in
[Eze 46:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#014). - [Eze
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#012). The freewill-offerings could be
presented on any week-day. And the rules laid down in [Eze
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001) and [Eze
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#002) for the Sabbath-offerings of the
prince are extended to cases of this kind, with one modification,
namely, that the east gate, which had been opened for the occasion,
should be closed again as soon as the sacrificial ceremony was over, and
not left open till the evening, as on the Sabbath and new moon. נדבה is
a substantive: the freewill-offering, which could be either a
burnt-offering or a peace-offering.

[Ezekiel 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 46:13</span></span>

The Daily Sacrifice

[Eze 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#013). And a yearling lamb
without blemish shalt thou prepare as a burnt-offering daily for
Jehovah: every morning shalt thou prepare it. [Eze
46:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#014). And a meat-offering shalt thou
add to it every morning, a sixth of an ephah, and oil a third of a hin,
to moisten the wheaten flour, as a meat-offering for Jehovah: let these
be everlasting statutes, perpetually enduring. [Eze
46:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#015). And prepare the lamb, and the
meat-offering, and the oil, every morning as a perpetual burnt-offering.
- The preparation of the daily sacrifice is not imposed upon the prince,
in harmony with [Eze 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#017); it is the
duty of the congregation, which the priests have to superintend. Every
morning a yearling lamb is to be brought as a burnt-offering. The Mosaic
law required such a lamb both morning and evening ([Num
28:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#003)). The new thorah omits the
evening sacrifice, but increases the meat-offering to the sixth of an
ephah of meal and the third of a hin of oil, against the tenth of an
ephah of meal and the fourth of a hin of oil prescribed by the Mosaic
law ([Num 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#005)). רס, from רסס, ἁπ.
λεγ.., to moisten (cf. רסיסים, [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)). The plural חקּות refers to the
burnt-offering and meat-offering. תּמיד is added to give greater force,
and, according to the correct remark of Hitzig, appears to be intended
as a substitute for לדורתיכם in [Lev
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#014), [Lev
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#021), [Lev
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#031). The repeated emphasizing of
בּבּקר בּבּק shows that the silence as to the evening sacrifice is not a
mere oversight of the matter, but that in the new order of worship the
evening sacrifice is to be omitted. The Chetib ועשׂוּ is to be retained,
in opposition to the Keri יעשׂוּ.

This brings to an end the new order of worship. The verses which follow
in the chapter before us introduce two supplementary notices, - namely,
a regulation pointing back to [Eze
45:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#007), concerning the right of the
prince to hand down or give away his landed property ([Eze
46:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016)); and a brief description of
the sacrificial kitchens for priests and people ([Eze
46:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019)).

[Ezekiel 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 46:16</span></span>

On the Right of the Prince to Dispose of his Landed Property

[Eze 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016). Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, If the prince gives a present to one of his sons, it is his
inheritance, shall belong to his sons; it is their possession, in an
hereditary way. [Eze 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#017). But if he
gives a present from his inheritance to one of his servants, it shall
belong to him till the year of liberty, and then return to the prince;
to his sons alone shall his inheritance remain. [Eze
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#018). And the prince shall not take
from the inheritance of the people, so as to thrust them out of their
possession; from his own possession he shall transmit to his sons, that
no one of my people be scattered from his possession. - According to
[Eze 45:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#007), at the future division of
the land among the tribes, a possession was to be given to the prince on
both sides of the holy heave and of the city domain, that he might not
seize upon a possession by force, as the former princes had done. The
prince might give away portions of this royal property, but only within
such limits that the design with which a regal possession had been
granted might not be frustrated. To his sons, as his heirs, he might
make gifts therefrom, which would remain their own property; but if he
presented to any one of his servants a portion of his hereditary
property, it was to revert to the prince in the year of liberty; just
as, according to the Mosaic law, the hereditary field of an Israelite,
which had been alienated, was to revert to its hereditary owner ([Lev
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#024), compared with [Lev
25:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010)). The suffix in נחלתו ([Eze
46:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016)) is not to be taken as referring
to the prince, and connected with the preceding words in opposition to
the accents, but refers to אישׁ מבּניו. What the prince gives to one of
his sons from his landed property shall be his נחלה, i.e., after the
manner of an hereditary possession. On the other hand, what the prince
presents to one of his servants shall not become hereditary in his case,
but shall revert to the prince in the year of liberty, or the year of
jubilee. The second half of [Eze 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#017)
reads verbally thus: "only his inheritance is it; as for his sons, it
shall belong to them." - And as the prince was not to break up his regal
possession by presents made to servants, so was he ([Eze
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#018)) also not to put any one out of
his possession by force, for the purpose, say, of procuring property for
his own sons; but was to give his sons their inheritance from his own
property alone. For הונה, compare [Eze
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#008), and such passages as [Sa1
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#014); [Sa1
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007). We shall return by and by to the
question, how this regulation stands related to the view that the prince
is the Messiah.

[Ezekiel 46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 46:19</span></span>

The Sacrificial Kitchens for the Priests and for the People

[Eze 46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019). And he brought me up the
entrance by the shoulder of the gate to the holy cells for the priests,
which looked to the north; and behold there was a place on the outermost
side toward the west. [Eze 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#020). And
he said to me, This is the place where the priests boil the
trespass-offering and the sin-offering, where they bake the
meat-offering that they may not need to carry it out into the outer
court, to sanctify the people. [Eze
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#021). And he led me out into the
outer court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and
behold, in every corner of the court there was again a court. [Eze
46:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#022). In the four corners of the
court were closed courts of forty cubits in length and thirty cubits in
breadth; all four corner spaces had one measure. [Eze
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#023). And a row of stands was round
about therein in all four, and boiling hearths were under the rows made
round about. [Eze 46:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#024). And he said
to me, These are the kitchen-house, where the servants of the house boil
the slain-offering of the people. - In the list and description of the
subordinate buildings of the temple, the sacrificial kitchens are passed
over; and they are therefore referred to here again in a supplementary
manner. Ewald has shifted [Eze
46:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019), and placed them after [Eze
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#014), which would certainly have been
the most suitable place for mentioning the sacrificial kitchens for the
priests. But it is evident that they stood here originally, and not
there; not only from the fact that in [Eze
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019) the passage to the holy cells
([Eze 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#001).) is circumstantially
described, which would have been unnecessary if the description of the
kitchens had originally followed immediately after [Eze
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#014), as Ezekiel was then standing by
the cells; but also, and still more clearly, from the words that serve
as an introduction to what follows, "he led me back to the door of the
house" ([Eze 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001)), which are
unintelligible unless he had changed his standing-place between [Eze
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#018) and [Eze
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001), as is related in [Eze
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019) and [Eze
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#021), since Ezekiel had received the
sacrificial thorah (Ezekiel 44:5-46:18) in front of the house ([Eze
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#004)). If [Eze
46:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019) had originally stood
elsewhere, so that [Eze 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001) was
immediately connected with [Eze 46:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#018),
the transition-formula in [Eze 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001)
would necessarily have read very differently. - But with this section
the right of the preceding one, [Eze
46:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016), which Ewald has arbitrarily
interpolated in Ezekiel 45 between [Eze
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#008) and [Eze
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#009), to hold its present place in the
chapter before us as an appendix, is fully vindicated. - The holy cells
([Eze 46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019)) are those of the northern
cell-building ([Eze 42:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#001)) described
in [Eze 42:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#001) (see Plate I L).
בּמּבוא is the approach or way mentioned in [Eze
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#009), which led from the northern
inner gate to these cells (see Plate I l); not the place to which
Ezekiel was brought (Kliefoth), but the passage along which he was led.
The spot to which he was conducted follows in אל (the article before the
construct state, as in [Eze 43:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#021),
etc.). אל הכּהנים is appended to this in the form of an apposition; and
here לשׁכות is to be repeated in thought: to those for the priests.
'הפּנות צ belongs to הלשׁכות. There, i.e., by the cells, was a space set
apart at the outermost (hindermost) sides toward the west (Plate I M),
for the boiling of the flesh of the trespass-offering and sin-offering,
and the baking of the minchah, - that is to say, of those portions of
the sacrifices which the priests were to eat in their official capacity
(see the comm. on [Eze 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013)). For the
motive assigned in [Eze 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#020) for the
provision of special kitchens for this object, see the exposition of
[Eze 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#019).

In addition to these, kitchens were required for the preparation of the
sacrificial meals, which were connected with the offering of the
shelamim, and were held by those who presented them. These sacrificial
kitchens for the people are treated of in [Eze
46:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#020). They were situated in the
four corners of the outer court (Plate I N). To show them to the
prophet, the angel leads him into the outer court. The holy cells ([Eze
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019)) and the sacrificial kitchens
for the priests ([Eze 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#020)) were also
situated by the outside wall of the inner court; and for this reason
Ezekiel had already been led out of the inner court, where he had
received the sacrificial thorah, through the northern gate of the court
by the way which led to the holy cells, that he might be shown the
sacrificial kitchens. When, therefore, it is stated in [Eze
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#021) that "he led me out into the
outer court," יוציאני can only be explained on the supposition that the
space from the surrounding wall of the inner court to the way which led
from the gate porch of that court to the holy cells, and to the passage
which continued this way in front of the cells (Plate I l and m), was
regarded as an appurtenance of the inner court. In every one of the four
corners of the outer court there was a (small) courtyard in the court.
The repetition of 'חצר בּמקצע הח has a distributive force. The small
courtyards in the four corners of the court were קטרות, i.e., not
"uncovered," as this would be unmeaning, since all courts or courtyards
were uncovered; nor "contracted" (Bttcher), for קטר has no such meaning;
nor "fumum exhalantia," as the Talmudists suppose; nor "bridged over"
(Hitzig), which there is also nothing in the language to sustain; but in
all probability atria clausa, i.e., muris cincta et janius clausa (Ges.
Thes.), from קטר; in Aram. ligavit; in Ethiop. clausit, obseravit
januam. The word מהקצעות is marked with puncta extraordinaria by the
Masoretes as a suspicious word, and is also omitted in the Septuagint
and Vulgate. Bttcher and Hitzig have therefore expunged it as a gloss.
But even Hitzig admits that this does not explain how it found its way
into the text. The word is a Hophal participle of קצע, in the sense of
cornered off, cut off into corners, and is in apposition to the suffix
to לארבּעתּם, - literally, one measure wax to all four, the spaces or
courtyards cut off in the corners. For this appositional use of the
participle, compare [Kg1 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#006). There
is also a difference of opinion as to the meaning of the word טוּר,
which only occurs here and in [Exo
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#017). and [Eze
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#010), where it signifies "row," and
not "enclosure" (Kliefoth). טירות, which follows, is evidently merely
the feminine plural, from טוּר, as טירה is also derived from טוּר, in
the sense of "to encircle" (see the comm. on [Psa
69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026)). Consequently טוּר does not
mean a covering or boundary wall, but a row or shelf of brickwork which
had several separate shelves, under which the cooking hearths were
placed. מבשּׁלות, not kitchens, but cooking hearths; strictly speaking a
partic. Piel, things which cause to boil. - בּית המּבשּׁלים - .liob ot
e, kitchen house. משׁרתּי הבּית, the temple servants, as distinguished
from the servants of Jehovah ([Eze
44:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015)), are the Levites ([Eze
44:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#011)). עשׂוּי is construed as in
[Eze 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#017) and [Eze
41:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#018).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 47](eze047)

</div>
