<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze000)  [Next](eze002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

First Half - The Prophecies of Judgment - Ezekiel 1-32

The Consecration and Calling of Ezekiel to the Office of Prophet -
Ezekiel 1-3:21

In a vision of God, Ezekiel beholds in a great cloud, through which
shone the splendour of fire, and which a tempestuous wind drives from
the north, the glory of the Lord above the cherubim upon a majestic
throne in human form (Ezekiel 1), and hears a voice, which sends him as
a prophet to Israel, and inspires him with the subject-matter of his
announcements (Ezekiel 2:1-3:3). He is thereafter transported in spirit
to Tel-abib on the Chebar, into the midst of the exiles, and the duties
and responsibilities of his calling laid before him (3:4-21). By this
divine appearance and the commission therewith connected is he
consecrated, called, and ordained to the prophetic office. The whole
occurrences in the vision are subdivided into the copious description of
the theophany, Ezekiel 1, by which he is consecrated for his calling;
and into the revelation of the word, Ezekiel 2:1-3:21, which prepares
him for the discharge of the same. From these contents it clearly
appears that these chapters do not constitute the first section of the
book, but the introduction to the whole, to which the circumstantial
notices of the time and place of this revelation of God at the
commencement, [Eze 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001), also point.

[Ezekiel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 1:1</span></span>

The Appearance of the Glory of the Lord. - [Eze
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001). Time and place of the same. -
[Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001). Now it came to pass in the
thirtieth year, in the fourth (month), on the fifth (day) of the month,
as I was among the captives by the river of Chebar, that the heavens
were opened, and I saw visions of God. [Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002). On the fifth day of the month, it
was the fifth year of King Jehoiachin's captivity, [Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003). The word of the Lord came to
Ezekiel the priest, the son of Busi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the
river Chebar; and the hand of the Lord was there upon him.

Regarding ויהי at the beginning of a book, as e.g., in [Jon
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001), cf. the note on [Jos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001). The two notices of the year in
[Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001) and [Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002) are closely connected with the
twofold introduction of the theophany. This is described in verse first,
according to its form or phenomenal nature, and then in verses second
and third, according to its intended purpose, and its effect upon the
prophet. The phenomenon consisted in this, that the heavens were opened,
and Ezekiel saw visions of God. The heaven opens not merely when to our
eye a glimpse is disclosed of the heavenly glory of God (Calvin), but
also when God manifests His glory in a manner perceptible to human
sight. The latter was the case here. מראות אלהים, "visions of God," are
not "visiones praestantissimae," but visions which have divine or
heavenly things for their object; cf. [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001); [Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019); [Kg2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017). Here it is the manifestation of
Jehovah's glory described in the following verses. This was beheld by
Ezekiel in the thirtieth year, which, according to verse second, was in
the fifth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin. The real identity of
these two dates is placed beyond doubt by the mention of the same day of
the month, "on the fifth day of the month" ([Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002) compared with [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)). The fifth year from the
commencement of Jehoiachin's captivity is the year 595 b.c.; the
thirtieth year, consequently, is the year 625 b.c. But the era, in
accordance with which this date is reckoned, is matter of dispute, and
can no longer be ascertained with certainty. To suppose, with
Hengstenberg, that the reference is to the year of the prophet's own
life, is forbidden by the addition "in the fourth month, on the fifth
day of the month," which points to an era generally recognised. In the
year 625 b.c., Nabopolassar became king of Babylon, and therefore many
of the older expositors have supposed that Ezekiel means the thirtieth
year of the era of Nabopolassar. Nothing, however, is know of any such
era. Others, as the Chaldee paraphrast and Jerome, and in modern times
also Ideler, are of opinion that the thirtieth year is reckoned from the
eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah, because in that year the book of
the law was discovered, and the regeneration of public worship completed
by a solemn celebration of the Passover. No trace, however, can
elsewhere be pointed out of the existence of a chronology dating from
these events. The Rabbins in Seder Olam assume a chronology according to
the periods of the years of jubilee, and so also Hitzig; but for this
supposition too all reliable proofs are wanting. At the time mentioned,
Ezekiel found himself בּתוך הגּולה, "in the midst of the exiles," i.e.,
within the circuit of their settlements, not, in their society; for it
is evident from [Eze 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015) that he was
alone when the theophany was imparted to him, and did not repair till
afterwards to the residences of the settlers. [Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003). By the river Chebar, in the land
of the Chaldees, i.e., in Babylon or Mesopotamia. The river כּבר, to be
distinguished from חבור, the river of Gosan, which flows into the
Tigris, see on [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006), is the
Mesopotamian Chabioras, ̓Αβορρας (Strabo, xvi. 748), or Χαβώρας (Ptolem.
v. 18, 3), Arab. cha=bu=r (Edrisi Clim. iv. p. 6, ii. p. 150, ed.
Jaubert and Abulf. Mesopot. in the N. Repertor. III. p. xxiv.), which
according to Edrisi takes its rise from "nearly three hundred springs,"
near the city Ras-el-'Ain, at the foot of the mountain range of Masius,
flows through Upper Mesopotamia in a direction parallel with its two
principal streams, and then, turning westward, discharges itself into
the Euphrates near Kirkesion. There the hand of Jehovah came upon
Ezekiel. The expression יד יי' היתה על )אל( always signifies a
miraculous working of the power or omnipotence of God upon a man-the
hand being the organ of power in action-by which he is placed in a
condition to exert superhuman power, [Kg1
18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046), and is the regular expression
for the supernatural transportation into the state of ecstasy for the
purpose of beholding and announcing (cf. [Kg2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015)), or undertaking, heavenly
things; and so throughout Ezekiel, cf. [Eze
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022); [Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001); [Eze
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022); [Eze
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001); [Eze
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#001).

[Ezekiel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 1:4</span></span>

Description of the theophany seen by the spirit of the prophet. - [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004). And I saw, and, lo, a tempestuous
wind came from the north, a great cloud, and a fire rolled together like
a ball, and the brightness of light round about it, and out of its
midst, as the appearance of glowing metal from the midst of the fire. -
The description begins with a general outline of the phenomenon, as the
same presented itself to the spiritual eye of the prophet on its
approach from the north. A tempestuous wind brings hither from the north
a great cloud, the centre of which appears as a lump of fire, which
throws around the cloud the brightness of light, and presents in its
midst the appearance of glowing metal. The coming of the phenomenon from
the north is, as a matter of course, not connected with the Babylonian
representation of the mountain of the gods situated in the extreme
north, [Isa 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013). According to the
invariable usage of speech followed by the prophets, especially by
Jeremiah (cf. e.g., [Eze 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014); [Eze
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#006); [Eze
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001), etc.), the north is the quarter
from which the enemies who were to execute judgment upon Jerusalem and
Judah break in. According to this usage, the coming of this divine
appearance from the north signifies that it is from the north that God
will bring to pass the judgment upon Judah. אשׁ מתלקּחת, "fire rolled
together like a ball," is an expression borrowed from [Exo
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#010). לו refers to ענן, and מתּוכהּ to
אשׁ, as we see from the words in apposition, מתּוך האשׁ. The fire, which
formed the centre of the cloud, had the appearance of השׁמל. The meaning
of this word, which occurs again in [Eze
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027) and [Eze
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#002), is disputed. The Septuagint and
Vulgate translate it by ἤλεκτρον, electrum, i.e., a metal having a
bright lustre, and consisting of a mixture of gold and silver. Cf.
Strabo, III. 146; Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxiii. 4. To the explanation of
Bochart, that it is a compound of נחשׁת, "brass," and the Talmudic word
מלל or מללא, "aurum rude," and signifies "rough gold ore," is opposed
the fact that the reading מללא in the Talmud is not certain, but
purports to be ממלא (cf. Gesen. Thesaur. p. 535, and Buxtorf, Lexic.
Talmud, p. 1214), as well as the circumstance that raw gold ore has not
a lustre which could shine forth out of the fire. Still less probability
has the supposition that it is a compound of l\#<span class="small">x,
in Syriac "conflavit, fabricavit," and חשׁם, "fricuit," on which
Hvernick and Maurer base the meaning of "a piece of metal wrought in the
fire." The word appears simply to be formed from חשׁם , probably "to
glow," with ל appended, as כּרמל from כרם morf , and to denote "glowing
ore." This meaning is appropriate both in v. 27, where עין השׁמל is
explained by מראה־אשׁ, as well as in [Eze
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#002), where זהר, "brilliancy," stands
as parallel to it. השׁמל, however, is different from נחשׁת קלל in [Eze
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007) and in [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), for חשׁמל refers in all the
three places to the person of Him who is enthroned above the cherubim;
while נחשׁת קלל in [Eze 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007) is spoken
of the feet of the cherubim, and in [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006) of the arms and feet of the
personage who there manifests Himself. In verse fifth the appearance is
described more minutely. There first present themselves to the eye of
the seer four beings, whom he describes according to their figure and
style.</span>

[Eze 1:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005)

The four cherubim. - [Eze 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005). And out
of its midst there prominently appeared a figure, consisting of four
creatures, and this was their appearance: they had the figure of a man.
[Eze 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006). And each had four faces, and
each of them had four wings. [Eze 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007).
And their feet were upright-standing feet; and the soles of their feet
like the soles of a calf, and sparkling like the appearance of shining
brass. [Eze 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008). And the hands of a
man were under their wings on their four sides; and all four had faces
and wings. [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009). Their wings were
joined one to another; they turned not as they went; they went each one
in the direction of his face. [Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010). And the form of their faces was
that of a man; and on the right all four had a lion's face; and on the
left all four had the face of an ox; and all four had an eagle's face.
[Eze 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011). And their faces and their
wings were divided above, two of each uniting with one another, and two
covering their bodies. [Eze 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012). And
they went each in the direction of his face; whithersoever the spirit
was to go, they went; they turned not as they went. [Eze
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013). And the likeness of the
creatures resembled burning coals of fire, like the appearance of
torches: it (the fire) went hither and thither amongst the beings; and
the fire was brilliant, and from the fire came forth lightning. [Eze
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014). And the beings ran hither and
thither in a zig-zag manner.

From out of the fiery centre of the cloud there shows itself the form
(tw%md@;, properly "resemblance," "picture") of four חיּות, animantia,
"living creatures;" ζῶα, [Rev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006); not
θηρία, "wild beasts," as Luther has incorrectly rendered it, after the
animalia of the Vulgate. These four creatures had דּמוּת אדם, "the
figure of a man." Agreeably to this notice, placed at the head of the
description, these creatures are to be conceived as presenting the
appearance of a human body in all points not otherwise specified in the
following narrative. Each of them had four faces and four wings (אחת
without the article stands as a distributive, and כּנפים are "pinions,"
as in [Isa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002), not "pairs of wings").
Their feet were רגל ישׁרה, "a straight foot;" the singular stands
generically, stating only the nature of the feet, without reference to
their number. We have accordingly to assume in each of the four
creatures two legs, as in a man. ישׁר .nam a , "straight," i.e.,
standing upright, not bent, as when sitting or kneeling. רגל is the
whole leg, including the knee and thigh, and כּף רגל, "sole of the
foot," or the under part of the leg, with which we tread on the ground.
This part, not the whole leg, resembled the calf's foot, which is firmly
planted on the ground. The legs sparkled like the appearance of נחשׁה
קלל. The subject of נצצים is not "the כּרוּבים, which are understood to
be intended under the חיּות in verse fifth" (Hitzig), for this subject
is too far distant, but רגליהם, which is here construed as masculine, as
in [Jer 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016). In this sense are these
words apprehended in [Rev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015), and
נחשׁת there translated by χαλκολίβανος. On this word see Hengstenberg
and Dsterdieck on [Rev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015). נח' קלל
probably signifies "light," i.e., "bright, shining brass," as the old
translators have rendered it. The Septuagint has ἐξαστράπτων; the
Vulgate, aes candens; and the Chaldee paraphrase, aes flammans. The
signification "smoothed, polished brass" (Bochart), rests upon uncertain
combinations; cf. Gesen. Thes. p. 1217, and is appropriate neither here
nor in [Dan 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), where these words
precede, "His face had the appearance of lightning, and his eyes were as
a flame of fire." Under the four wings were four hands on the four sides
of each cherub, formed like the hands of a man. The wings accordingly
rested upon the shoulders, from which the hands came forth. The Chetib
וידו may certainly be defended if with Kimchi and others we punctuate
וידו, and take the suffix distributively and אדם elliptically, "his
(i.e., each of the four creatures) hands were (the hands of) a man;" cf.
for such an ellipsis as this, passages like that in [Psa
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034), רגלי כּאיּלות, "my feet as the
(feet) of hinds;" [Job 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#002), מאל,
"before the righteousness of God." It is extremely probable, however,
that ו is only the error of an old copyist for י, and that the Keri וידי
is the correct reading, as the taking of אדם elliptically is not in
keeping with the broad style of Ezekiel, which in its verbosity verges
on tautology. The second half of [Eze
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008) is neither, with Hvernick, to be
referred to the following ninth verse, where the faces are no more
spoken of, nor, with Hitzig, to be arbitrarily mutilated; but is to be
taken as it stands, comprising all that has hitherto been said regarding
the faces and wings, in order to append thereto in [Eze
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009). the description of the use and
nature of these members. The definite statement, that "the wings were
joined one to another," is in [Eze
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011) limited to the two upper wings,
according to which we have so to conceive the matter, that the top or
the upper right wing of each cherub came in contact with the top of the
left wing of the neighbouring cherub. This junction presented to the eye
of the seer the unity and coherence of all the four creatures as a
complete whole - a חיּה, and implied, as a consequence, the harmonious
action in common of the four creatures. They did not turn as they went
along, but proceeded each in the direction of his face. אל, "over
against his face." The meaning is thus rightly given by Kliefoth: "As
they had four faces, they needed not to turn as they went, but went on
as (i.e., in the direction in which) they were going, always after the
face."

In the closer description of the faces in [Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010), the face of the man is first
mentioned as that which was turned towards the seer, that of the lion to
the right side, the ox to the left, and that of the eagle (behind). In
naming these three, it is remarked that all the four creatures had these
faces: in naming the man's face, this remark is omitted, because the
word פּניהם (referring to all the four) immediately precedes. In [Eze
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011), it is next remarked of the faces
and wings, that they were divided above (מלמעלה, "from above,"
"upward"); then the direction of the wings is more precisely stated. The
word וּפניהם is neither to be referred to the preceding, "and it was
their faces," nor, with Hitzig, to be expunged as a gloss; but is quite
in order as a statement that not only the wings but also the faces were
divided above, consequently were not like Janus' faces upon one head,
but the four faces were planted upon four heads and necks. In the
description that follows, חוברות אישׁ is not quite distinct, and \#<span
class="small">y)i is manifestly to be taken as an abbreviation of אשּׁה
אל־אחותהּ in [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009) : on each were
two wings joining one another, i.e., touching with their tops the tips
of the wings of the cherub beside them, in accordance with which we have
to conceive the wings as expanded. Two were covering their bodies, i.e.,
each cherub covered his body with the pair of wings that folded
downwards; not, as Kliefoth supposes, that the lower wings of the one
cherub covered the body of the other cherub beside him, which also is
not the meaning in [Eze 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023); see note
on that verse. In [Eze 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012), what is
to be said about their movements is brought to a conclusion, while both
statements are repeated in [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009),
and completed by the addition of the principium movens. In whatever
direction the רוּח "was to go, in that direction they went;" i.e., not
according to the action of their own will, but wherever the רוּח
impelled them. רוּח, however, signifies not "impulse," nor, in this
place, even "the wind," as the vehicle of the power of the spiritual
life palpable to the senses, which produced and guided their movements,
(Kliefoth), but spirit. For, according to [Eze
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020), the movement of the wheels,
which was in harmony with the movements of the cherubim, was not caused
by the wind, but proceeded from the רוּח החיּה, i.e., from the spirit
dwelling in the creature. On the contrary, there is not in the whole
description, with the exception of the general statement that a
tempestuous wind drove from the north the great cloud in which the
theophany was enwrapped, any allusion to a means of motion palpable to
the senses. In the 13th and 14th verses is described the entire
impression produced by the movement of the whole appearance. וּדמוּת
החיּות precedes, and is taken absolutely "as regards the form of the
creatures," and corresponds to the דּמוּת ארבּע חיּות in [Eze
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005), with which the description of the
individual figures which appeared in the brightness of the fire was
introduced. Their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the
appearance of torches. היא refers to אשׁ as the principal conception.
Fire, like the fire of burning coals and torches, went, moved hither and
thither amongst the four creatures. This fire presented a bright
appearance, and out of it came forth lightnings. The creatures,
moreover, were in constant motion. רצוא, from רצא, an Aramaising form
for the Hebrew רוּץ, to run. The infin. absol. stands instead of the
finite verb. The conjecture of יצוא, after [Gen
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#007) (Hitzig), is inappropriate,
because here we have not to think of "coming out," and no reason exists
for the striking out of the words, as Hitzig proposes. The continued
motion of the creatures is not in contradiction with their perpetually
moving on straight before them. "They went hither and thither, and yet
always in the direction of their countenances; because they had a
countenance looking in the direction of every side" (Kliefoth). בּזק
signifies not "lightning" (=בּרק), but comes from בּזק; in Syriac, "to
be split," and denotes "the splitting," i.e., the zigzag course of the
lightning (Kliefoth).</span>

[Eze 1:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015)

The four wheels beside the cherubim. - [Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015). And I saw the creatures, and,
lo, there was a wheel upon the earth beside the creatures, towards their
four fronts. [Eze 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016). The appearance
of the wheels and their work was like the appearance of the chrysolite;
and all four had one kind of figure: and their appearance and their work
was as if one wheel were within the other. [Eze
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017). Towards their four sides they
went when they moved: they turned not as they went. [Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018). And their felloes, they were
high and terrible; and their felloes were full of eyes round about in
all the four. [Eze 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019). And when the
creatures moved, the wheels moved beside them; and when the creatures
raised themselves up from the earth, the wheels also raised themselves.
[Eze 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020). Whithersoever the spirit
was to go, they went in the direction in which the spirit was to go; and
the wheels raised themselves beside them: for the spirit of the
creatures was in the wheels. [Eze
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#021). When the former moved, the
latter moved also; when the former stood, the latter stood; and when the
former raised themselves from the ground, the wheels raised themselves
beside them: for the spirit of the creatures was in the wheels. - The
words, "and I saw the creatures," prepare the way for the transition to
the new object which presented itself in these creatures to the eye of
the seer. By the side of these creatures upon the ground he sees a
wheel, and that at the four fronts, or front faces of the creatures. The
singular suffix in לארבּעת פּניו can neither be referred, with
Rosenmller, to the chariot, which is not mentioned at all, nor, with
Hitzig, to the preposition אצל, nor, with Hvernick, Maurer, and
Kliefoth, to אופן, and so be understood as if every wheel looked towards
four sides, because a second wheel was inserted in it at right angles.
This meaning is not to be found in the words. The suffix refers ad
sensum to חיּות (Ewald), or, to express it more correctly, to the figure
of the cherubim with its four faces turned to the front, conceived as a
unity - as one creature (החיּה, [Eze
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022)). Accordingly, we have so to
represent the matter, that by the side of the four cherubim, namely,
beside his front face, a wheel was to be seen upon the earth. Ezekiel
then saw four wheels, one on each front of a cherub, and therefore
immediately speaks in [Eze 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016) of
wheels (in the plural). In this verse מראה is adspectus, and מעשׂה
"work;" i.e., both statements employing the term "construction,"
although in the first hemistich only the appearance, in the second only
the construction, of the wheels is described. תּרשׁישׁ is a chrysolite
of the ancients, the topaz of the moderns, - a stone having the lustre
of gold. The construction of the wheels was as if one wheel were within
a wheel, i.e., as if in the wheel a second were inserted at right
angles, so that without being turned it could go towards all the four
sides. גּבּיהן, in [Eze 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018), stands
absolutely. "As regards their felloes," they possessed height and
terribleness-the latter because they were full of eyes all round. Hitzig
arbitrarily understands גּבהּ of the upper sides; and יראה, after the
Arabic, of the under side, or that which lies towards the back. The
movement of the wheels completely followed the movement of the creatures
([Eze 1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019)), because the spirit of
the creature was in the wheels. החיּה, in [Eze
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020) and [Eze
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#021), is not the "principle of life"
(Hvernick), but the cherubic creatures conceived as a unity, as in [Eze
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022), where the meaning is undoubted.
The sense is: the wheels were, in their motion and rest, completely
bound by the movements and rest of the creatures, because the spirit
which ruled in them was also in the wheels, and regulated their going,
standing, and rising upwards. By the רוּח the wheels are bound in one
with the cherub-figures, but not by means of a chariot, to or upon which
the cherubim were attached.

[Ezekiel 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 1:22</span></span>

The throne of Jehovah. - [Eze 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022).
And over the heads of the creature there appeared an expanse like the
appearance of the terrible crystal, stretched out over their heads
above. [Eze 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023). And under the
expanse were their wings, extended straight one towards another: each
had two wings, covering to these, and each two (wings), covering to
those, their bodies. [Eze 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024). And I
heard the sound of their wings, as the sound of many waters, like the
voice of the Almighty, as they went: a loud rushing like the clamour of
a camp: when they stood, they let down their wings. [Eze
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025). And there came a voice from
above the expanse which was above their heads; when they stood, they let
their wings sink down. [Eze 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026). Over
the expanse above their heads was to be seen, like a sapphire stone, the
figure of a throne: and over the figure of the throne was a figure
resembling a man above it. [Eze 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027).
And I saw like the appearance of glowing brass, like the appearance of
fire within the same round about; from the appearance of his loins
upwards, and from the appearance of his loins downwards, I saw as of the
appearance of fire, and a shining light was round about it. [Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028). Like the appearance of the bow,
which is in the clouds in the day of rain, was the appearance of the
shining light round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of
the glory of Jehovah. And I saw it, and fell upon my face, and I heard
the voice of one that spake. - Above, over the heads of the figures of
the cherubim, Ezekiel sees something like the firmament of heaven ([Eze
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022).), and hears from above this
canopy a voice, which re-echoes in the rushing of the wings of the
cherubim, and determines the movement as well as the standing still of
these creatures. The first sentence of [Eze
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022) literally signifies: "And a
likeness was over the heads of the creature - a canopy, as it were,
stretched out." רקיע is not the genitive after דּמוּת, but an
explanatory apposition to it, and before רקיע; neither has כּ fallen out
(as Hitzig supposes), nor is it to be supplied. For דּמוּת denotes not
any definite likeness, with which another could be compared, but,
properly, similitudo, and is employed by Ezekiel in the sense of
"something like." רקיע, without the article, does not mean the firmament
of heaven, but any expanse, the appearance of which is first described
as resembling the firmament by the words כּעין הקּרח. It is not the
firmament of heaven which Ezekiel sees above the heads of the cherubim,
but an expanse resembling it, which has the shining appearance of a
fear-inspiring crystal. נורא, used of crystal, in so far as the
appearance of this glittering mass dazzles the eyes, and assures terror,
as in [Jdg 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#006), of the look of the
angel; and in [Job 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#022), of the
divine majesty. The description is based upon [Exo
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010), and the similitude of the
crystal has passed over to the Apocalypse, [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006). Under the canopy were the wings
of the cherubim, ישׁרות, standing straight, i.e., spread out in a
horizontal direction, so that they appeared to support the canopy. אשּׁה
אל־אחותה is not, with Jerome and others, to be referred to the cherubim
(החיּה), but to כּנפיהם, as in [Eze
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009). The לאישׁ which follows does
refer, on the contrary, to the cherub, and literally signifies, "To each
were two wings, covering, namely, to these and those, their bodies."
להנּה corresponds to לאישׁ, in a manner analogous to לאחת להם in [Eze
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006). By the repetition of the להנּה,
"to these and those," the four cherubim are divided into two pairs,
standing opposite to one another. That this statement contradicts, as
Hitzig asserts, the first half of the verse, is by no means evident. If
the two creatures on each side covered their bodies with the two wings,
then two other wings could very easily be so extended under the canopy
that the tops of the one should touch those of the other. As the
creatures moved, Ezekiel hears the sound, i.e., the rustling of their
wings, like the roaring of mighty billows. This is strengthened by the
second comparison, "like the voice of the Almighty," i.e., resembling
thunder, cf. [Eze 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#005). The קול המלּה
that follows still depends on אשׁמע. המלּה, which occurs only here and
in [Jer 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#006), is probably synonymous
with המון "roaring," "noise," "tumult." This rushing sound, however, was
heard only when the creatures were in motion; for when they stood, they
allowed their wings to fall down. This, of course, applies only to the
upper wings, as the under ones, which covered the body, hung downwards,
or were let down. From this it clearly appears that the upper wings
neither supported nor bore up the canopy over their heads, but only were
so extended, when the cherubim were in motion, that they touched the
canopy. In [Eze 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025) is also mentioned
whence the loud sound came, which was heard, during the moving of the
wings, from above the canopy, consequently from him who was placed above
it, so that the creatures, always after this voice resounded, went on or
stood still, i.e., put themselves in motion, or remained without moving,
according to its command.

With the repetition of the last clause of [Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024) this subject is concluded in [Eze
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025). Over or above upon the firmament
was to be seen, like a sapphire stone, the likeness of a throne, on
which sat one in the form of a man - i.e., Jehovah appeared in human
form, as in [Dan 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009). Upon this was
poured out a fiery, shining light, like glowing brass (עין חשׁמל, as in
[Eze 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)) and like fire, בּית־להּ
סביב, "within it round about" (מבּית = בּית, "within," and להּ, pointing
back to דּמוּת כּסּא). This appears to be the simplest explanation of
these obscure words. They are rendered differently by Hitzig, who
translates them: "like fire which has a covering round about it, i.e.,
like fire which is enclosed, whose shining contrasts so much the more
brightly on account of the dark surrounding." But, to say nothing of the
change which would then be necessary of בּית into בּית, this meaning
seems very far-fetched, and cannot be accepted for this reason alone,
that מראה אשׁ, neither in the following hemistich ([Eze
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027)) nor in [Eze
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#002), has any such or similar
strengthening addition. The appearance above shows, as the centre of the
cloud ([Eze 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)), a fiery gleam of
light, only there is to be perceived upon the throne a figure resembling
a man, fiery-looking from the loins upwards and downwards, and round
about the figure, or rather round the throne, a shining light (נגהּ, cf.
[Eze 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)), like the rainbow in the
clouds, cf. [Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). This הוּא, [Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028), does not refer to הנּגהּ, but to
the whole appearance of him who was enthroned - the covering of light
included, but throne and cherubim ([Eze
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004), [Eze
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019)) excluded (Hitzig)\] was the
appearance of the likeness of Jehovah's glory. With these words closes
the description of the vision. The following clause, "And I saw, etc.,"
forms the transition to the word of Jehovah, which follows on the second
chapter, and which summoned Ezekiel to become a prophet to Israel.
Before we pass, however, to an explanation of this word, we must
endeavour to form to ourselves a clear conception of the significance of
this theophany.

For its full understanding we have first of all to keep in view that it
was imparted to Ezekiel not merely on his being called to the office of
prophet, but was again repeated three times - namely, in [Eze
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022)., where he was commissioned to
predict symbolically the impending siege of Jerusalem; [Eze
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#004)., when he is transported in spirit
to the temple-court at Jerusalem for the purpose of beholding the
abominations of the idol-worship practised by the people, and to
announce the judgment which, in consequence of these abominations, was
to burst upon the city and the temple, in which it is shown to him how
the glory of the Lord abandons, first the temple and thereafter the city
also; and in [Eze 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#001)., in which is
shown to him the filling of the new temple with the glory of the Lord,
to swell for ever among the children of Israel. In all three passages it
is expressly testified that the divine appearance was like the first
which he witnessed on the occasion of his call. From this Kliefoth has
drawn the right conclusion, that the theophany in [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004). bears a relation not to the call
only, but to the whole prophetic work of Ezekiel: "We may not say that
God so appears to Ezekiel at a later time, because He so appeared to him
at his call; but we must say, conversely, that because God wills and
must so appear to Ezekiel at a later time while engaged in his prophetic
vocation, therefore He also appears to him in this form already at his
call." The intention, however, with which God so appears to him is
distinctly contained in the two last passages, Ezekiel 8-11 and Ezekiel
43: "God withdraws in a visible manner from the temple and Jerusalem,
which are devoted to destruction on account of the sin of the people: in
a visible manner God enters into the new temple of the future; and
because the whole of what Ezekiel was inspired to foretell was
comprehended in these two things - the destruction of the existing
temple and city, and the raising up of a new and a better; - because the
whole of his prophetic vocation had its fulfilment in these, therefore
God appears to Ezekiel on his call to be a prophet in the same form as
that in which He departs from the ancient temple and Jerusalem, in order
to their destruction, and in which He enters into the new edifice in
order to make it a temple. The form of the theophany, therefore, is what
it is in [Eze 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)., because its
purpose was to show and announce to the prophet, on the one side the
destruction of the temple, and on the other its restoration and
glorification." These remarks are quite correct, only the significance
of the theophany itself is not thereby made clear. If it is clear from
the purpose indicated why God here has the cherubim with Him, while on
the occasion of other appearances (e.g., [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009); [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)) He is without cherubim; as the
cherubim here have no other significance than what their figures have in
the tabernacle, viz., that God has there His dwelling-place, the seat of
His gracious presence; yet this does not satisfactorily explain either
the special marks by which the cherubim of Ezekiel are distinguished
from those in the tabernacle and in Solomon's temple, or the other
attributes of the theophany. Kliefoth, moreover, does not misapprehend
those diversities in the figures of the cherubim, and finds indicated
therein the intention of causing it distinctly to appear that it is the
one and same Jehovah, enthroned amid the cherubim, who destroys the
temple, and who again uprears it. Because Ezekiel was called to predict
both events, he therefore thinks there must be excluded, on the one
hand, such attributes in the form of the manifestation as would be out
of harmony with the different aims of the theophany; while, on the
other, those which are important for the different aims must be combined
and comprehended in one form, that this one form may be appropriate to
all the manifestations of the theophany. It could not therefore have in
it the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat; because, although these
would probably have been appropriate to the manifestation for the
destruction of the old temple ([Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001).), they would not have been in
keeping with that for entering into the new temple. Instead of this, it
must show the living God Himself upon the throne among "the living
creatures;" because it belongs to the new and glorious existence of the
temple of the future, that it should have Jehovah Himself dwelling
within it in a visible form.

From this, too, may be explained the great fulness of the attributes,
which are divisible into three classes: 1. Those which relate to the
manifestation of God for the destruction of Jerusalem; 2. Those which
relate to the manifestation of God for entering into the new temple;
and, 3. Those which serve both objects in common. To the last class
belongs everything which is essential to the manifestation of God in
itself, e.g., the visibility of God in general, the presence of the
cherubim in itself, and so on: to the first class all the signs that
indicate wrath and judgment, consequently, first, the coming from the
north, especially the fire, the lightnings, in which God appears as He
who is coming to judgment; but to the second, besides the rainbow and
the appearance of God in human form, especially the wheels and the
fourfold manifestation in the cherubim and wheels. For the new temple
does not represent the rebuilding of the temple by Zerubbabel, but the
economy of salvation founded by Christ at His appearing, to which they
belong as essential tokens; to be founded, on the one hand, by God's own
coming and dwelling upon the earth; on the other, to be of an oecumenic
character, in opposition to the particularities and local nature of the
previous ancient dispensation of salvation. God appears bodily, in human
form; lowers down to earth the canopy on which His throne is seated; the
cherubim, which indicate God's gracious presence with His people, appear
not merely in symbol, but in living reality, plant their feet upon the
ground, while each cherub has at his side a wheel, which moves, not in
the air, but only upon the earth. By this it is shown that God Himself
is to descend to the earth, to walk and to dwell visibly among His
people; while the oecumenic character of the new economy of salvation,
for the establishment of which God is to visit the earth, is represented
in the fourfold form of the cherubim and wheels. The number four - the
sign of the oecumenicity which is to come, and the symbol of its being
spread abroad into all the world - is assigned to the cherubim and
wheels, to portray the spreading abroad of the new kingdom of God over
the whole earth. But how much soever that is true and striking this
attempt at explanation may contain in details, it does not touch the
heart of the subject, and is not free from bold combinations. The
correctness of the assumption, that in the theophany attributes of an
opposite kind are united, namely, such as should refer only to the
destruction of Jerusalem and of the temple, and such as relate only to
the foundation and nature of the new economy of salvation, is beset with
well-founded doubts. Why, on such a hypothesis, should the form of the
theophany remain the same throughout in all three or four cases? This
question, which lies on the surface, is not satisfactorily answered by
the remark that Ezekiel had to predict not only the destruction of the
old, but also the foundation of a new and much more glorious kingdom of
God. For not only would this end, but also the object of showing that it
is the same God who is to accomplish both, have been fully attained if
the theophany had remained the same only in those attributes which
emblemize in a general way God's gracious presence in His temple; while
the special attributes, which typify only the one and the other purpose
of the divine appearance, would only they have been added, or brought
prominently out, where this or that element of the theophany had to be
announced. Moreover, the necessity in general of a theophany for the
purpose alleged is not evident, much less the necessity of a theophany
so peculiar in form. Other prophets also, e.g., Micah, without having
seen a theophany, have predicted in the clearest and distinctest manner
both the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, and the raising up of
a new and more glorious kingdom of God. The reason, then, why Ezekiel
witnessed such a theophany, not only at his call, but had it repeated to
him at every new turn in his prophetic ministry, must be deeper than
that assigned; and the theophany must have another meaning than that of
merely consecrating the prophet for the purpose of announcing both the
judgment upon Jerusalem and the temple, and the raising up of a new and
more glorious economy of salvation, and strengthening the word of the
prophet by a symbolical representation of its contents.

To recognise this meaning, we must endeavour to form a distinct
conception, not merely of the principal elements of our theophany, but
to take into consideration at the same time their relation to other
theophanies. In our theophany three elements are unmistakeably prominent
- 1st, The peculiarly formed cherubim; 2nd, The wheels are seen beside
the cherubim; and, 3rd, The firmament above, both with the throne and
the form of God in human shape seated upon the throne. The order of
these three elements in the description is perhaps hardly of any
importance, but is simply explicable from this, that to the seer who is
on earth it is the under part of the figure which, appearing visibly in
the clouds, first presents itself, and that his look next turns to the
upper part of the theophany. Especially significant above all, however,
is the appearance of the cherubim under or at the throne of God; and by
this it is indisputably pointed out that He who appears upon the throne
is the same God that is enthroned in the temple between the cherubim of
the mercy-seat upon their outspread wings. Whatever opinion may be
formed regarding the nature and significance of the cherubim, this much
is undoubtedly established, that they belong essentially to the
symbolical representation of Jehovah's gracious presence in Israel, and
that this portion of our vision has its real foundation in the plastic
representation of this gracious relation in the Holy of Holies of the
tabernacle or temple. As, however, opinions are divided on the subject
of the meaning of these symbols, and the cherubim of Ezekiel, moreover,
present no inconsiderable differences in their four faces and four wings
from the figures of the cherubim upon the mercy-seat and in the temple,
which had only one face and two wings, we must, for the full
understanding of our vision, look a little more closely to the nature
and significance of the cherubim.

While, according to the older view, the cherubim are angelic beings of a
higher order, the opinion at the present day is widely prevalent, that
they are only symbolical figures, to which nothing real corresponds -
merely ideal representations of creature life in its highest fulness.

(Note: Compare the investigation of the cherubim in my Handbuch der
Biblischen Archaeologie, I. pp. 86ff. and 113ff.; also Kliefoth's
Abhandlung ber die Zahlensymbolik der heiligen Schrift in der Theolog.
Zeitschrift von Dieckhoff und Kliefoth, III. p. 381ff., where especially
the older view - that the cherubim are angelic beings of a higher rank -
is defended in a thorough manner, and the daring hypothesis of Hofmann
signally refuted; lastly, Ed. C. Aug. Riehm, De natur et notione
symbolic Cheruborum, Commentat. Basil. 1864, who, proceeding from the
view - adopted by Bhr, Hengstenberg, and others - that the cherubim were
only symbolical figures, has sought to determine more minutely the
meaning of these symbols.)

This modern view, however, finds in the circumstance that the cherubim
in the Israelitish sanctuary, as well as in Ezekiel and in the
Apocalypse, are symbolical figures of varying shape, only an apparent
but no real support. The cherubim occur for the firs time in the history
of Paradise, where, in [Gen 3:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022),
it is related that God, after expelling the first human pair from
Paradise, placed at the east side of the garden the cherubim and the
flame of a sword, which turned hither and thither, to guard the way to
the tree of life. If this narrative contains historical truth, and is
not merely a myth or philosopheme; if Paradise and the Fall, with their
consequences, extending over all humanity, are to remain real things and
occurrences - then must the cherubim also be taken as real beings. "For
God will not have placed symbols - pure creations of Hebrew fancy - at
the gate of Paradise," Kliefoth. Upon the basis of this narrative,
Ezekiel also held the cherubim to be spiritual beings of a higher rank.
This appears from [Eze 28:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#014), where
he compares the prince of Tyre, in reference to the high and glorious
position which God had assigned him, to a cherub, and to Elohim. It does
not at all conflict with the recognition of the cherubim as real beings,
and, indeed, as spiritual or angelic beings, that they are employed in
visions to represent super-sensible relations, or are represented in a
plastic form in the sanctuary of Israel. "When angels," as Kliefoth
correctly remarks in reference to this, "sing the song of praise in the
holy night, this is an historical occurrence, and these angels are real
angels, who testify by their appearance that there are such beings as
angels; but when, in the Apocalypse, angels pour forth sounds of wrath,
these angels are figures in vision, as elsewhere, also, men and objects
are seen in vision." But even this employment of the angels as "figures"
in vision, rests upon the belief that there are actually beings of this
kind. Biblical symbolism furnishes not a single undoubted instance of
abstract ideas, or ideal creations of the imagination, being represented
by the prophets as living beings. Under the plastic representation of
the cherubim upon the mercy-seat, and in the most holy and holy place of
the tabernacle and the temple, lies the idea, that these are heavenly,
spiritual beings; for in the tabernacle and temple (which was built
after its pattern) essential relations of the kingdom of God are
embodied, and all the symbols derived from things having a real
existence. When, however, on the other hand, Hengstenberg objects, on
[Rev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), "that what Vitringa remarks
is sufficient to refute those who, under the cherubim, would understand
angels of rank - viz. that these four creatures are throughout the whole
of this vision connected with the assembly of the elders, and are
distinguished not only from the angels, but from all the angels, as is
done in [Eze 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#011)," - we must regard
this refutation as altogether futile. From the division of the heavenly
assembly before the throne into two choirs or classes ([Rev
5:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001) and 7) - in which the ζῶα
(cherubim) and the elders form the one ([Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008)), the ἄγγελοι the other choir
([Rev 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011)) - an argument can be as
little derived against the angelic nature of the cherubim, as it could
be shown, from the distinction between the στρατιὰ οὐράνιος and ἀγγελος,
in [Luk 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013), that the "multitude of
the heavenly host" were no angels at all. And the passage in [Rev
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011) would only then furnish the
supposed proof against the relationship of the cherubim to the angels,
if πάντες ἄγγελοι (in general - all angels, how numerous soever they may
be - were spoken of. But the very tenor of the words, πάντες οἱ ἄγγελοι
"all the angels," points back to the choir of angels already mentioned
in [Eze 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011), which was formed by
πολλοὶ ἄγγελοι, whose number was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands.

(Note: See on this distinction Winer's Grammar of New Testament Greek
(Moulton's translation), p. 137, where, among other remarks, it is
observed that "πᾶσαι γενεαί are all generations, whatever their number;
πᾶσαι αί γενεαί ([Mat 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#017)), all the
generations - those which, either from the context or in some other way,
are familiar as a definite number.")

From the distinction between the ζῶα and the ἄγγελοι in the Apocalypse,
no further inference can be deduced than that the cherubim are not
common angels, "ministering spirits, sent forth to minister" ([Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)), but constitute a special class
of angels of higher rank.

More exact information regarding the relationship of the cherubim to the
other angels, or their nature, cannot indeed be obtained, either from
the name cherubim or from the circumstance that, with the exception of
Gen 3, they occur always only in connection with the throne of God. The
etymology of the word כּרוּב is obscure: all the derivations that have
been proposed from the Hebrew or any other Semitic dialect cannot make
the slightest pretensions to probability. The word appears to have come
down from antiquity along with the tradition of Paradise. See my
Biblical Archaeology, p. 88ff. If we take into consideration, however,
that Ezekiel calls them חיּות, and first in Ezekiel 10 employs the name
כּרוּבים, known from the tabernacle, or rather from the history of
Paradise; since, as may be inferred from [Eze
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#020), he first recognised, from the
repetition of the theophany related in Ezekiel 10, that the living
creatures seen in the vision were cherubim - we may, from the
designation חיּות, form a supposition, if not as to their nature, at
least as to the significance of their position towards the throne of
God. They are termed חיּות, "living," not as being "ideal
representatives of all living things upon the earth" (Hengstenberg), but
as beings which, among all the creatures in heaven and earth, possess
and manifest life in the fullest sense of the word, and on that very
account, of all spiritual beings, stand nearest to the God of the
spirits of all flesh (who lives from eternity to eternity), and encircle
His throne. With this representation harmonises not only the fact, that
after the expulsion of the first human beings from Paradise, God
commanded them to guard the way to the tree of life, but also the form
in which they were represented in the sanctuary and in the visions. The
cherubim in the sanctuary had the form of a man, and were only marked
out by their wings as super-terrestrial beings, not bound by the earthly
limits of space. The cherubim in Ezekiel and the Apocalypse also
preserve the appearance of a man. Angels also assume the human form when
they appear visibly to men on earth, because of all earthly creatures
man, created in the image of God, takes the first and highest place. For
although the divine image principally consists in the spiritual nature
of man, - in the soul breathed into him by the Spirit of God, - yet his
bodily form, as the vessel of this soul, is the most perfect corporeity
of which we have any knowledge, and as such forms the most appropriate
garment for the rendering visible the heavenly spiritual being within.
But the cherubim in our vision exhibit, besides the figure of the human
body with the face of a man, also the face of the lion, of the ox, and
of the eagle, and four wings, and appear as four-sided, square-formed
beings, with a face on each of their four sides, so that they go in any
direction without turning, and yet, while so doing, they can always
proceed in the direction of one face; while in the vision in the
Apocalypse, the four faces of the creatures named are divided among the
four cherubim, so that each has only one of them. In the countenance of
man is portrayed his soul and spirit, and in each one also of the higher
order of animals, its nature. The union of the lion, ox, and eagle-faces
with that of man in the cherubim, is intended, doubtless, to represent
them as beings which possess the fulness and the power of life, which in
the earthly creation is divided among the four creatures named. The
Rabbinical dictum (Schemoth Rabba, Schttgen, Horae Hebraicae, p. 1168):
Quatuor sunt qui principatum in hoc mundo tenent. Inter creaturas homo,
inter aves aquila, inter pecora bos, inter bestias leo, contains a
truth, even if there lies at the foundation of it the idea that these
four creatures represent the entire earthly creation. For in the cherub,
the living powers of these four creatures are actually united. That the
eagle, namely, comes into consideration only in reference to his power
of flight, in which he excels all other birds, may be concluded from the
circumstance that in [Rev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007) the
fourth ζῷον is described as resembling an eagle flying. According to
this principle, the ox and the lion are only to be considered in
reference to their physical strength, in virtue of which the ox amongst
tame animals, the lion amongst wild beasts, take the first place, while
man, through the power of his mind, asserts his supremacy over all
earthly creatures.

(Note: This has been already rightly recognised by Riehm, l.c. p. 21ff.,
who has drawn from it the inference: quaternis igitur faciebus eximiae
vires atque facultates significantur cherubis a deo ad munus suum
sustinendum impertitae, which is connected with the erroneous
representation that the cherubim are intended to bear the throne of God,
and to carry the Lord of the world.)

The number four, lastly, both of the cherubim and of the four faces of
each cherub, in our vision, is connected with their capacity to go in
all directions without turning, and can contribute nothing in favour of
the assumption that these four indicate the whole living creation, upon
the simple ground that the number four is not essential to them, for on
the mercy-seat only two cherubim are found. That they are also
represented in the vision as higher spiritual beings, appears not only
from [Eze 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#007), where a cherub
stretches forth his hand and fetches out fire from between the cherubim,
and places it in the hands of the angel clothed in white linen, who was
to accomplish the burning of Jerusalem; but, still more distinctly, from
what is said in the Apocalypse regarding their working. Here we observe
them, as Kliefoth has already pointed out, "in manifold activity: they
utter day and night the Tersanctus; they offer worship, [Rev
4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008); [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008); [Rev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004); they repeat the Amen to the song
of praise from all creation, [Rev
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014); they invite John to see what the
four first seals are accomplishing, [Rev
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001), [Rev
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#003), [Rev
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005), [Rev
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#007); one of them gives to the seven
angels the seven phials of wrath, [Rev
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007)."

Besides this activity of theirs in the carrying out of the divine
counsel of salvation, we must, in order to gain as clear a view as
possible of the significance of the cherubim in our vision, as well as
in Biblical symbolism generally, keep also in view the position which,
in the Apocalypse, they occupy around the throne of God. Those who are
assembled about the throne form these three concentric circles: the four
ζῶα (cherubim) form the innermost circle; the twenty-four elders, seated
upon thrones, clothed in white garments, and wearing golden crowns upon
their heads, compose the wider circle that follows; while the third, and
widest of all, is formed by the many angels, whose number was many
thousands of thousands ([Rev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004), [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006); [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006), [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008); [Rev
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011)). To these are added the great,
innumerable host, standing before the throne, of the just made perfect
from among all heathens, peoples, and languages, in white raiment, and
with palms in their hands, who have come out of great tribulation, and
have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb,
and now, before the throne of God, serve Him day and night in His temple
([Eze 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#009), [Eze
7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#014)). Accordingly the twenty-four
elders, as the patriarchs of the Old and New Testament congregation of
God, have their place beside God's throne, between the cherubim and the
myriads of the other angels; and in the same manner as they are exalted
above the angels, are the cherubim exalted even above them. This
position of the cherubim justifies the conclusion that they have the
name of ζῶα from the indwelling fulness of the everlasting blessed life
which is within them, and which streams out from the Creator of spirits
- the King of all kings, and Lord of all lords - upon the spiritual
beings of heaven, and that the cherubim immediately surround the throne
of God, as being representatives and bearers of the everlasting life of
blessedness, which men, created in the image of God, have forfeited by
the Fall, but which they are again, from the infinitude of the divine
compassion, to recover in the divine kingdom founded for the redemption
of fallen humanity.

It is easier to recognise the meaning of the wheels which in our vision
appear beside the cherubim. The wheel serves to put the chariot in
motion. Although the throne of God is not now expressly represented and
designated as a chariot-throne, yet there can be no doubt that the
wheels which Ezekiel sees under the throne beside the cherubim are
intended to indicate the possibility and ease with which the throne can
be moved in the direction of the four quarters of the heavens. The
meaning of the eyes, however, is matter of controversy, with which,
according to [Eze 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018), the felloes of
the wheels, and, as is expressly mentioned in [Eze
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#012), and also noted in [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), the cherubim themselves are
furnished all round. According to Kliefoth, the eyes serve the purpose
of motion; and as the movement of the cherubim and wheels indicates the
spreading abroad over the whole earth of the new economy of salvation,
this mass of eyes in the cherubim and wheels must indicate that this
spreading abroad is to take place, not through blind accident, but with
conscious clearness. The meaning is not appropriate to [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), where the cherubim have no wheels
beside them, and where a going forth into all countries is not to be
thought of. Here therefore, according to Kliefoth, the eyes only serve
to bring into view the moral and physical powers which have created and
supported the kingdom of God upon earth, and which are also to bring it
now to its consummation. This is manifestly arbitrary, as any support
from passages of the Bible in favour of the one view or the other is
entirely wanting. The remark of Rosenmller is nearer the truth, that by
the multitude of the eyes is denoted Coelestium naturarum perspicacia et
ὀξυωπία, and leads to the correct explanation of [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006), where the seven eyes of the Lamb
are declared to be τὰ ἐπτὰ πνεύματα τοῦ Θεου,͂ τὰ ἀπεσταλμένα εἰς πᾶσαν
τὴν γῆν; the eyes consequently indicate the spiritual effects which
proceed from the Lamb over the entire earth in a manner analogous to His
seven horns, which are the symbols of the completeness of His power. The
eye, then, is the picture and mirror of the Spirit; and the
ornamentation of the cherubim and wheels with eyes, shows that the power
of the divine Spirit dwells within them, and determines and guides their
movements.

The remaining objects of the vision are not difficult to explain. The
appearance of the expanse over above the cherubim and wheels, upon which
a throne is to be seen, represents the firmament of heaven as the place
of God's throne. God appears upon the throne in human form, in the
terrible glory of His holy majesty. The whole appearance draws nigh to
the prophet in the covering of a great fiery cloud ([Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)). This cloud points back to the
"thick cloud" in which Jehovah, in the ancient time, descended upon
Mount Sinai amid thunders and lightnings ([Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)) to establish His covenant of
grace, promised to the patriarchs with their seed - the people of Israel
brought forth from Egypt - and to found His kingdom of grace upon the
earth. If we observe the connection of our theophany with that
manifestation of God on Sinai for the founding of the Old Testament
dispensation of salvation, we shall neither confine the fire and the
lightnings in our vision to the manifestation of God for the destruction
of Jerusalem and the temple, nor refer the splendour which appears above
the throne in the form of a rainbow to the grace which returns after the
execution of judgment, or to the new dispensation of salvation which is
to be established. Nor may we regard these differing attributes, by
referring them specially to individual historical elements of the
revelation of God in His kingdom, as in opposition; but must conceive of
them, more generally and from the point of view of unity, as symbols of
the righteousness, holiness, and grace which God reveals in the
preservation, government, and consummation of His kingdom. It holds true
also of our theophany what Dsterdieck remarks on [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003) (cf. p. 219 of the second edition
of his Commentary) regarding the importance of the divine appearance
described in that passage: "We may not hastily apply in a general way
the description before us by special reference to the judgments of God
(which are seen at a later time) in their relation to the divine grace;
it is enough that here, where the everlasting and personal ground of all
that follows is described, the sacred glory and righteousness of God
appear in the closest connection with His unchanging, friendly grace, so
that the entire future development of the kingdom of God, and of the
world down to the final termination, as that is determined by the
marvellous unity of being which is in the holy, righteous, and gracious
God, must not only according to its course, but also according to its
object, correspond to this threefold glory of the living God." As this
fundamental vision (of the Apocalypse) contains all that serves to alarm
the enemies and to comfort the friends of Him who sits on the throne, so
the vision of Ezekiel also has its fundamental significance not only for
the whole of the prophet's ministry, but, generally, for the
continuation and development of the kingdom of God in Israel, until its
aim has been reached in its consummation in glory. This, its fundamental
significance, unmistakeably appears from the twofold circumstance -
firstly, that the theophany was imparted to the prophet at his call, and
was then repeated at the principal points in his prophetic ministry, at
the announcement both of the dissolution of the old kingdom of God by
the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, Ezekiel 9-11, and also at
the erection of the new temple and a new arrangement of the kingdom
(Ezekiel 40-48). Since, as was formerly already remarked, a theophany
was not required either for the calling of Ezekiel to the office of a
prophet, or for the announcement which was entrusted to him of the
annihilation of the old and the foundation of the new kingdom of God, so
the revelation of God, which pointed in its phenomenal shape to the
dwelling of the Lord among His people in the Holy of Holies in the
temple (and which was imparted in this place to Ezekiel, living among
the exiles in the land of Chaldea by the banks of the Chebar), could
only be intended, in view of the dissolution of the theocracy, which had
already begun, and was shortly to be completed, to give to the prophet
and those of his contemporaries who were living with him in exile, a
real pledge that the essential element of the theocracy was not to be
removed by the penal judgment which was passing over the sinful people
and kingdom; but that God the Lord would still continue to attest
Himself to His people as the living God, and preserve His kingdom, and
one day bring it again to a glorious consummation. - In correspondence
with this aim, God appears in the temple in the symbolical forms of His
gracious presence as He who is throned above the cherubim; but cherubim
and throne are furnished with attributes, which represent the movement
of the throne in all directions, not merely to indicate the spreading of
the kingdom of God over all the earth, but to reveal Himself as Lord and
King, whose might extends over the whole world, and who possesses the
power to judge all the heathen, and to liberate from their bondage His
people, who have been given into their hands, if they repent and turn
unto Him; and who will again gather them together, and raise them in the
place of their inheritance to the glory which had been promised.

Such is the significance of the theophany at the inauguration of Ezekiel
to the prophetic office. The significance, however, which its repetition
possesses is clearly contained in the facts which the prophet was
herewith permitted by God to behold. From the temple and city, polluted
by sinful abominations, the gracious presence of God departs, in order
that temple and city may be given over to the judgment of destruction;
into the new and glorious temple there enters again the glory of God, to
dwell for ever among the children of Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 2](eze002)

</div>
