<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze015)  [Next](eze017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 16:0</span></span>

Ingratitude and Unfaithfulness of Jerusalem. Its Punishment and Shame

The previous word of God represented Israel as a wild and useless vine,
which had to be consumed. But as God had planted this vine in His
vineyard, as He had adopted Israel as His own people, the rebellious
nation, though met by these threatenings of divine judgment, might still
plead that God would not reject Israel, on account of its election as
the covenant nation. This proof of false confidence in the divine
covenant of grace is removed by the word of God in the present chapter,
which shows that by nature Israel is no better than other nations; and
that, in consequence of its shameful ingratitude towards the Lord, who
saved it from destruction in the days of its youth, it has sinned so
grievously against Him, and has sunk so low among the heathen through
its excessive idolatry, that God is obliged to punish and judge it in
the same manner as the others. At the same time, the Lord will continue
mindful of His covenant; and on the restoration of Sodom and Samaria, He
will also turn the captivity of Jerusalem, - to the deep humiliation and
shame of Israel, - and will establish an everlasting covenant with it. -
The contents of this word of God divide themselves, therefore, into
three parts. In the first, we have the description of the nations's sin,
through its falling away from its God into idolatry (vv. 2-34); in the
second, the announcement of the punishment (vv. 35-52); and in the
third, the restoration of Israel to favour ([Eze
16:53-63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053)). The past, present, and
future of Israel are all embraced, from its first commencement to its
ultimate consummation. - These copious contents are draped in an
allegory, which is carried out on a magnificent scale. Starting from the
representation of the covenant relation existing between the Lord and
His people, under the figure of a marriage covenant, - which runs
through the whole of the Scriptures, - Jerusalem, the capital of the
kingdom of God, as the representative of Israel, the covenant nation, is
addressed as a wife; and the attitude of God to Israel, as well of that
of Israel to its God, is depicted under this figure.

[Ezekiel 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 16:1</span></span>

Israel, by nature unclean, miserable, and near to destruction ([Eze
16:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)), is adopted by the Lord and
clothed in splendour ([Eze 16:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006)).
[Eze 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001) and [Eze
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#002) form the introduction. - [Eze
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001). And the word of Jehovah came to
me, saying, [Eze 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#002). Son of man,
show Jerusalem her abominations. - The "abominations" of Jerusalem are
the sins of the covenant nation, which were worse than the sinful
abominations of Canaan and Sodom. The theme of this word of God is the
declaration of these abominations. To this end the nation is first of
all shown what it was by nature. - [Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003). And say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah to Jerusalem, Thine origin and thy birth are from the land of
the Canaanites; thy father was the Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite.
[Eze 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004). And as for thy birth, in
the day of thy birth thy navel was not cut, and thou wast not bathed in
water for cleansing; and not rubbed with salt, and not wrapped in
bandages. [Eze 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#005). No eye looked
upon thee with pity, to do one of these to thee in compassion; but thou
wast cast into the field, in disgust at thy life, on the day of thy
birth. - According to the allegory, which runs through the whole
chapter, the figure adopted to depict the origin of the Israelitish
nation is that Jerusalem, the existing representative of the nation, is
described as a child, born of Canaanitish parents, mercilessly exposed
after its birth, and on the point of perishing. Hitzig and Kliefoth show
that they have completely misunderstood the allegory, when they not only
explain the statement concerning the descent of Jerusalem, in [Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003), as relating to the city of that
name, but restrict it to the city alone, on the ground that "Israel as a
whole was not of Canaanitish origin, whereas the city of Jerusalem was
radically a Canaanitish, Amoritish, and Hittite city." But were not all
the cities of Israel radically Canaanaean? Or was Israel not altogether,
but only half, of Aramaean descent? Regarded merely as a city, Jerusalem
was neither of Amoritish nor Hittite origin, but simply a Jebusite city.
And it is too obvious to need any proof, that the prophetic word does
not refer to the city as a city, or to the mass of houses; but that
Jerusalem, as the capital of the kingdom of Judah at that time, so far
as its inhabitants were concerned, represents the people of Israel, or
the covenant nation. It was not the mass of houses, but the population,
- which was the foundling, - that excited Jehovah's compassion, and
which He multiplied into myriads ([Eze
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007)), clothed in splendour, and chose
as the bride with whom He concluded a marriage covenant. The descent and
birth referred to are not physical, but spiritual descent. Spiritually,
Israel sprang from the land of the Canaanites; and its father was the
Amorite ad its mother a Hittite, in the same sense in which Jesus said
to the Jews, "Ye are of your father the devil" ([Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)). The land of the Canaanites is
mentioned as the land of the worst heathen abominations; and from among
the Canaanitish tribes, the Amorites and Hittites are mentioned as
father and mother, not because the Jebusites are placed between the two,
in [Num 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#029), as Hitzig supposes, but
because they were recognised as the leaders in Canaanitish ungodliness.
The iniquity of the Amorites (האמרי) was great even in Abraham's time,
though not yet full or ripe for destruction ([Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016)); and the daughters of Heth,
whom Esau married, caused Rebekah great bitterness of spirit ([Gen
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#046)). These facts furnish the
substratum for our description. And they also help to explain the
occurrence of האמרי with the article, and חתּית without it. The plurals
מכרתיך and מלדתיך also point to spiritual descent; for physical
generation and birth are both acts that take place once for all. מכרה or
מכוּרה (Ezekiel 21:35; [Eze 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#014)) is
not the place of begetting, but generation itself, from כּוּר = כּרה, to
dig = to beget (cf. [Isa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001)). It is
not equivalent to מקוּר, or a plural corresponding to the Latin natales,
origines. תולדת: birth.

[Eze 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004) and [Eze
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#005) describe the circumstances
connected with the birth. וּמלדתיך ([Eze
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004)) stands at the head as an
absolute noun. At the birth of the child it did not receive the
cleansing and care which were necessary for the preservation and
strengthening of its life, but was exposed without pity. The
construction הוּלדת אותך (the passive, with an accusative of the object)
is the same as in [Gen 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020), and many
other passages of the earlier writings. כּרּת: for כּרת ([Jdg
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#028)), Pual of כּרת; and שרּּך: from
שׁר, with the reduplication of the r, which is very rare in Hebrew
(vid., Ewald, 71). By cutting the navel-string, the child is liberated
after birth from the blood of the mother, with which it was nourished in
the womb. If the cutting be neglected, as well as the tying of the
navel-string, which takes place at the same time, the child must perish
when the decomposition of the placenta begins. The new-born child is
then bathed, to cleanse it from the impurities attaching to it. משׁעי
cannot be derived from שׁעה = שׁעע; because neither the meaning to see,
to look (שׁעה), nor the other meaning to smear (שׁעע), yields a suitable
sense. Jos. Kimchi is evidently right in deriving it from משׁע, in
Arabic m\_', 2 and 4, to wipe off, cleanse. The termination י is the
Aramaean form of the absolute state, for the Hebrew משׁעית, cleansing
(cf. Ewald, 165a). After the washing, the body was rubbed with salt,
according to a custom very widely spread in ancient times, and still met
with here and there in the East (vid., Hieron. ad h. l. Galen, de Sanit.
i. 7; Troilo Reisebeschr. p. 721); and that not merely for the purpose
of making the skin drier and firmer, or of cleansing it more thoroughly,
but probably from a regard to the virtue of salt as a protection from
putrefaction, "to express in a symbolical manner a hope and desire for
the vigorous health of the child" (Hitzig and Hvernick). And, finally,
it was bound round with swaddling-clothes. Not one of these things, so
indispensable to the preservation and strengthening of the child, was
performed in the case of Israel at the time of its birth from any
feeling of compassionate love (להמלה, infinitive, to show pity or
compassion towards it); but it was cast into the field, i.e., exposed,
in order that it might perish בּגועל in disgust at thy life (compare
גּעל, to thrust away, reject, despise, [Lev
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#011); [Lev
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#030)). The day of the birth of
Jerusalem, i.e., of Israel, was the period of its sojourn in Egypt,
where Israel as a nation was born, - the sons of Jacob who went down to
Egypt having multiplied into a nation. The different traits in this
picture are not to be interpreted as referring to historical
peculiarities, but have their explanation in the totality of the figure.
At the same time, they express much more than "that Israel not only
stood upon a level with all other nations, so far as its origin and its
nature were concerned, but was more helpless and neglected as to both
its nature and its natural advantages, possessing a less gifted nature
than other nations, and therefore inferior to the rest" (Kliefoth). The
smaller gifts, or humbler natural advantages, are thoughts quite foreign
to the words of the figure as well as to the context. Both the
Canaanitish descent and the merciless exposure of the child point to a
totally different point of view, as indicated by the allegory. The
Canaanitish descent points to the moral depravity of the nature of
Israel; and the neglected condition of the child is intended to show how
little there was in the heathen surroundings of the youthful Israel in
Canaan and Egypt that was adapted to foster its life and health, or to
educate Israel and fit it for its future destination. To the Egyptians
the Israelites were an abomination, as a race of shepherds; and not long
after the death of Joseph, the Pharaohs began to oppress the growing
nation.

[Ezekiel 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 16:6</span></span>

Israel therefore owes its preservation and exaltation to honour and
glory to the Lord its God alone. - [Eze
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006). Then I passed by thee, and saw
thee stamping in thy blood, and said to thee, In thy blood live! and
said to thee, In thy blood live! [Eze
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007). I made thee into myriads as the
growth of the field, and thou grewest and becamest tall, and camest to
ornament of cheeks. The breasts expanded, and thy hair grew, whereas
thou wast naked and bare. [Eze 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008).
And I passed by thee, and saw thee, and, behold, it was thy time, the
time of love; and I spread my wing over thee, and covered thy nakedness;
and I swore to thee, and entered into covenant with thee, is the saying
of the Lord Jehovah, and thou becamest mine. [Eze
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009). And I bathed thee in water, and
rinsed thy blood from thee, and anointed thee with oil. [Eze
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010). And I clothed thee with
embroidered work, and shod thee with morocco, and wrapped thee round
with byssus, and covered thee with silk. [Eze
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#011). I adorned thee with ornaments,
and put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain around thy neck. [Eze
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#012). And I gave thee a ring in thy
nose, and earrings in thine ears, and a splendid crown upon thy head.
[Eze 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013). And thou didst adorn
thyself with gold and silver; and thy clothing was byssus, and silk, and
embroidery. Wheaten-flour, and honey, and oil thou didst eat; and thou
wast very beautiful; and didst thrive to regal dignity. [Eze
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#014). Thy name went forth among the
nations on account of thy beauty; for it was perfect through my glory,
which I put upon thee, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah. - The
description of what the Lord did for Israel in His compassionate love is
divided into two sections by the repetition of the phrase "I passed by
thee" ([Eze 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006) and [Eze
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008)). The first embraces what God had
done for the preservation and increase of the nation; the second, what
He had done for the glorification of Israel, by adopting it as the
people of His possession. When Israel was lying in the field as a
neglected new-born child, the Lord passed by and adopted it, promising
it life, and giving it strength to live. To bring out the magnitude of
the compassion of God, the fact that the child was lying in its blood is
mentioned again and again. The explanation to be given of מתבּוססת (the
Hithpolel of בּוּס, to trample upon, tread under foot) is doubtful,
arising from the difficulty of deciding whether the Hithpolel is to be
taken in a passive or a reflective sense. The passive rendering,
"trampled upon" (Umbreit), or ad conculcandum projectus, thrown down, to
be trodden under foot (Gesenius, etc.), is open to the objection that
the Hophal is used for this. We therefore prefer the reflective meaning,
treading oneself, or stamping; as the objection offered to this, namely,
that a new-born child thrown into a field would not be found stamping
with the feet, has no force in an allegorical description. In the clause
[Eze 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006), which is written twice, the
question arises whether בּדמיך is to be taken with חיי or with ואמר : I
said to thee, "In thy blood live;" or, "I said to thee in thy blood,
'Live.' " We prefer the former, because it gives a more emphatic sense.
בּדמיך is a concise expression; for although lying in thy blood, in
which thou wouldst inevitably bleed to death, yet thou shalt live.
Hitzig's proposal to connect בּדמיך in the first clause with חיי , and
in the second with אמר, can hardly be entertained. A double construction
of this kind is not required either by the repetition of אמר לך, or by
the uniform position of בדמיך before חיי in both clauses, as compared
with [Kg1 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#018) and [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005).

In [Eze 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007) the description of the
real fact breaks through the allegory. The word of God חיי, live, was
visibly fulfilled in the innumerable multiplication of Israel. But the
allegory is resumed immediately. The child grew (רבה, as in [Gen
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#020); [Deu
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#016)), and came into ornament of
cheeks (בּוא with בּ, to enter into a thing, as in [Eze
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008); not to proceed in, as Hitzig
supposes). עדי, not most beautiful ornament, or highest charms, for
עדיים is not the plural of עדי; but according to the Chetib and most of
the editions, with the tone upon the penultima, is equivalent to עדיים,
a dual form; so that עדי cannot mean ornament in this case, but, as in
[Psa 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009) and [Psa
103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005), "the cheek," which is the
traditional meaning (cf. Ges. Thes. p. 993). Ornament of cheeks is
youthful freshness and beauty of face. The clauses which follow describe
the arrival of puberty. נכון, when applied to the breasts, means to
expand, lit., to raise oneself up. שׂער = שׂער רגלים, pubes. The
description given in these verses refers to the preservation and
marvellous multiplication of Israel in Egypt, where the sons of Israel
grew into a nation under the divine blessing. Still it was quite naked
and bare (ערם and עריה are substantives in the abstract sense of
nakedness and bareness, used in the place of adjective to give greater
emphasis). Naked and bare are figurative expressions for still destitute
of either clothing or ornaments. This implies something more than "the
poverty of the people in the wilderness attached to Egypt" (Hitzig).
Nakedness represents deprivation of all the blessings of salvation with
which the Lord endowed Israel and made it glorious, after He had adopted
it as the people of His possession. In Egypt, Israel was living in a
state of nature, destitute of the gracious revelations of God.

[Eze 16:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008)

The Lord then went past again, and chose for His bride the virgin, who
had already grown up to womanhood, and with whom He contracted marriage
by the conclusion of the covenant at Sinai. עתּך, thy time, is more
precisely defined as עת דּדים, the time of conjugal love. I spread my
wing over thee, i.e., the lappet of my garment, which also served as a
counterpane; in other words, I married thee (cf. Ruth. [Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)), and thereby covered thy
nakedness. "I swore to thee," sc. love and fidelity (cf. [Hos
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021)), and entered into a covenant
with thee, i.e., into that gracious connection formed by the adoption of
Israel as the possession of Jehovah, which is represented as a marriage
covenant (compare [Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008) and [Exo
19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005), and [Deu
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#002) : - אתך for אתּך). [Eze
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009). describe how Jehovah provided
for the purification, clothing, adorning, and maintenance of His wife.
As the bride prepares herself for the wedding by washing and anointing,
so did the Lord cleanse Israel from the blemishes and impurities which
adhered to it from its birth. The rinsing from the blood must not be
understood as specially referring either to the laws of purification
given to the nation (Hitzig), or as relating solely to the purification
effected by the covenant sacrifice (Hvernick). It embraces all that the
Lord did for the purifying of the people from the pollution of sin,
i.e., for its sanctification. The anointing with oil indicates the
powers of the Spirit of God, which flowed to Israel from the divine
covenant of grace. The clothing with costly garments, and adorning with
all the jewellery of a wealthy lady or princess, points to the equipment
of Israel with all the gifts that promote the beauty and glory of life.
The clothing is described as made of the costliest materials with which
queens were accustomed to clothe themselves. רקמה, embroidered cloth
([Psa 45:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#015)). תּחשׁ, probably the
sea-cow, Manati (see the comm. on [Exo
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005)). The word is used here for a
fine description of leather of which ornamental sandals were made; a
kind of morocco. "I bound thee round with byssus:" this refers to the
headband; for חבשׁ is the technical expression for the binding or
winding round of the turban-like headdress (cf. [Eze
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#017); [Exo
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#009); [Lev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#013)), and is applied by the Targum to
the headdress of the priests. Consequently covering with משׁי, as
distinguished from clothing, can only refer to covering with the veil,
one of the principal articles of a woman's toilet. The ἁπ. λεγ. משׁי
([Eze 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010) and [Eze
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013)) is explained by the Rabbins as
signifying silk. The lxx render it τρίχαπτον. According to Jerome, this
is a word formed by the lxx: quod tantae subtilitatis fuerit
vestimentum, ut pilorum et capillorum tenuitatem habere credatur. The
jewellery included not only armlets, nose-rings, and ear-rings, which
the daughters of Israel were generally accustomed to wear, but also
necklaces and a crown, as ornaments worn by princesses and queens. For
רביד, see comm. on [Gen 41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042). [Eze
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013) sums up the contents of [Eze
16:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009). Sheeshiy שׁשׁי is made to
conform to משׁי; the food is referred to once more; and the result of
the whole is said to have been, that Jerusalem became exceedingly
beautiful, and flourished even to royal dignity. The latter cannot be
taken as referring simply to the establishment of the monarchy under
David, any more than merely to the spiritual sovereignty for which
Israel was chosen from the very beginning ([Exo
19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)). The expression includes both,
viz., the call of Israel to be a kingdom of priests, and the historical
realization of this call through the Davidic sovereignty. The beauty,
i.e., glory, of Israel became so great, that the name of fame of Israel
sounded abroad in consequence among the nations. It was perfect, because
the Lord had put His glory upon His Church. This, too, we must not
restrict (as Hvernick does) to the far-sounding fame of Israel on its
departure from Egypt ([Exo 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014).); it
refers pre-eminently to the glory of the theocracy under David and
Solomon, the fame of which spread into all lands. - Thus had Israel been
glorified by its God above all the nations, but it did not continue in
fellowship with its God.

[Ezekiel 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 16:15</span></span>

The apostasy of Israel. Its origin and nature, [Eze
16:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015); its magnitude and extent,
[Eze 16:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023). In close connection
with what precedes, this apostasy is described as whoredom and adultery.
- [Eze 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015). But thou didst trust in
thy beauty, and didst commit fornication upon thy name, and didst pour
out thy fornication over every one who passed by: his it became. [Eze
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016). Thou didst take off thy
clothes, and didst make to thyself spotted heights, and didst commit
fornication upon them: things which should not come, and that which
should not take place. [Eze 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#017). And
thou didst take jewellery of thine ornament of my gold and of my silver,
which I had given thee, and didst make thyself male images, and didst
commit fornication with them; [Eze
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#018). And thou didst take thy
embroidered clothes, and didst cover them therewith: and my oil and my
incense thou didst set before them. [Eze
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#019). And my bread, which I gave to
thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou didst
set before them for a pleasant odour: this came to pass, is the saying
of the Lord Jehovah. [Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020). And
thou didst take thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou barest to me, and
didst sacrifice them to them to devour. Was thy fornication too little?
[Eze 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021). Thou didst slay my sons,
and didst give them up, devoting them to them. [Eze
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022). And in all thine abominations
and thy fornication thou didst not remember the days of thy youth, when
thou wast naked and bare, and layest stamping in thy blood. - The
beauty, i.e., the glory, of Israel led to its fall, because it made it
the ground of its confidence; that is to say, it looked upon the gifts
and possessions conferred upon it as its desert; and forgetting the
giver, began to traffic with the heathen nations, and allowed itself to
be seduced to heathen ways. For the fact, compare [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015) and [Hos
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#006). "We are inflamed with pride and
arrogance, and consequently profane the gifts of God, in which His glory
ought to be resplendent" (Calvin). תּזני על שׁמך does not mean either
"thou didst commit fornication notwithstanding thy name" (Winer and Ges.
Thes. p. 422), or "against thy name" (Hvernick); for על connected with
זנה has neither of these meanings, even in [Jdg
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#002). It means, "thou didst commit
fornication upon thy name, i.e., in reliance upon thy name" (Hitzig and
Maurer); only we must not understand שׁם as referring to the name of the
city of God, but must explain it, in accordance with [Eze
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#014), as denoting the name, i.e., the
renown, which Israel had acquired among the heathen on account of its
beauty. In the closing words, לו יהי, לו refers to כּל־עובר, and יהי
stands for ויהי, the copula having been dropped from ויהי because לו
ought to stand first, and only יהי remaining (compare יך, [Hos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)). The subject to יהי is יפי; the
beauty became his (cf. [Psa 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012)).
This fornication is depicted in concrete terms in [Eze
16:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016); and with the marriage
relation described in [Eze 16:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008)
still in view, Israel is represented as giving up to idolatry all that
it had received from its God. - [Eze
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016). With the clothes it made
spotted heights for itself. בּמות stands for בּתּי בּמות, temples of
heights, small temples erected upon heights by the side of the altars
([Kg1 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#032); [Kg2
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#029); for the fact, see the comm. on
[Kg1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002)), which may probably have
consisted simply of tents furnished with carpets. Compare [Kg2
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#007), where the women are described as
weaving tents for Astarte, also the tent-like temples of the Slavonian
tribes in Germany, which consisted of variegated carpets and curtains
(see Mohne on Creuzer's Symbolik, V. p. 176). These bamoth Ezekiel calls
טלאות, not variegated, but spotted or speckled (cf. [Gen
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032)), possibly with the subordinate
idea of patched (מטלּא, [Jos 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#005)),
because they used for the carpets not merely whole garments, but pieces
of cloth as well; the word being introduced here for the purpose of
indicating contemptuously the worthlessness of such conduct. "Thou didst
commit whoredom upon them," i.e., upon the carpets in the tent-temples.
The words 'לא באות וגו are no doubt relative clauses; but the usual
explanation, "which has not occurred, and will not be," after [Exo
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#014), cannot be vindicated, as it is
impossible to prove either the use of בּוא in the sense of occurring or
happening (= היה), or the use of the participle instead of the preterite
in connection with the future. The participle באות in this connection
can only supply one of the many senses of the imperfect (Ewald, 168c),
and, like יהיה, express that which ought to be. The participial form
באות is evidently chosen for the sake of obtaining a paronomasia with
בּמות: the heights which should not come (i.e., should not be erected);
while לא יהיה points back to ותּזני עליהם: "what should not happen."

[Eze 16:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#017)

The jewellery of gold and silver was used by Israel for צלמי זכר, idols
of the male sex, to commit fornication with them. Ewald thinks that the
allusion is to Penates (teraphim), which were set up in the house, with
ornaments suspended upon them, and worshipped with lectisternia. But
there is no more allusion to lectisternia here than in [Eze
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041). And there is still less ground
for thinking, as Vatke, Movers, and Hvernick do, of Lingam-or
Phallus-worship, of which it is impossible to find the slightest trace
among the Israelites. The arguments used by Hvernick have been already
proved by Hitzig to have no force whatever. The context does not point
to idols of any particular kind, but to the many varieties of
Baal-worship; whilst the worship of Moloch is specially mentioned in
[Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020). as being the greatest
abomination of the whole. The fact that נתן לפּניהם, to set before them
(the idols), does not refer to lectisternia, but to sacrifices offered
as food for the gods, is indisputably evident from the words לריח ניחח,
the technical expression for the sacrificial odour ascending to God (cf.
[Lev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009), [Lev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#013), etc.). ויּהי ([Eze
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#019)), and it came to pass (sc., this
abomination), merely serves to give emphatic expression to the disgust
which it occasioned (Hitzig). - [Eze
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020), [Eze
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021). And not even content with this,
the adulteress sacrificed the children which God had given her to idols.
The revulsion of feeling produced by the abominations of the
Moloch-worship is shown in the expression לאכול, thou didst sacrifice
thy children to idols, that they might devour them; and still more in
the reproachful question 'המעט, "was there too little in thy whoredom?"
מן before תּזנוּתיך is used in a comparative sense, though not to
signify "was this a smaller thing than thy whoredom?" which would mean
far too little in this connection. The מן is rather used, as in [Eze
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#017) and [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006), in the sense of too: was thy
whoredom, already described in [Eze
16:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016), too little, that thou didst
also slaughter thy children to idols? The Chetib תזנותך ([Eze
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020) and [Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)) is a singular, as in [Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025) and [Eze
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#029); whereas the Keri has treated it
as a plural, as in [Eze 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015), [Eze
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022), and [Eze
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#033), but without any satisfactory
ground. The indignation comes out still more strongly in the description
given of these abominations in [Eze
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021) : "thou didst slay my sons"
(whereas in [Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020) we have simply
"thy sons, whom thou hast born to me"), "and didst give them up to them,
בּהעביר, by making them pass through," sc. the fire. העביר is used here
not merely or lustration or februation by fire, but for the actual
burning of the children slain as sacrifices, so that it is equivalent to
העביר בּאשׁ למּלך ([Kg2 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)). By the
process of burning, the sacrifices were given to Moloch to devour.
Ezekiel has the Moloch-worship in his eye in the form which it had
assumed from the times of Ahaz downwards, when the people began to burn
their children to Moloch (cf. [Kg2
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003); [Kg2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006); [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)), whereas all that can be proved
to have been practised in earlier times by the Israelites was the
passing of children through fire without either slaying or burning; a
februation by fire (compare the remarks on this subject in the comm. on
[Lev 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021)). - Amidst all these
abominations Israel did not remember its youth, or how the Lord had
adopted it out of the deepest wretchedness to be His people, and had
made it glorious through the abundance of His gifts. This base
ingratitude shows the depth of its fall, and magnifies its guilt. For
[Eze 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022) compare [Eze
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007) and [Eze
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006).

[Ezekiel 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 16:23</span></span>

Extent and Magnitude of the Idolatry

[Eze 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023). And it came to pass after
all thy wickedness - Woe, woe to thee! is the saying of the Lord Jehovah
- [Eze 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024). Thou didst build thyself
arches, and didst make thyself high places in all the streets. [Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025). Thou didst build thy high
places at every cross road, and didst disgrace thy beauty, and stretch
open thy feet for every one that passed by, and didst increase thy
whoredom. [Eze 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026). Thou didst
commit fornication with the sons of Egypt thy neighbours, great in
flesh, and didst increase thy whoredom to provoke me. [Eze
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027). And, behold, I stretched out my
hand against thee, and diminished thine allowance, and gave thee up to
the desire of those who hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, who
are ashamed of thy lewd way. [Eze
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#028). And thou didst commit
fornication with the sons of Asshur, because thou art never satisfied;
and didst commit fornication with them, and wast also not satisfied.
[Eze 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#029). And thou didst increase
thy whoredom to Canaan's land, Chaldaea, and even thereby wast not
satisfied. [Eze 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030). How languishing
is thy heart! is the saying of the Lord Jehovah, that thou doest all
this, the doings of a dissolute prostitute. [Eze
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#031). When thou buildest thy arches
at every cross road, and madest thy high places in every road, thou wast
not like the harlot, since thou despisedst payment. [Eze
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032). The adulterous wife taketh
strangers instead of her husband. [Eze
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#033). Men give presents to all
prostitutes; but thou gavest thy presents to all thy suitors, and didst
reward them for coming to thee from all sides, for fornication with
thee. [Eze 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#034). And there was in
thee the very opposite of the women in thy whoredom, that men did not go
whoring after thee. In that thou givest payment, and payment was not
given to thee, thou wast the very opposite. - By אחרי כל־רעתך, the
picture of the wide spread of idolatry, commenced in [Eze
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022), is placed in the relation of
chronological sequence to the description already given of the idolatry
itself. For all sin, all evil, must first exist before it can spread.
The spreading of idolatry was at the same time an increase of apostasy
from God. This is not to be sought, however, in the face that Israel
forsook the sanctuary, which God had appointed for it as the scene of
His gracious presence, and built itself idol-temples (Kliefoth). It
consisted rather in this, that it erected idolatrous altars and little
temples at all street-corners and cross-roads ([Eze
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024), [Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)), and committed adultery with
all heathen nations ([Eze 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026), [Eze
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#028), [Eze
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#029)), and could not be induced to
relinquish idolatry either by the chastisements of God ([Eze
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027)), or by the uselessness of such
conduct ([Eze 16:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032)). כל־רעתך is
the whole of the apostasy from the Lord depicted in [Eze
16:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015), which prevailed more and
more as idolatry spread. The picture of this extension of idolatry is
introduced with woe! woe! to indicate at the outset the fearful judgment
which Jerusalem was bringing upon itself thereby. The exclamation of woe
is inserted parenthetically; for ותּבני ([Eze
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024)) forms the apodosis to ויהי in
[Eze 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023). גּב and רמה are to be
taken as general terms; but, as the singular גּבּך with the plural רמתיך
in [Eze 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039) plainly shows, גּב is a
collective word. Hvernick has very properly called attention to the
analogy between גּב and קבּה in [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008), which is used there to denote an
apartment furnished or used for the service of Baal-peor. As קבּה, from
קבב, signifies literally that which is arched, a vault; so גּב, from
גּבב, is literally that which is curved or arched, a hump or back, and
hence is used here for buildings erected for idolatrous purposes, small
temples built on heights, which were probably so called to distinguish
them as chapels for fornication. The ancient translations suggest this,
viz.: lxx οἴκημα πορνικόν and ἔκθεμα, which Polychron. explains thus:
προαγώγιον ἔνθα τὰς πόρνας τρέφειν εἴωθασι; Vulg.: lupanar and
prostibulum. רמה signifies artificial heights, i.e., altars built upon
eminences, commonly called bâmōth. The word râ̂̂mâh is probably chosen
here with an allusion to the primary signification, height, as Jerome
has said: quod excelsus sit ut volentibus fornicari procul appareat
fornicationis locus et non necesse sit quaeri.

The increase of the whoredom, i.e., of the idolatry and illicit
intercourse with heathenish ways, is individualized in [Eze
16:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026) by a specification of
historical facts. We cannot agree with Hitzig in restricting the illicit
intercourse with Egypt ([Eze 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026)),
Asshur ([Eze 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#028)), and Chaldaea
([Eze 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#029)) to political apostasy, as
distinguished from the religious apostasy already depicted. There is
nothing to indicate any such distinction. Under the figure of whoredom,
both in what precedes and what follows, the inclination of Israel to
heathen ways in all its extent, both religious and political, is
embraced. Egypt stands first; for the apostasy of Israel from the Lord
commenced with the worship of the golden calf, and the longing in the
wilderness for the fleshpots of Egypt. From time immemorial Egypt was
most deeply sunken in the heathenish worship of nature. The sons of
Egypt as therefore described, in accordance with the allegory, as גּדלי
, magni carne (bâzâr, a euphemism; cf. [Eze
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#020)), i.e., according to the correct
explanation of Theodoret: μεθ ̓ὑπερβολῆς τῇ τῶν εἰδώλων θεραπείᾳ
προστετηκότας ου. The way in which God punished this erring conduct was,
that, like a husband who endeavours by means of chastisement to induce
his faithless wife to return, He diminished the supply of food,
clothing, etc. (chōg, as in [Pro
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008)), intended for the wife (for the
fact compare [Hos 2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#009)); this He did
by "not allowing Israel to attain to the glory and power which would
otherwise have been conferred upon it; that is to say, by not permitting
it to acquire the undisturbed and undivided possession of Canaan, but
giving it up to the power and scorn of the princes of the Philistines"
(Kliefoth). נתן בּנפשׁ, to give any one up to the desire of another. The
daughters of the Philistines are the Philistian states, corresponding to
the representation of Israel as an adulterous wife. The Philistines are
mentioned as the principal foes, because Israel fell completely into
their power at the end of the period of the Judges (cf. Judg 13-16; [Sa1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001)); and they are referred to here,
for the deeper humiliation of Israel, as having been ashamed of the
licentious conduct of the Israelites, because they adhered to their
gods, and did not exchange them for others as Israel had done (compare
[Jer 2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)). זמּה (v. 27) is in
apposition to דּרכּך: thy way, which is zimmâh. Zimmâh is applied to the
sin of profligacy, as in [Lev 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#017). -
But Israel was not improved by this chastisement. It committed adultery
with Asshur also from the times of Ahaz, who sought help from the
Assyrians ([Kg2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007).); and even with
this it was not satisfied; that is to say, the serious consequences
brought upon the kingdom of Judah by seeking the friendship of Assyria
did not sober it, so as to lead it to give up seeking for help from the
heathen and their gods. In [Eze 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#028),
תּזני אל is distinguished from תּזנים (זנה, with accus.). The former
denotes the immoral pursuit of a person for the purpose of procuring his
favour; the latter, adulterous intercourse with him, when his favour has
been secured. The thought of the verse is this: Israel sought the favour
of Assyria, because it was not satisfied with illicit intercourse with
Egypt, and continued to cultivate it; yet it did not find satisfaction
or sufficiency even in this, but increased its adultery אל־ארץ כּנען
כּשׂדּימה, to the Canaan's-land Chaldaea. ארץ כּנען is not the proper
name of the land of Canaan here, but an appellative designation applied
to Chaldaea (Kasdim) or Babylonia, as in [Eze
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#004) (Raschi). The explanation of the
words, as signifying the land of Canaan, is precluded by the fact that
an allusion to Canaanitish idolatry and intercourse after the mention of
Asshur would be out of place, and would not coincide with the historical
order of things; since it cannot be shown that "a more general diffusion
of the religious customs of Canaan took place after the Assyrian era."
And it is still more decidedly precluded by the introduction of the word
כּשׂדּימה, which cannot possibly mean as far as, or unto, Chaldaea, and
can only be a more precise definition of ארץ כנען. The only thing about
which a question can be raised, is the reason why the epithet כנען
should have been applied to Chaldaea; whether it merely related to the
commercial spirit, in which Babylon was by no means behind the
Canaanitish Tyre and Sidon, or whether allusion was also made to the
idolatry and immorality of Canaan. The former is by no means to be
excluded, as we find that in [Eze 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#004)
"the land of Canaan" is designated "a city of merchants" (rōkhelim). But
we must not exclude the latter either, inasmuch as in the Belus- and
Mylitta-worship of Babylon the voluptuous character of the Baal- and
Astarte-worship of Canaan had degenerated into shameless unchastity (cf.
Herodotus, i. 199).

In [Eze 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030), the contents of [Eze
16:16-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016) are summed up in the verdict
which the Lord pronounces upon the harlot and adulteress: "yet how
languishing is thy heart!" אמלה (as a participle Kal απ. λεγ..; since
the verb only occurs elsewhere in the Pual, and that in the sense of
faded or pining away) can only signify a morbid pining or languishing,
or the craving of immodest desire, which has grown into a disease. The
form לבּה is also ἁπ. λεγ..; but it is analogous to the plural לבּות.

(Note: Hitzig objects to the two forms, which do not occur elsewhere;
and with the help of the Sept. rendering τὶ διαθῶ τὴν θυγατέρα σου,
which is a mere guess founded upon the false reading מה אמלה, he adopts
the conjectural reading מה אמלה לבתּך, "what hope is there for thy
daughter?" by which he enriches the Hebrew language with a new word
(אמלה ), and the prophecy contained in this chapter with a thought which
is completely foreign to it, and altogether unsuitable.)

שׁלּטת, powerful, commanding; as an epithet applied to zōnâh, one who
knows no limit to her actions, unrestrained; hence in Arabic, insolent,
shameless. [Eze 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#031) contains an
independent sentence, which facilitates the transition to the thought
expanded in [Eze 16:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032), namely,
that Jerusalem had surpassed all other harlots in her whoredoms. If we
take [Eze 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#031) as dependent upon the
protasis in [Eze 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030), we not only
get a very dragging style of expression, but the new thought expressed
in [Eze 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#031) is reduced to a merely
secondary idea; whereas the expansion of it in [Eze
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032). shows that it introduces a new
feature into the address. And if this is the case, ולא־הייתי cannot be
taken as co-ordinate with עשׂיתי htiw etanidro-oc, but must be construed
as the apodosis: "in thy building of rooms...thou wast not like the
(ordinary) harlot, since thou disdainest payment." For the plural suffix
attached to בּבנותיך, see the commentary on [Eze
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#008). The infinitive לקלּס answers to
the Latin gerund in ndo (vid., Ewald, 237c and 280d), indicating
wherein, or in what respect, the harlot Jerusalem differed from an
ordinary prostitute; namely, in the fact that she disdained to receive
payment for her prostitution. That this is the meaning of the words, is
rendered indisputable by [Eze
16:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032). But the majority of
expositors have taken לקלּס as indicating the point of comparison
between Israel and other harlots, i.e., as defining in what respect
Israel resembled other prostitutes; and then, as this thought is at
variance with what follows, have attempted to remove the discrepancy by
various untenable explanations. Most of them resort to the explanation:
thou wast not like the other prostitutes, who disdain to receive their
payment offered for their prostitution, in the hope of thereby obtaining
still more,

(Note: Jerome adopts this rendering: non facta es quasi meretrix
fastidio augens pretium, and gives the following explanation: "thou hast
not imitated the cunning prostitutes, who are accustomed to raise the
price of lust by increasing the difficulties, and in this way to excite
their lovers to greater frenzy." Rosenmller and Maurer have adopted a
similar explanation: "thou differest greatly from other harlots, who
despise the payment offered them by their lovers, that they may get
still more; for thou acceptest any reward, being content with the lowest
payment; yea, thou dost even offer a price to thine own lovers.")

an explanation which imports into the words a thought that has no
existence in them at all. Hvernick seeks to fix upon קלס, by means of
the Aramaean, the meaning to cry out (crying out payment), in opposition
to the ordinary meaning of קלס, to disdain, or ridicule, in which sense
Ezekiel also uses the noun קלּסה in [Eze
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#004). Hitzig falls back upon the handy
method of altering the text; and finally, Kliefoth gives to ל the
imaginary meaning "so far as," i.e., "to such a degree that," which
cannot be defended either through [Exo
39:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#019) or from [Deu
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005).

With the loose way in which the infinitive construct with ל is used, we
grant that the words are ambiguous, and might have the meaning which the
majority of the commentators have discovered in them; but this view is
by no means necessary, inasmuch as the subordinate idea introduced by
לקלּס אתנן may refer quite as well to the subject of the sentence,
"thou," as to the zōnâh with whom the subject is compared. Only in the
latter case the קלּס would apply to other harlots as well as to Israel;
whereas in the former it applies to Israel alone, and shows in what it
was that Israel did not resemble ordinary prostitutes. But the
explanation which followed was a sufficient safeguard against mistake.
In this explanation adulteresses are mentioned first (v. 32), and then
common prostitutes (vv. 33, 34). V. 32 must not be taken, as it has been
by the majority of commentators, as an exclamation, or a reproof
addressed to the adulteress Jerusalem: O thou adulterous wife, that
taketh strangers instead of her husband! Such an exclamation as this
does not suit the connection at all. But the verse is not to be struck
out on that account, as Hitzig proposes. It has simply to be construed
in another way, and taken as a statement of what adulteresses do
(Kliefoth). They take strangers instead of their husband, and seek their
recompense in the simple change, and the pleasure of being with other
men. תּחת אישׁהּ, lit., under her husband, i.e., as a wife subject to
her husband, as in the connection with זנה in [Eze
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005) and [Hos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#012) (see the comm. on [Num
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#019)). - [Eze
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#033), [Eze
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#034). Common prostitutes give
themselves up for presents; but Israel, on the contrary, gave presents
to its lovers, so that it did the very opposite to all other harlots,
and the practice of ordinary prostitutes was left far behind by that of
Israel. The change of forms נדא and נדן (a present) is probably to be
explained simply on the ground that the form נדא was lengthened into נדן
with a consonant as the termination, because the suffix could be
attached more easily to the other. הפך, the reverse, the opposite, i.e.,
with the present context, something unheard of, which never occurred in
the case of any other harlot. - Ezekiel has thus fulfilled the task
appointed him in [Eze 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#002), to charge
Jerusalem with her abominations. The address now turns to an
announcement of the punishment.

[Ezekiel 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">eze 16:35</span></span>

As Israel has been worse than all the heathen, Jehovah will punish it
notwithstanding its election, so that its shame shall be uncovered
before all the nations ([Eze
16:36-42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036)), and the justice of the
judgment to be inflicted upon it shall be made manifest ([Eze
16:43-52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)). According to these points
of view, the threat of punishment divides itself into two parts in the
following manner: - In the first ([Eze
16:35-42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035)) we have, first of all (in
[Eze 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036)), a recapitulation of the
guilty conduct described in vv. 16-34; and secondly, an announcement of
the punishment corresponding to the guilt, as the punishment of adultery
and murder ([Eze 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037) and [Eze
16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048)), and a picture of its
infliction, as retribution for the enormities committed ([Eze
16:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039)). In the second part ([Eze
16:43-52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)) there follows a proof of the
justice of this judgment.

[Eze 16:35-42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035)

The punishment will correspond to the sin. - [Eze
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035). Therefore, O harlot, hear the
word of Jehovah! [Eze 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036). Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, Because thy brass has been lavished, and thy
shame exposed in thy whoredom with thy lovers, and because of all the
idols of thine abominations, and according to the blood of thy sons,
which thou hast given them; [Eze
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037). Therefore, behold, I will
gather together all thy lovers, whom thou hast pleased, and all whom
thou hast loved, together with all whom thou hast hated, and will gather
them against thee from round about, and will expose thy shame to them,
that they may see all thy shame. [Eze
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038). I will judge thee according to
the judgment of adulteresses and murderesses, and make thee into blood
of wrath and jealousy. [Eze 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039). And
I will give thee into their hand, that they may destroy thy arches, and
pull down thy heights; that they may strip thy clothes off thee, and
take thy splendid jewellery, and leave thee naked and bare. [Eze
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040). And they shall bring up a
company against thee, and stone thee, and cut thee in pieces with their
swords. [Eze 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041). And they shall
burn thy houses with fire, and execute judgment upon thee before the
eyes of many women. Thus do I put an end to thy whoredom.; and thou wilt
also give payment no more. [Eze 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042).
And I quiet my fury toward thee, and will turn away my jealousy from
thee, that I may repose and vex myself no more. - In the brief summary
of the guilt of the whore, the following objects are singled out, as
those for which she is to be punished: (1) the pouring out of her brass
and the exposure of her shame; (2) the idols of her abominations (with
על before the noun, corresponding to יען before the infinitive); (3) the
blood of her sons, with the preposition כּ, according to, to indicate
the measure of her punishment. Two things are mentioned as constituting
the first ground of punishment. The first is, "because thy brass has
been poured out." Most of the commentators have explained this
correctly, as referring to the fact that Israel had squandered the
possessions received from the Lord, viz., gold, silver, jewellery,
clothing, and food ([Eze 16:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010) and
[Eze 16:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016)), upon idolatry. The
only difficulty connected with this is the use of the word nechōsheth,
brass or copper, in the general sense of money or metal, as there are no
other passages to support this use of the word. At the same time, the
objection raised to this, namely, that nechōsheth cannot signify money,
because the Hebrews had no copper coin, is an assertion without proof,
since all that can be affirmed with certainty is, that the use of copper
or brass as money is not mentioned anywhere in the Old Testament, with
the exception of the passage before us. But we cannot infer with
certainty from this that it was not then in use. As soon as the Hebrews
began to stamp coins, bronze or copper coins were stamped as well as the
silver shekels, and specimens of these are still in existence from the
time of the Maccabees, with the inscription "Simon, prince of Israel"
(cf. Cavedoni, Bibl. Numismatik, transl. by Werlhof, p. 20ff.). Judging
from their size, these coins were in all probability worth a whole, a
half, and a quarter gerah (Caved. pp. 50, 51). If, then, the silver
shekel of the value of 21 grains contained twenty gerahs in Moses' time,
and they had already silver pieces of the weight of a shekel and half
shekel, whilst quarter shekels are also mentioned in the time of Samuel,
there would certainly be metal coins in use of the value of a gerah for
the purposes of trade and commerce, and these would in all probability
be made of brass, copper, or bronze, as silver coins of the value of a
penny would have been found too small. Consequently it cannot be
positively denied that brass or copper may have been used as coin for
the payment of a gerah, and therefore that the word nechōsheth may have
been applied to money. We therefore adhere to the explanation that brass
stands for money, which has been already adopted by the lxx and Jerome;
and we do so all the more, because every attempt that has been made to
fasten another meaning upon nechōsheth, whether by allegorical
interpretation (Rabb.), or from the Arabic, or by altering the text, is
not only arbitrary, but does not even yield a meaning that suits the
context.

השׁפך, to be poured out = squandered or lavished. To the squandering of
the possessions bestowed by the Lord upon His congregation, there was
added the exposure of its shame, i.e., the disgraceful sacrifice of the
honour and dignity of the people of God, of which Israel had made itself
guilty by its whoredom with idols, i.e., by falling into idolatry, and
adopting heathen ways. על־מאהביך, to (towards), i.e., with thy lovers
(על standing for אל, according to later usage: vid., Ewald, 217i, p.
561), is to be explained after the analogy of זנה אל, as signifying to
commit adultery towards a person, i.e., with him. But it was not enough
to sacrifice the gifts of the Lord, i.e., His possessions and His glory,
to the heathen and their idols; Israel also made for itself כּל־גּלּוּלי
תּועבות, all kinds of logs of abominations, i.e., of idols, upon which
it hung its ornaments, and before which it set oil and incense, meal and
honey ([Eze 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#018) and [Eze
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#019)). And it was not even satisfied
with this, but gave to its idols the blood of its sons, by slaying its
children to Moloch ([Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020)).
Therefore ([Eze 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037).) the Lord will
uncover the shame of His people before all the nations. He will gather
them together, both friend and foe, against Jerusalem, and let them
execute the judgment. The punishment will correspond to the sin. Because
Israel has cultivated friendship with the heathen, it shall now be given
up altogether into their power. On the uncovering of the nakedness as a
punishment, compare [Hos 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#012). The
explanation of the figure follows in [Eze
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038). The heathen nations shall
inflict upon Jerusalem the punishment due to adultery and bloodshed.
Jerusalem (i.e., Israel) had committed this twofold crime. It had
committed adultery, by falling away from Jehovah into idolatry; and
bloodshed, by the sacrifices offered to Moloch. The punishment for
adultery was death by stoning (see the comm. on [Eze
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040)); and blood demanded blood ([Gen
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006); [Exo
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012)). 'וּנתתּיך דּם וגו' does not
mean, "I will put blood in thee" (Ros.), or "I will cause thy blood to
be shed in anger" (De Wette, Maurer, etc.); but I make thee into blood;
which we must not soften down, as Hitzig proposes, into cause thee to
bleed. The thought is rather the following: thou shalt be turned into
blood, so that nothing but blood may be left of thee, and that the blood
of fury and jealousy, as the working of the wrath and jealousy of God
(compare [Eze 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042)). To this end the
heathen will destroy all the objects of idolatry (גּב and רמות, [Eze
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039), as in [Eze
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024), [Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)), then take from the harlot both
clothes and jewellery, and leave her naked, i.e., plunder Jerusalem and
lay it waste, and, lastly, execute upon her the punishment of death by
stoning and by sword; in other words, destroy both city and kingdom. The
words 'העלוּ , they bring (up) against thee an assembly, may be
explained from the ancient mode of administering justice, according to
which the popular assembly (qâhâl, cf. [Pro
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#014)) sat in judgment on cases of
adultery and capital crimes, and executed the sentence, as the law for
stoning expressly enjoins ([Lev 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002);
[Num 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#036); [Deu
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#021); compare my Bibl. Archol. II. p.
257). But they are also applicable to the foes, who would march against
Jerusalem (for qâhâl in this sense, compare [Eze
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#017)). The punishment of adultery
(according to [Lev 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010)) was death by
stoning, as we may see from Lev 20:2-27 and [Deu
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#024) compared with [Joh
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#005). This was the usual mode of
capital punishment under the Mosaic law, when judicial sentence of death
was pronounced upon individuals (see my Archol. II. p. 264). The other
form of punishment, slaying by the sword, was adopted when there were
many criminals to be put to death, and was not decapitation, but cutting
down or stabbing (bâthaq, to hew in pieces) with the sword (see my
Archol. l.c.). The punishment of death was rendered more severe by the
burning of the corpse ([Lev 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014);
[Lev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009)). Consequently the burning
of the houses in [Eze 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041) is also to
be regarded as intensifying the punishment; and it is in the same light
that the threat is to be regarded, that the judgment would be executed
"before the eyes of many women." The many women are the many heathen
nations, according to the description of Jerusalem or Israel as an
unfaithful wife. "As it is the greatest punishment to an adulterous
woman to be exposed in her sin before the eyes of other women; so will
the severest portion of Israel's punishment be, that it will stand
exposed in its sin before the eyes of all other nations" (Kliefoth).
This is the way in which God will put an end to the fornication, and
appease His wrath and jealousy upon the harlot ([Eze
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041) and [Eze
16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042)). השׁבּית, with מן, to cause a
person to cease to be or do anything. For [Eze
16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042), compare [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013). By the execution of the judgment
the jealousy (קנאה) of the injured husband is appeased.

[Eze 16:43-52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)

This judgment is perfectly just; for Israel has not only forgotten the
grace of its God manifested towards it in its election, but has even
surpassed both Samaria and Sodom in its abominations. - [Eze
16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043). Because thou hast not
remembered the days of thy youth, and hast raged against me in all this;
behold, I also give thy way upon thy head, is the saying of the Lord
Jehovah, that I may not do that which is wrong above all thine
abominations. [Eze 16:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044). Behold,
every one that useth proverbs will use this proverb concerning thee: as
the mother, so the daughter. [Eze
16:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045). Thou art the daughter of thy
mother, who casteth off her husband and her children; and thou art the
sister of thy sisters, who cast off their husbands and their children.
Your mother is a Hittite, and your father an Amorite. [Eze
16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046). And thy great sister is Samaria
with her daughters, who dwelleth at thy left; and thy sister, who is
smaller than thou, who dwelleth at thy right, is Sodom with her
daughters. [Eze 16:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#047). But thou hast
not walked in their ways and done according to their abominations a
little only; thou didst act more corruptly than they in all thy ways.
[Eze 16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048). As I live, is the saying
of the Lord Jehovah, Sodom thy sister, she with her daughters hath not
done as thou hast done with thy daughters. [Eze
16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049). Behold, this was the sin of
Sodom, thy sister: pride, superabundance of food, and rest undisturbed
had she with her daughters, and the hand of the poor and needy she did
not hold. [Eze 16:50](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#050). They were
haughty, and did abominations before me; and I swept them away when I
saw it. [Eze 16:51](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#051). And Samaria, she
hath not sinned to the half of thy sins; thou hast increased thine
abominations more than they, and hast made thy sisters righteous by all
thine abominations which thou hast done. [Eze
16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052). Bear, then, also thy shame,
which thou hast adjudged to thy sisters. Through thy sins, which thou
hast committed more abominably than they, they become more righteous
than thou. Be thou, then, also put to shame, and bear thy disgrace, as
thou hast justified thy sisters. - יען אשׁר, which corresponds to יען in
[Eze 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036), introduces a new train of
thought. Most of the commentators take [Eze
16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043) in connection with what
precedes, and place the pause at [Eze
16:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044). But the perfect נתתּי shows
that this is wrong. If [Eze 16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)
simply contained a recapitulation, or a concluding summary, of the
threat of judgment in [Eze 16:35-42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035),
the punishment would be announced in the future tense, as it is in [Eze
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037). By the perfect נתתּי, on the
contrary, the punishment is exhibited as a completed fact, and further
reasons are then assigned in vindication of the justice of the divine
procedure, which we find in [Eze
16:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044). To this end the guilt of
Jerusalem is mentioned once more: "thou didst not remember the days of
thy youth," i.e., what thou didst experience in thy youth; the misery in
which thou didst find thyself, and out of which I rescued thee and
exalted thee to glory ([Eze 16:4-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004)).
To this there was added rage against Jehovah, which manifested itself in
idolatrous acts. רגז , to be excited upon or against any person, to
rage; thus in Hithpael with אל in [Kg2
19:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#027). For נתן דּרך , compare [Eze
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#010). The last clause of [Eze
16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043), 'ולא עשׂיתי וגו, has been
misinterpreted in many ways. According to the Masoretic pointing, עשׂיתי
is the second person; but this does not yield a suitable meaning. For
עשׂה זמּה is not used in the sense adopted by the Targum, upon which the
Masoretic pointing is undoubtedly based, and which Raschi, Kimchi, and
Rosenmller retain, viz., cogitationem facere: "thou hast not take any
thought concerning all thy abominations," i.e., has not felt any
remorse. The true meaning is to commit a crime, a wrong, and is used for
the most part of unnatural offences (cf. [Jdg
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#006); [Hos
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009)). There is all the more reason for
retaining this meaning, that זמּה (apart from the plural זמּוה = מזמּות)
only occurs sensu malo, and for the most part in the sense of an immoral
action (vid., [Job 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#011)).
Consequently we should have to adopt the rendering: and thou no longer
committest this immorality above all thine abominations. But in that
case not only would עוד have to be supplied, but a distinction would be
drawn between the abominations committed by Israel and the sin of
lewdness, i.e., adultery, which is quite foreign to the connection and
to the contents of the entire chapter; for, according to these, the
abominations of Israel consisted in adultery or the sin of lewdness. We
must therefore take עשׂיתי as the first person, as Symm. and Jerome have
done, and explain the words from [Lev
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#029), where the toleration by a
father of the whoredom of a daughter is designated as zimmâh. If we
adopt this interpretation, Jehovah says that He has punished the
spiritual whoredom of Israel, in order that He may not add another act
of wrong to the abominations of Israel by allowing such immorality to go
on unpunished. If He did not punish, He would commit a zimmâh Himself, -
in other words, would make Himself accessory to the sins of Israel.

The concluding characteristic of the moral degradation of Israel fits in
very appropriately here in [Eze
16:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044)., in which Jerusalem is compared
to Samaria and Sodom, both of which had been punished long ago with
destruction on account of their sins. This characteristic is expressed
in the form of proverbial sayings. Every one who speaks in proverbs
(mōsheel, as in [Num 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027)) will then
say over thee: as the mother, so her daughter. Her abominable life is so
conspicuous, that it strikes every one, and furnishes occasion for
proverbial sayings. אמּה may be a feminine form of אם, as לבּה is of לב
([Eze 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030)); or it may also be a
Raphe form for אמהּ: as her (the daughter's) mother, so her (the
mother's) daughter (cf. Ewald, 174e, note, with 21, 223). The daughter
is of course Jerusalem, as the representative of Israel. The mother is
the Canaanitish race of Hittites and Amorites, whose immoral nature had
been adopted by Israel (cf. [Eze 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)
and [Eze 16:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045)). In [Eze
16:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045) the sisterly relation is added
to the maternal, to carry out the thought still further. Some difficulty
arises here from the statement, that the mothers and the sisters despise
their husbands and their children, or put them away. For it is
unquestionable that the participle גּעלת belongs to אמּך, and not to
בּת, from the parallel relative clause אשׁר גּעלוּ, which applies to the
sisters. The husband of the wife Jerusalem is Jehovah, as the
matrimonial head of the covenant nation or congregation of Israel. The
children of the wives, viz., the mother, her daughter, and her sisters,
are the children offered in sacrifice to Moloch. The worship of Moloch
was found among the early Canaanites, and is here attributed to Samaria
and Sodom also, though we have no other proofs of its existence there
than the references made to it in the Old Testament. The husband, whom
the mother and sisters have put away, cannot therefore be any other than
Jehovah; from which it is evident that Ezekiel regarded idolatry
generally as apostasy from Jehovah, and Jehovah as the God not only of
the Israelites, but of the heathen also.

(Note: Theodoret has explained it correctly in this way: "He shows by
this, that He is not the God of Jews only, but of Gentiles also; for God
once gave oracles to them, before they chose the abomination of
idolatry. Therefore he says that they also put away both the husband and
the children by denying God, and slaying the children to demons.")

אחותך ([Eze 16:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045)) is a plural noun,
as the relative clause which follows and [Eze
16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046) clearly show, and therefore is a
contracted form of אחותיך ([Eze 16:51](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#051))
or אחיותך ([Eze 16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052); vid., Ewald,
212b, p. 538). Samaria and Sodom are called sisters of Jerusalem, not
because both cities belonged to the same mother-land of Canaan, for the
origin of the cities does not come into consideration here at all, and
the cities represent the kingdoms, as the additional words "her
daughters," that is to say, the cities of a land or kingdom dependent
upon the capital, clearly prove. Samaria and Sodom, with the daughter
cities belonging to them, are sisters of Jerusalem in a spiritual sense,
as animated by the same spirit of idolatry. Samaria is called the great
(greater) sister of Jerusalem, and Sodom the smaller sister. This is not
equivalent to the older and the younger, for Samaria was not more deeply
sunk in idolatry than Sodom, nor was her idolatry more ancient than that
of Sodom (Theodoret and Grotius); and Hvernick's explanation, that "the
finer form of idolatry, the mixture of the worship of Jehovah with that
of nature, as represented by Samaria, was the first to find an entrance
into Judah, and this was afterwards followed by the coarser abominations
of heathenism," is unsatisfactory, for the simple reason that, according
to the historical books of the Old Testament, the coarser forms of
idolatry forced their way into Judah at quite as early a period as the
more refined. The idolatry of the time of Rehoboam and Abijam was not
merely a mixture of Jehovah-worship with the worship of nature, but the
introduction of heathen idols into Judah, along with which there is no
doubt that the syncretistic worship of the high places was also
practised. גּדול and קטן do not generally mean old and young, but great
and small. The transferred meaning old and young can only apply to men
and animals, when greatness and littleness are really signs of a
difference in age; but it is altogether inapplicable to kingdoms or
cities, the size of which is by no means dependent upon their age.
Consequently the expressions great and small simply refer to the extent
of the kingdoms or states here named, and correspond to the description
given of their situation: "at the left hand," i.e., to the north, and
"at the right hand," i.e., to the south of Jerusalem and Judah.

Jerusalem had not only equalled these sisters in sins and abominations,
but had acted more corruptly than they ([Eze
16:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#047)). The first hemistich of this
verse, "thou walkest not in their ways," etc., is more precisely defined
by ותּשׁחתי מהן in the second half. The link of connection between the
two statements is formed by כּמעט קט yb d. This is generally rendered,
"soon was there disgust," i.e., thou didst soon feel disgust at walking
in their ways, and didst act still worse. But apart from the fact that
while disgust at the way of the sisters might very well constitute a
motive for forsaking those ways, i.e., relinquishing their abominations,
it could not furnish a motive for surpassing those abominations. This
explanation is exposed to the philological difficulty, that קט by itself
cannot signify taeduit te, and the impersonal use of קוּט would at all
events require לך, which could not be omitted, even if קט were intended
for a substantive. These difficulties fall away if we interpret קט from
the Arabic qaṭṭ omninô tantum, as Alb. Schultens has done, and connect
the definition "a little only" with the preceding clause. We then obtain
this very appropriate thought: thou didst walk in the ways of thy
sisters; and that not a little only, but thou didst act still more
corruptly than they. This is proved in [Eze
16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048). by an enumeration of the sins
of Sodom. They were pride, satiety, - i.e., superabundance of bread
(vid., [Pro 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#009)), - and careless rest
or security, which produce haughtiness and harshness, or
uncharitableness, towards the poor and wretched. In this way Sodom and
her daughters (Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim) became proud and haughty,
and committed abominations לפני, i.e., before Jehovah (alluding to [Gen
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)); and God destroyed them when He
saw this. The sins of Samaria ([Eze
16:51](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#051)) are not specially mentioned,
because the principal sin of this kingdom, namely, image-worship, was
well known. It is simply stated, therefore, that she did not sin half so
much as Jerusalem; and in fact, if we except the times of Ahab and his
dynasty, pure heathenish idolatry did not exist in the kingdom of the
ten tribes, so that Samaria seemed really a righteous city in comparison
with the idolatry of Jerusalem and Judah, more especially from the time
of Ahaz onward (vid., [Jer 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011)). The
punishment of Samaria by the destruction of the kingdom of the ten
tribes is also passed over as being well known to every Israelite; and
in [Eze 16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052) the application is
directly made to Jerusalem, i.e., to Judah: "Thou also, bear thy shame,
thou who hast adjudged to thy sisters," - sc. by pronouncing an
uncharitable judgment upon them, thinking thyself better than they,
whereas thou hast sinned more abominably, so that they appear more
righteous than thou. צדק, to be righteous, and צדּק, to justify, are
used in a comparative sense. In comparison with the abominations of
Jerusalem, the sins of Sodom and Samaria appeared perfectly trivial.
After וגם אתּ , the announcement of punishment is repeated for the sake
of emphasis, and that in the form of a consequence resulting from the
sentence with regard to the nature of the sin: therefore be thou also
put to shame, and bear thy disgrace.

[Ezekiel 16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">eze 16:53</span></span>

But this disgrace will not be the conclusion. Because of the covenant
which the Lord concluded with Israel, Jerusalem will not continue in
misery, but will attain to the glory promised to the people of God; -
and that in such a way that all boasting will be excluded, and Judah,
with the deepest shame, will attain to a knowledge of the true
compassion of God. - Yet, in order that all false confidence in the
gracious promises of God may be prevented, and the sinful nation be
thoroughly humbled, this last section of our word of God announces the
restoration of Sodom and Samaria as well as that of Jerusalem, so that
all boasting on the part of Israel is precluded. - [Eze
16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053). And I will turn their
captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity
of Samaria and her daughters, and the captivity of thy captivity in the
midst of them: [Eze 16:54](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#054). That thou
mayest bear thy shame, and be ashamed of all that thou hast done, in
comforting them. [Eze 16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055). And thy
sisters, Sodom and her daughters, will return to their first estate; and
Samaria and her daughters will return to their first estate; and thou
and thy daughters will return to your first estate. [Eze
16:56](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#056). And Sodom thy sister was not a
discourse in thy mouth in the day of thy haughtinesses, [Eze
16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057). Before thy wickedness was
disclosed, as at the time of the disgrace of the daughters of Aram and
all its surroundings, the daughters of the Philistines, who despised
thee round about. [Eze 16:58](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#058). Thy
wrong-doing and all thy abominations, thou bearest them, is the saying
of Jehovah. [Eze 16:59](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#059). For thus saith
the Lord Jehovah, And I do with thee as thou hast done, who hast
despised oath to break covenant. [Eze
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060). And I shall remember my
covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and shall establish an
everlasting covenant with thee. [Eze
16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061). And thou wilt remember thy
ways, and be ashamed, when thou receivest thy sisters, those greater
than thou to those smaller than thou; and I give them to thee for
daughters, although they are not of thy covenant. [Eze
16:62](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#062). And I will establish my
covenant with thee; and thou wilt perceive that I am Jehovah; [Eze
16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063). That thou mayest remember, and
be ashamed, and there may no longer remain to thee an opening of the
mouth because of thy disgrace, when I forgive thee all that thou hast
done, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah. - The promise commences with an
announcement of the restoration, not of Jerusalem, but of Sodom and
Samaria. The two kingdoms, or peoples, upon which judgment first fell,
shall also be the first to receive mercy; and it will not be till after
then that Jerusalem, with the other cities of Judah, will also be
restored to favour, in order that she may bear her disgrace, and be
ashamed of her sins ([Eze 16:54](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#054)); that
is to say, not because Sodom and Samaria have borne their punishment for
a longer time, but to the deeper shaming, the more complete humiliation
of Jerusalem. שׁוּב שׁבוּת, to turn the captivity, not "to bring back
the captives" (see the comm. on [Deu
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003)), is here used in a figurative
sense for restitutio in statum integritatis, according to the
explanation given of the expression in [Eze
16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055). No carrying away, or captivity,
took place in the case of Sodom. The form שׁבית, which the Chetib has
adopted several times here, has just the same meaning as שׁבוּת. שׁבית
שׁביתיך does not mean the captives of thy captivity, since the same word
cannot be used first as a concrete and then as an abstract noun; nor
does the combination serve to give greater emphasis, in the sense of a
superlative - viz. "the captivity of thy captivities, equivalent to thy
severest or most fearful captivity," - as Stark and Hvernick suppose.
The genitive must be taken as explanatory, as already proposed by
Hengstenberg and Kliefoth: "captivity, which is thy captivity;" and the
pleonastic mode of expression is chosen to give greater prominence to
the thought, "thine own captivity," than would have been given to it by
a suffix attached to the simple noun. בּתוכהנה, in their midst, does not
imply, that just as Judah was situated now in the very midst between
Sodom and Samaria, so its captives would return home occupying the
centre between those two (Hitzig); the reference is rather to fellowship
in captivity, to the fact that Jerusalem would share the same fate, and
endure the same punishment, as Samaria and Sodom (Hengst., Klief.). The
concluding words of [Eze 16:54](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#054), "in
that thou comfortest them," do not refer to the sins already committed
by Israel (as Kliefoth, who adopts the rendering, "didst comfort them,"
imagines), but to the bearing of such disgrace as makes Jerusalem
ashamed of its sins. By bearing disgrace, i.e., by its endurance of
well-merited and disgraceful punishment, Jerusalem consoles her sisters
Samaria and Sodom; and that not merely by fellowship in misfortune, -
solamen miseris etc. , (Calvin, Hitzig, etc.), - but by the fact that
from the punishment endured by Jerusalem, both Samaria and Sodom can
discern the righteousness of the ways of God, and find therein a
foundation for their hope, that the righteous God will bring to an end
the merited punishment as soon as its object has been attained (see the
comm. on [Eze 14:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022)). The turning
of the captivity, according to [Eze
16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055), will consist in the fact that
Sodom, Samaria, and Jerusalem return לקדמתן, to their original state.
קדמה does not mean the former or earlier state, but the original state,
as in [Isa 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#007). Kliefoth is wrong,
however, in explaining this as meaning: "as they were, when they came in
Adam from the creative hand of God." The original state is the status
integritatis, not as a state of sinlessness or original righteousness
and holiness, - for neither Jerusalem on the one hand, nor Samaria and
Sodom on the other, had ever been in such a state as this, - but as an
original state of glory, in which they were before they had fallen and
sunk into ungodly ways.

But how could a restoration of Sodom and her daughters (Gomorrah, etc.)
be predicted, when the destruction of these cities was accompanied by
the sweeping away of all their inhabitants from off the face of the
earth? Many of the commentators have attempted to remove the difficulty
by assuming that Sodom here stands for the Moabites and Ammonites, who
were descendants of Lot, who escaped from Sodom. But the untenableness
of such an explanation is obvious, from the simple fact that the
Ammonites and Moabites were no more Sodomites than Lot himself. And the
view expressed by Origen and Jerome, and lately revived by Hvernick,
that Sodom is a typical name denoting heathenism generally, is also
unsatisfactory. The way in which Sodom is classed with Samaria and
Jerusalem, and the special reference to the judgment that fell upon
Sodom ([Eze 16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049), [Eze
16:50](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#050)), point undeniably to the real
Sodom. The heathen world comes into consideration only so far as this,
that the pardon of a heathen city, so deeply degraded as Sodom, carries
with it the assurance that mercy will be extended to all heathen
nations. We must therefore take the words as referring to the literal
Sodom. Yet we certainly cannot for a moment think of any earthly
restoration of Sodom. For even if we could conceive of a restoration of
the cities that were destroyed by fire, and sunk into the depths of the
Dead Sea, it is impossible to form any conception of an earthly and
corporeal restoration of the inhabitants of those cities, who ere
destroyed at the same time; and in this connection it is chiefly to them
that the words refer. This does not by any means prove that the thing
itself is impossible, but simply that the realization of the prophecy
must be sought for beyond the present order of things, in one that
extends into the life everlasting.

As [Eze 16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055) elucidates the contents
of [Eze 16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053), so the thought of [Eze
16:54](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#054) is explained and still further
expanded in [Eze 16:56](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#056) and [Eze
16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057). The meaning of [Eze
16:56](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#056) is a subject of dispute; but so
much is indisputable, that the attempt to Kliefoth to explain [Eze
16:56](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#056) and [Eze
16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057) as referring to the future, and
signifying that in the coming day of its glory Israel will no longer
carry Sodom as a legend in its mouth as it does now, does violence to
the grammar, and is quite a mistake. It is no more allowable to take ולא
היתה as a future, in the sense of "and will not be," than to render כּמו
עת חרפּת redner ot naht " ([Eze
16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057)), "it will be like the time of
scorn." Moreover, the application of בּיום גּאוניך to the day of future
glory is precluded by the fact that in [Eze
16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049) the word גּאון is used to denote
the pride which was the chief sin of Sodom; and the reference to this
verse very naturally suggests itself. The meaning of [Eze
16:56](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#056) depends upon the rendering to be
given to לשׁמוּעה. The explanation given by Rosenmller and Maurer, after
Jerome, - viz. non erat in auditione, i.e., non audiebatur, thou didst
not think at all of Sodom, didst not take its name into thy mouth, - is
by no means satisfactory. שׁמוּעה means proclamation, discourse, and
also report. If we adopt the last, we must take the sentence as
interrogatory (לוא for הלוא), as Hengstenberg and Hitzig have done.
Although this is certainly admissible, there are no clear indexes here
to warrant our assumption of an interrogation, which is only hinted at
by the tone. We therefore prefer the meaning "discourse:" thy sister
Sodom was not a discourse in thy mouth in the day of thy haughtinesses,
that thou didst talk of the fate of Sodom and lay it to heart when thou
wast in prosperity. The plural גּאוניך is more emphatic than the
singular. The day of the haughtinesses is defined in [Eze
16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057) as the period before the
wickedness of Judah had been disclosed. This was effected by means of
the judgment, which burst upon Jerusalem on the part of Babylon. Through
this judgment Jerusalem is said to have been covered with disgrace, as
at the time when the daughters of Aram, i.e., the cities of Syria, and
those of the Philistines (Aram on the east, and the Philistines on the
west, Isa 9; 11), scorned and maltreated it round about. This refers
primarily to the times of Ahaz, when the Syrians and Philistines pressed
hard upon Judah ([Kg2 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037); [Kg2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006); and [Ch2
28:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)). It must not be restricted
to this, however; but was repeated in the reign of Jehoiachin, when
Jehovah sent troops of the Chaldaeans, Aramaeans, Ammonites, and
Moabites against him, to destroy Judah ([Kg2
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002)). It is true, the Philistines are
not mentioned here; but from the threat in [Eze
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#015), we may infer that they also
attempted at the same time to bring disgrace upon Judah. שׁאט = שׁוּט,
according to Aramaean usage, to treat contemptuously, or with
repudiation (cf. [Eze 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#024), [Eze
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#026)). Jerusalem will have to atone
for this pride, and to bear its wrong-doing and its abominations ([Eze
16:58](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#058)). For zimmâh, see the comm. on
[Eze 16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043). The perfect נשׂאתים
indicates that the certainty of the punishment is just as great as if it
had already commenced. The reason assigned for this thought in [Eze
16:59](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#059) forms a transition to the
further expansion of the promise in [Eze
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060). ועשׂית ([Eze
16:59](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#059)) has been correctly pointed by
the Masoretes as the 1st person. The ו is copulative, and shows that
what follows forms the concluding summary of all that precedes. אותך for
אתּך, as in [Eze 16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060), etc., to deal
with any one. The construction of עשׂה, with an accusative of the
person, to treat any one, cannot be sustained either from [Eze
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#017) and [Eze
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#025), or from [Jer
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#009); and Gesenius is wrong in
assuming that we meet with it in [Isa
42:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#016).

Despising the oath (אלה) points back to [Deu
29:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#011), where the renewal of the
covenant concluded at Sinai is described as an entrance into the
covenant and oath which the Lord then made with His people. - But even
if Israel has faithlessly broken the covenant, and must bear the
consequence punishment, the unfaithfulness of man can never alter the
faithfulness of God. This is the link of connection between the
resumption and further expansion of the promise in [Eze
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060) and the closing words of [Eze
16:59](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#059). The remembrance of His covenant
ins mentioned in [Lev 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042) and [Lev
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#045) as the only motive that will
induce God to restore Israel to favour again, when the humiliation
effected by the endurance of punishment has brought it to a confession
of its sins. The covenant which God concluded with Israel in the day of
its youth, i.e., when He led it out of Egypt, He will establish as an
everlasting covenant. Consequently it is not an entirely new covenant,
but simply the perfecting of the old one for everlasting duration. For
the fact itself, compare [Isa 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003),
where the making of the everlasting covenant is described as granting
the stedfast mercies of David, i.e., as the fulfilment of the promise
given to David (2 Sam 7). This promise is called by David himself an
everlasting covenant which God had made with him ([Sa2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005)). And the assurance of its
everlasting duration was to be found in the fact that this covenant did
not rest upon the fulfilment of the law, but simply upon the forgiving
grace of God (compare [Eze 16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063) with
[Jer 31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)). - The bestowal of this
grace will put Israel in remembrance of its ways, and fill it with
shame. In this sense, וזכרתּ (and thou shalt remember), in [Eze
16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061), is placed side by side with
זכרתּי (I will remember) in [Eze
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060). This shame will seize upon
Israel when the establishment of an everlasting covenant is followed by
the greater and smaller nations being associated with it in glory, and
incorporated into it as children, though they are not of its covenant.
The greater and smaller sisters are the greater and smaller nations, as
members of the universal family of man, who are to be exalted to the
glory of one large family of God. The restoration, which is promised in
[Eze 16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053) and [Eze
16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055) to Sodom and Samaria alone, is
expanded here into a prophecy of the reception of all the greater and
smaller nations into fellowship in the glory of the people of God. We
may see from this that Sodom and Samaria represent the heathen nations
generally, as standing outside the Old Testament dispensation: Sodom
representing those that were sunk in the deepest moral degradation, and
Samaria those that had fallen from the state of grace. The attitude in
which these nations stand towards Israel in the everlasting covenant of
grace, is defined as the relation of daughters to a mother. If,
therefore, Israel, which has been thrust out among the heathen on
account of its deep fall, is not to return to its first estate till
after the return of Sodom, which has been destroyed, and Samaria, which
has been condemned, the election of Israel before all the nations of the
earth to be the first-born son of Jehovah will continue unchanged, and
Israel will form the stem of the new kingdom of God, into which the
heathen nations will be incorporated. The words, "and not of thy
covenant," have been taken by most of the commentators in the sense of,
"not because thou hast kept the covenant;" but this is certainly
incorrect. For even if "thy covenant" really formed an antithesis to "my
covenant" ([Eze 16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060) and [Eze
16:62](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#062)), "thy covenant" could not
possibly signify the fulfilment of thy covenant obligations. The words
belong to bânōth (daughters), who are thereby designated as
extra-testamental - i.e., as not included in the covenant which God made
with Israel, and consequently as having no claim by virtue of that
covenant to participate in the glory of the everlasting covenant which
is hereafter to be established. - When this covenant has been
established, Israel will know that God is Jehovah, the unchangeably true
(for the meaning of the name Jehovah, see the commentary on [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)); that it may call to mind, sc.
both its sinful abominations and the compassionate grace of God, and be
so filled with shame and penitence that it will no more venture to open
its mouth, either for the purpose of finding excuses for its previous
fall, or to murmur against God and His judgments, - namely, when the
Lord forgives all its sins by establishing the everlasting covenant, the
kernel and essence of which consists in the forgiveness of sins (cf.
[Jer 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)). Thus will the experience
of forgiving grace complete what judgment has already begun, viz., the
transformation of proud and haughty sinners into meek and humble
children of God, for whom the kingdom has been prepared from the
beginning.

This thought brings the entire prophecy to a close, - a prophecy which
embraces the whole of the world's history and the New Testament, the
parallel to which is contained in the apostle's words, "God hath
concluded them all in unbelief, that He might have mercy upon all" ([Rom
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)). - As the punishment threatened
to the adulteress, i.e., to the nation of Israel that had despised its
God and King, had been fulfilled upon Jerusalem and the Jews, and is in
process of fulfilment still, so has the promise also been already
fulfilled, so far as its commencement is concerned, though the complete
and ultimate fulfilment is only to be expected in time to come. The
turning of the captivity, both of Jerusalem and her daughters, and of
Samaria and her daughters, commenced with the establishment of the
everlasting covenant, i.e., of the covenant made through Christ, and
with the reception of the believing portion of Israel in Judaea,
Samaria, and Galilee ([Act 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005)., [Act
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#025), [Act
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031)). And the turning of the
captivity of Sodom commenced with the spread of the gospel among the
heathen, and their entrance into the kingdom of Christ, inasmuch as
Sodom with her daughters represents the morally degraded heathen world.
Their reception into the kingdom of heaven, founded by Christ on earth,
forms the commencement of the return of the forgiven to their first
estate on the "restitution of all things," i.e., the restoration of all
moral relations to their original normal constitution (compare [Act
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021) and Meyer's comm. thereon with
[Mat 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011)), which will attain its
perfection in the παλιγγενεσία, the general restoration of the world to
its original glory (compare [Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)
with [Rom 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018). and [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013)). The prophecy before us in [Eze
16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055) clearly points to this final
goal. It is true that one might understand the return of Jerusalem and
Samaria to their original state, which is predicted here as simply
relating to the pardon of the covenant nation, whose apostasy had led to
the rejection of both its parts; and this pardon might be sought in its
reception into the kingdom of Christ and its restoration as the people
of God. In that case the complete fulfilment of our prophecy would take
place during the present aeon in the spread of the gospel among all
nations, and the conversion of that portion of Israel which still
remained hardened after the entrance of the full number of the Gentiles
into the kingdom of God. But this limitation would be out of harmony
with the equality of position assigned to Sodom and her daughters on the
one hand, and Samaria and Jerusalem on the other. Though Sodom is not
merely a type of the heathen world, the restoration of Sodom and her
daughters cannot consist in the reception of the descendants of the
cities on which the judgment fell into the kingdom of God or the
Christian Church, since the peculiar manner in which those cities were
destroyed prevented the possibility of any of the inhabitants remaining
alive whose descendants could be converted to Christ and blessed in Him
during the present period of the world. On the other hand, the opinion
expressed by C. a Lapide, that the restoration of Sodom is to be
referred and restricted to the conversion of the descendants of the
inhabitants of Zoar, which was spared for Lot's sake, when the other
cities of the plain were destroyed, is too much at variance with the
words of the passage to allow of our accepting such a solution as this.
The turning of the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, i.e., the
forgiveness of the inhabitants of Sodom and the other cities of the
plain, points beyond the present aeon, and the realization can only take
place on the great day of the resurrection of the dead in the persons of
the former inhabitants of Sodom and the neighbouring cities. And in the
same way the restoration of Samaria and Jerusalem will not be completely
fulfilled till after the perfecting of the kingdom of Christ in glory at
the last day.

Consequently the prophecy before us goes beyond [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)., inasmuch as it presents, not
to the covenant nation only, but, in Samaria and Sodom, to all the
larger and smaller heathen nations also, the prospect of being
eventually received into the everlasting kingdom of God; although, in
accordance with the main purpose of this prophetic word, namely, to
bring the pride of Israel completely down, this is simply hinted at, and
no precise intimation is given of the manner in which the predicted
apokatastasis will occur. But notwithstanding this indefiniteness, we
must not explain away the fact itself by arbitrary expositions, since it
is placed beyond all possible doubt by other passages of Scriptures. The
words of our Lord in [Mat 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015) and
[Mat 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024), to the effect that it will
be more tolerable in the day of judgment for Sodom than for Capernaum
and every other city that shall have rejected the preaching of the
gospel, teach most indisputably that the way of mercy stands open still
even for Sodom itself, and that the judgment which has fallen upon it
does not carry with it the final decision with regard to its
inhabitants. For Sodom did not put away the perfect revelation of mercy
and salvation. If the mighty works which were done in Capernaum had been
done in Sodom, it would have stood to the present day ([Mat
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023)). And from this it clearly
follows that all the judgments which fell before the time of Christ,
instead of carrying with them the final decision, and involving eternal
damnation, leave the possibility of eventual pardon open still. The last
judgment, which is decisive for eternity, does not take place till after
the full revelation of grace and truth in Christ. Not only will the
gospel be preached to all nations before the end comes ([Mat
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)), but even to the dead; to the
spirits in prison, who did not believe at the time of Noah, it has been
already preached, at the time when Christ went to them in spirit, in
order that, although judged according to man's way in the flesh, they
might live according to God's way in the spirit ([Pe1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019); [Pe1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#006)). What the apostle teaches in the
first of these passages concerning the unbelievers before the flood, and
affirms in the second concerning the dead in general, is equally
applicable according to our prophecy to the Sodomites who were judged
after man's way in the flesh, and indeed generally to all heathen
nations who either lived before Christ or departed from this earthly
life without having heard the gospel preached. - It is according to
these distinct utterances of the New Testament that the prophecy before
us respecting the apokatastasis of Sodom, Samaria, and Jerusalem is to
be interpreted; and this is not to be confounded with the heretical
doctrine of the restoration, i.e., the ultimate salvation of all the
ungodly, and even of the devil himself. If the preaching of the gospel
precedes the last judgment, the final sentence in the judgment will be
regulated by the attitude assumed towards the gospel by both the living
and the dead. All souls that obstinately reject it and harden themselves
in unbelief, will be given up to everlasting damnation. The reason why
the conversion of Sodom and Samaria is not expressly mentioned, is to be
found in the general tendency of the promise, in which the simple fact
is announced without the intermediate circumstances, for the purpose of
humbling Jerusalem. The conversion of Jerusalem also is not definitely
stated to be the condition of pardon, but this is assumed as well known
from the words of Lev 26, and is simply implied in the repeated
assertion that Jerusalem will be seized with the deepest shame on
account of the pardon which she receives.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 17](eze017)

</div>
