<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze019)  [Next](eze021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001)

[Ezekiel 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 20:1</span></span>

The date given in [Eze 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001) applies
not only to Ezekiel 20, but also to Ezekiel 20-23 (compare [Eze
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001)); the prophetic utterances in
these four chapters being bound together into a group of connected words
of God, both by their contents and by the threefold repetition of the
expression, "wilt thou judge?" (vid., [Eze
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#004); [Eze
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#002), and [Eze
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#036)). The formula התשׁפּוט, which is
only omitted from the threat of punishment contained in Ezekiel 21,
indicates at the same time both the nature and design of these words of
God. The prophet is to judge, i.e., to hold up before the people once
more their sinful abominations, and to predict the consequent
punishment. The circumstance which occasioned this is narrated in [Eze
20:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001). Men of the elders of Israel
came to the prophet to inquire of the Lord. The occasion is therefore a
similar one to that described in the previous group; for we have already
been informed, in [Eze 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001), that
elders had come to the prophet to hear God's word from him; but they had
not gone so far as to inquire. Here, however (Ezekiel 20), they
evidently address a question to the prophet, and through him to the
Lord; though the nature of their inquiry is not given, and can only be
gathered from the answer, which was given to them by the Lord through
the prophet. The ground for the following words of God is therefore
essentially the same as for those contained in Ezekiel 14-19; and this
serves to explain the relation in which the two groups stand to each
other, namely, that Ezekiel 20-24 simply contain a further expansion of
the reproachful and threatening addresses of Ezekiel 14-19.

In Ezekiel 20 the prophet points out to the elders, in the form of a
historical survey, how rebellious Israel had been towards the Lord from
the very first, even in Egypt ([Eze
20:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005)) and the desert ([Eze
20:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#010) and [Eze
20:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018)), both the older and the
later generations, how they had sinned against the Lord their God
through their idolatry, and how it was only for His own name's sake that
the Lord had not destroyed them in His anger ([Eze
20:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#027)). And as Israel hath not
given up idolatry even in Canaan, the Lord would not suffer Himself to
be inquired of by the idolatrous generation, but would refine it by
severe judgments among the nations ([Eze
20:32-38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032)), and sanctify it thereby
into a people well-pleasing to Him, and would then gather it again out
of the dispersion, and bring it into the land promised to the fathers,
where it would serve Him with sacrifices and gifts upon His holy
mountain ([Eze 20:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039)). This word of
God is therefore a more literal repetition of the allegorical
description contained in Ezekiel 16.

Date, occasion, and theme of the discourse which follows. - [Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001). And it came to pass in the
seventh year, in the fifth (moon), on the tenth of the moon, there came
men of the elders of Israel, to inquire of Jehovah, and sat down before
me. [Eze 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#002). Then the word of
Jehovah came to me, saying, [Eze 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#003).
Son of man, speak to the elders of Israel, and say to them, Thus saith
the Lord Jehovah, Have ye come to inquire of me? As I live, if I suffer
myself to be inquired of by you, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah. [Eze
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#004). Wilt thou judge them? Wilt thou
judge, O son of man? Make known the abominations of their fathers to
them. - If we compare the date given in [Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001) with [Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001), we shall find that this word of
God was uttered only eleven months and five days after the one in
Ezekiel 8; two years, one month, and five days after the call of Ezekiel
to be a prophet ([Eze 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)); and two
years and five months before the blockading of Jerusalem by the
Chaldeans ([Eze 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001)). Consequently it
falls almost in the middle of the first section of Ezekiel's prophetic
work. דּרשׁ את , to seek Jehovah, i.e., to ask a revelation from Him.
The Lord's answer in [Eze 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#003) is
similar to that in [Eze 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003). Instead
of giving a revelation concerning the future, especially with regard to
the speedy termination of the penal sufferings, which the elders had, no
doubt, come to solicit, the prophet is to judge them, i.e., as the
following clause explains, not only in the passage before us, but also
in [Eze 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#003) and [Eze
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#036), to hold up before them the sins
and abominations of Israel. It is in anticipation of the following
picture of the apostasy of the nation from time immemorial that the sins
of the fathers are mentioned here. "No reply is given to the sinners,
but chiding for their sins; and He adds the oath, 'as I live,' that the
sentence of refusal may be all the stronger" (Jerome). The question
התשׁפּוט, which is repeated with emotion, "gives expression to an
impatient wish, that the thing could have been done already" (Hitzig).
The interrogative form of address is therefore adopted simply as a more
earnest mode of giving expression to the command to go and do the thing.
Hence the literal explanation of the word התשׁפּוט is also appended in
the form of an imperative (הודיעם). - The prophet is to revert to the
sins of the fathers, not merely for the purpose of exhibiting the
magnitude of the people's guilt, but also to hold up before the sinners
themselves, the patience and long-suffering which have hitherto been
displayed by the Lord.

[Ezekiel 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 20:5</span></span>

Election of Israel in Egypt. Its resistance to the commandments of God.
- [Eze 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005). And say to them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, In the day that I chose Israel, and lifted my
hand to the seed of Jacob, and made myself known to them in the land of
Egypt, and lifted my hand to them, saying, I am Jehovah, your God: [Eze
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006). In that day I lifted my hand to
them, to bring them out of the land of Egypt into the land which I
sought out for them, which floweth with milk and honey - it is an
ornament of all lands: [Eze 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007). And
said to them, Cast away every man the abominations of his eyes, and do
not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt. I am Jehovah, your God.
[Eze 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#008). But they were rebellious
against me, and would not hearken to me. Not one of them threw away the
abominations of his eyes, and they did not forsake the idols of Egypt.
Then I thought to pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger
upon them in the midst of the land of Egypt. [Eze
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#009). But I did it for my name's sake,
that it might not be profaned before the eyes of the nations, in the
midst of which they were, before whose eyes I had made myself known to
them, to bring them out of the land of Egypt. - [Eze
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005) and [Eze
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006) form one period. בּיּום בּחרי
([Eze 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005)) is resumed in בּיּום ההוּא
([Eze 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006)), and the sentence
continued. With ואשּׂא the construction with the infinitive passes over
into the finite verb. Lifting the hand, sc. to heaven, is a gesture
employed in taking an oath (see the comm. on [Exo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008)). The substance of the oath is
introduced by the word לאמר at the close of [Eze
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005); but the clause 'ואוּדע וגו (and
made myself known) is previously inserted, and then the lifting of the
hand mentioned again to indicate the importance of this act of divine
grace. The contents of [Eze 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005) and
[Eze 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006) rest upon [Exo
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002)., where the Lord makes Himself
known to Moses, and through him to the children of Israel, according to
the nature involved in the name Jehovah, in which He had not yet
revealed Himself to the patriarchs ([Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003)). Both נשׂאתי ידי (I lifted my
hand) and אני יהוה are taken from [Exo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008). The word תּרתּי, from תּוּר, to
seek out, explore, also belongs to the Pentateuch (compare [Deu
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#033)); and the same may be said of the
description given of Canaan as "a land flowing with milk and honey"
(vid., [Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008), etc.). But צבי,
ornament, as an epithet applied to the land of Israel, is first employed
by the prophets of the time of the captivity - namely, in [Eze
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006) and [Eze
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#015) of this chapter, in [Jer
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019), and in [Dan
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009); [Dan
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016), [Dan
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#041). The election of the Israelites
to be the people of Jehovah, contained eo ipso the command to give up
the idols of Egypt, although it was at Sinai that the worship of other
gods was for the first time expressly prohibited ([Exo
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003)), and Egyptian idolatry is only
mentioned in [Lev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007) (cf. [Jos
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014)). Ezekiel calls the idols
"abominations of their eyes," because, "although they were abominable
and execrable things, they were looked upon with delight by them"
(Rosenmller). It is true that there is nothing expressly stated in the
Pentateuch as to the refusal of the Israelites to obey the command of
God, or their unwillingness to give up idolatry in Egypt; but it may be
inferred from the statements contained in [Exo
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#009) and [Exo
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#012), to the effect that the
Israelites did not hearken to Moses when he communicated to them the
determination of God to lead them out of Egypt, and still more plainly
from their relapse into Egyptian idolatry, from the worship of the
golden calf at Sinai (Ex 32), and from their repeated desire to return
to Egypt while wandering in the desert.

(Note: The remarks of Calvin upon this point are very good. "We do not
learn directly from Moses," he says, "that they had been rebels against
God, because they would not throw away their idols and superstitions;
but the conjecture is a very probable one, that they had always been so
firmly fixed in their abominations as to prevent in a certain way the
hand of God from bringing them relief. And assuredly, if they had
embraced what Moses promised them in the name of God with promptness of
mind, the execution of the promise would have been more prompt and
swift. But we may learn that it was their own obtuseness which hindered
God from stretching out His hand forthwith and actually fulfilling all
that He had promised. It was necessary, indeed, that God should contend
with Pharaoh, that His power might be more conspicuously displayed; but
the people would not have been so tyrannically afflicted if they had not
closed the door of divine mercy.")

Nor is there anything said in the Pentateuch concerning the
determination of God to pour out His wrath upon the idolatrous people in
Egypt. We need not indeed assume on this account that Ezekiel derived
his information from some special traditional source, as Vitringa has
done ObservV. ss. I. 263), or regard the statement as a revelation made
by God to Ezekiel, and through him to us. The words do not disclose to
us either a particular fact or a definite decree of God; they simply
contain a description of the attitude which God, from His inmost nature,
assumes towards sinners who rebel against His holy commandments, and
which He displayed both in the declaration made concerning Himself as a
zealous, or jealous God, who visits iniquities ([Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)), and also in the words addressed
to Moses when the people fell into idolatry at Sinai, "Let me alone,
that my wrath may wax not against them, and that I may consume them"
([Exo 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010)). All that God expresses
here, His heart must have felt in Egypt towards the people who would not
desist from idolatry. For the words themselves, compare [Eze
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#008); [Eze
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#012); [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013). ואעשׂ ([Eze
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#009)), "but I did it for my name's
sake." The missing object explaining what He did, namely, abstain from
pouring out His wrath, is to be gathered from what follows: "that I
might not profane my name." This would have taken place if God had
destroyed Israel by pouring out His wrath; in other words, have allowed
them to be destroyed by the Egyptians. The heathen might then have said
that Jehovah had been unable to liberate His people from their hand and
power (cf. [Num 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#016) and [Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012)). החל is an infin. Niphal of חלל
for החל (cf. [Lev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#004)).

[Ezekiel 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 20:10</span></span>

Behaviour of Israel in the Desert

[Eze 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#010). And I led them out of the
land of Egypt, and brought them into the desert; [Eze
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#011). And gave them my statutes, and
my rights I made known to them, which man is to do that he may live
through them. [Eze 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012). I also gave
them my Sabbaths, that they might be for a sign between me and them,
that they might now that I Jehovah sanctify them. [Eze
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013). But the house of Israel was
rebellious against me in the desert: they did not walk in my statutes,
and my rights they rejected, which man is to do, that he may live
through them, and my Sabbaths they greatly profaned: Then I thought to
pour out my wrath upon them in the desert to destroy them. [Eze
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#014). But I did it for my name's
sake, that it might not be profaned before the eyes of the nations,
before whose eyes I had led them out. [Eze
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#015). I also lifted my hand to them
in the desert, not to bring them into the land which I had given (them),
which floweth with milk and honey; it is an ornament of all lands, [Eze
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#016). Because they rejected my
rights, did not walk in my statutes, and profaned my Sabbaths, for their
heart went after their idols. [Eze
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#017). But my eye looked with pity
upon them, so that I did not destroy them, and make an end of them in
the desert. - God gave laws at Sinai to the people whom He had brought
out of Egypt, through which they were to be sanctified as His own
people, that they might live before God. On [Eze
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#011) compare [Deu
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#016) and [Deu
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019). [Eze
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012) is taken almost word for word
from [Exo 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013), where God concludes
the directions for His worship by urging upon the people in the most
solemn manner the observance of His Sabbaths, and thereby pronounces the
keeping of the Sabbath the kernel of all divine worship. And as in that
passage we are to understand by the Sabbaths the actual weekly Sabbaths,
and not the institutions of worship as a whole, so here we must retain
the literal signification of the word. It is only of the Sabbath
recurring every week, and not of all the fasts, that it could be said it
was a sign between Jehovah and Israel. It was a sign, not as a token,
that they who observed it were Israelites, as Hitzig supposes, but to
know (that they might know) that Jehovah was sanctifying them, namely,
by the Sabbath rest - as a refreshing and elevation of the mind, in
which Israel was to have a foretaste of that blessed resting from all
works to which the people of God was ultimately to attain (see the comm.
on [Exo 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#011)). It is from this deeper
signification of the Sabbath that the prominence given to the Sabbaths
here is to be explained, and not from the outward circumstance that in
exile, when the sacrificial worship was necessarily suspended, the
keeping of the Sabbath as the only bond which united the Israelites, so
far as the worship of God was concerned (Hitzig). Historical examples of
the rebellion of Israel against the commandments of God in the desert
are given in ex. [Eze 32:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#001) and [Num
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001); and of the desecration of the
Sabbath, in ex. [Eze 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027) and [Num
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032). For the threat referred to in
[Eze 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013), compare [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010); [Num
14:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011). - [Eze
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#015) and [Eze
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#016) are not a repetition of [Eze
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013) (Hitzig); nor do they introduce
a limitation of [Eze 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#014) (Kliefoth).
They simply relate what else God did to put bounds to the rebellion
after He had revoked the decree to cut Israel off, at the intercession
of Moses ([Num 14:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011)). He lifted
His hand to the oath ([Num 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#021).),
that the generation which had come out of Egypt should not come into the
land of Canaan, but should die in the wilderness. Therewith He looked
with pity upon the people, so that He did not make an end of them by
following up the threat with a promise that the children should enter
the land. עשׂה כלה, as in [Eze 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013).

[Ezekiel 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 20:18</span></span>

The Generation that Grew Up in the Desert

[Eze 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018). And I spake to their sons
in the desert, Walk not in the statutes of your fathers, and keep not
their rights, and do not defile yourselves with their idols. [Eze
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#019). I am Jehovah your God; walk in
my statutes, and keep my rights, and do them, [Eze
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#020). And sanctify my Sabbaths, that
they may be for a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am
Jehovah your God. [Eze 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#021). But the
sons were rebellious against me; they walked not in my statutes, and did
not keep my rights, to do them, which man should do that he may live
through them; they profaned my Sabbaths. Then I thought to pour out my
wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger upon them in the desert. [Eze
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#022). But I turned back my hand and
did it for my name's sake, that it might not be profaned before the eyes
of the nations, before whose eyes I had them out. [Eze
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#023). I also lifted my hand to them
in the desert, to scatter them among the nations, and to disperse them
in the lands; [Eze 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#024). Because they
did not my rights, and despised my statutes, profaned my Sabbaths, and
their eyes were after the idols of their fathers. [Eze
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025). And I also gave them statutes,
which were not good, and rights, through which they did not live; [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026). And defiled them in their
sacrificial gifts, in that they caused all that openeth the womb to pass
through, that I might fill them with horror, that they might know that I
am Jehovah. - The sons acted like their fathers in the wilderness.
Historical proofs of this are furnished by the accounts of the
Sabbath-breaker ([Num 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032).), of the
rebellion of the company of Korah, and of the murmuring of the whole
congregation against Moses and Aaron after the destruction of Korah's
company (Num 16 and [Num 17:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#001)). In
the last two cases God threatened that He would destroy the whole
congregation (cf. [Num 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#021) and [Num
17:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#009)); and on both occasions the
Lord drew back His hand at the intercession of Moses, and his actual
intervention ([Num 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022) and [Num
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#011).), and did not destroy the whole
nation for His name's sake. The statements in [Eze
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#021) and [Eze
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#022) rest upon these facts. The words
of [Eze 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#023) concerning the oath of
God, that He would scatter the transgressors among the heathen, are also
founded upon the Pentateuch, and not upon an independent tradition, or
any special revelation from God. Dispersion among the heathen is
threatened in [Lev 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033) and [Deu
28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064), and there is no force in
Kliefoth's argument that "these threats do not refer to the generation
in the wilderness, but to a later age." For in both chapters the
blessings and curses of the law are set before the people who were then
in the desert; and there is not a single word to intimate that either
blessing or curse would only be fulfilled upon the generations of later
times.

On the contrary, when Moses addressed to the people assembled before him
his last discourse concerning the renewal of the covenant (Deut 29 and
30), he called upon them to enter into the covenant, "which Jehovah
maketh with thee this day" ([Deu
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012)), and to keep all the words of
this covenant and do them. It is upon this same discourse, in which
Moses calls the threatenings of the law אלה, an oath ([Deu
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#013)), that "the lifting of the hand
of God to swear," mentioned in [Eze
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#023) of this chapter, is also
founded. Moreover, it is not stated in this verse that God lifted His
hand to scatter among the heathen the generation which had grown up in
the wilderness, and to disperse them in the lands before their entrance
into the land promised to the fathers; but simply that He had lifted His
hand in the wilderness to threaten the people with dispersion among the
heathen, without in any way defining the period of dispersion. In the
blessings and threatenings of the law contained in Lev 26 and Deut
28-30, the nation is regarded as a united whole; so that no distinction
is made between the successive generations, for the purpose of
announcing this particular blessing or punishment to either one or the
other. And Ezekiel acts in precisely the same way. It is true that he
distinguishes the generation which came out of Egypt and was sentenced
by God to die in the wilderness from the sons, i.e., the generation
which grew up in the wilderness; but the latter, or the sons of those
who had fallen, the generation which was brought into the land of
Canaan, he regards as one with all the successive generations, and
embraces the whole under the common name of "fathers" to the generation
living in his day ("your fathers" [Eze
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#027)), as we may clearly see from the
turn given to the sentence which describes the apostasy of those who
came into the land of Canaan ('עוד זאת ). In thus embracing the
generation which grew up in the wilderness and was led into Canaan,
along with the generations which followed and lived in Canaan, Ezekiel
adheres very closely to the view prevailing in the Pentateuch, where the
nation in all its successive generations is regarded as one united
whole. The threat of dispersion among the heathen, which the Lord
uttered in the wilderness to the sons of those who were not to see the
land, is also not mentioned by Ezekiel as one which God designed to
execute upon the people who were wandering in the desert at the time.
For if he had understood it in this sense, he would have mentioned its
non-fulfilment also, and would have added a 'ואעשׂ למען שׁמי וגו, as he
has done in the case of the previous threats (cf. [Eze
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#022), [Eze
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#014), and [Eze
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#009)). But we do not find this either
in [Eze 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#024) or [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026). The omission of this turn
clearly shows that [Eze 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#023) does not
refer to a punishment which God designed to inflict, but did not execute
for His name's sake; but that the dispersion among the heathen, with
which the transgressors of His commandments were threatened by God when
in the wilderness, is simply mentioned as a proof that even in the
wilderness the people, whom God had determined to lead into Canaan, were
threatened with that very punishment which had now actually commenced,
because rebellious Israel had obstinately resisted the commandments and
rights of its God.

These remarks are equally applicable to [Eze
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025) and [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026). These verses are not to be
restricted to the generation which was born in the wilderness and
gathered to its fathers not long after its entrance into Canaan, but
refer to their descendants also, that is to say, to the fathers of our
prophet's contemporaries, who were born and had died in Canaan. God gave
them statutes which were not good, and rights which did not bring them
life. It is perfectly self-evident that we are not to understand by
these statutes and rights, which were not good, either the Mosaic
commandments of the ceremonial law, as some of the Fathers and earlier
Protestant commentators supposed, or the threatenings contained in the
law; so that this needs no elaborate proof. The ceremonial commandments
given by God were good, and had the promise attached to them, that
obedience to them would give life; whilst the threats of punishment
contained in the law are never called חקּים and משׁפּטים. Those statutes
only are called "not good" the fulfilment of which did not bring life or
blessings and salvation. The second clause serves as an explanation of
the first. The examples quoted in [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026) show what the words really mean.
The defiling in their sacrificial gifts ([Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026)), for example, consisted in
their causing that which opened the womb to pass through, i.e., in the
sacrifice of the first-born. העביר כּל־פּטר points back to [Exo
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#012); only ליהוה, which occurs in
that passage, is omitted, because the allusion is not to the commandment
given there, but to its perversion into idolatry. This formula is used
in the book of Exodus (l.c.) to denote the dedication of the first-born
to Jehovah; but in [Eze 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013) this
limitation is introduced, that the first-born of man is to be redeemed.
העביר signifies a dedication through fire (= העביר בּאשׁ, [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031)), and is adopted in the book of
Exodus, where it is joined to ליהוה, in marked opposition to the
Canaanitish custom of dedicating children of Moloch by februation in
fire (see the comm. on ex. [Eze
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#012)). The prophet refers to this
Canaanitish custom, and cites it as a striking example of the defilement
of the Israelites in their sacrificial gifts (טמּא, to make unclean, not
to declare unclean, or treat as unclean). That this custom also made its
way among the Israelites, is evident from the repeated prohibition
against offering children through the fire to Moloch ([Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021) and [Deu
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010)). When, therefore, it is
affirmed with regard to a statute so sternly prohibited in the law of
God, that Jehovah gave it to the Israelites in the wilderness, the word
נתן (give) can only be used in the sense of a judicial sentence, and
must not be taken merely as indicating divine permission; in other
words, it is to be understood, like [Th2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011) ("God sends them strong
delusion") and [Act 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042) ("God turned,
and gave them up to worship the host of heaven"), in the sense of
hardening, whereby whoever will not renounce idolatry is so given up to
its power, that it draws him deeper and deeper in. This is in perfect
keeping with the statement in [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026) as the design of God in doing
this: "that I might fill them with horror;" i.e., might excite such
horror and amazement in their minds, that if possible they might be
brought to reflect and to return to Jehovah their God.

[Ezekiel 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 20:27</span></span>

Israel committed these sins in Canaan also, and to this day has not
given them up; therefore God will not allow the idolatrous generation to
inquire of Him. - [Eze 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#027).
Therefore speak to the house of Israel, O son of man, and say to them,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Still further have your fathers blasphemed
me in this, with the faithlessness which they have shown toward me. [Eze
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#028). When I had brought them into
the land, which I had lifted my hand to give them, then they looked out
every high hill and every thickly covered tree, and offered their
sacrifices there, and gave their irritating gifts there, and presented
the fragrance of their pleasant odour there, and poured out their
drink-offerings there. [Eze 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#029). And
I said to them, What height is that to which ye go? And its name is
called Height to this day. [Eze 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#030).
Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, What?
Do ye defile yourselves in the way of your fathers; and go whoring after
their abominations; [Eze 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031). And
defile yourselves in all your idols to this day, by lifting up your
gifts, and causing your sons to pass through the fire; and should I let
myself be inquired of by you? As I live, is the saying of the Lord
Jehovah, I will not let myself be inquired of by you. - The לכן in [Eze
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#027) is resumed in [Eze
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#030); and there the answer given by
God to the elders, who had come to inquire of Him, is first
communicated, after an express declaration of the fact that Israel had
continued its idolatry in the most daring manner, even after its
entrance into Canaan. But the form in which this is done - עוד זאת,
"still further in this" - is to be understood as intimating that the
conduct of the fathers of the existing generation, and therefore not
merely of those who grew up in the wilderness, but also of those who had
lived in Canaan, has already been described in general terms in the
preceding verses, and that what follows simply adds another novel
feature. But this can only be the case if [Eze
20:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#023) are taken in the sense given
above. זאת is an accusative; and גּדּף is construed with the accusative
both of the person and thing. The more precise definition of זאת is not
given in בּמעלם בּי ni nev at the end of the verse, but in the idolatry
depicted in [Eze 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#028). מעל refers to
the faithlessness involved in the breach of the covenant and in
idolatry. This is the general description; whilst the idolatry mentioned
in [Eze 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#028) constituted one
particular feature, in which the faithlessness appeared in the form of
blasphemy. For the fact itself, namely, the worship on high places,
which was practised on every hand, see [Eze
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#013); [Eze
16:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024); [Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023); [Kg2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#010).

In the enumeration of the offerings, there is something striking in the
position in which כּעס קרבּנם stands, namely, between the slaughtered
sacrifices (זבחים) and the increase- and drink-offerings; and this is no
doubt the reason why the clause 'ויּתּנוּ שׁם וגו is omitted from the
Cod. Vat. and Alex. of the lxx; and even Hitzig proposes to strike it
out. But Theodoret found this reading in the Alex. Version; and Hitzig
is wrong in affirming that קרבּן is used in connection with sacrifices,
meat-offerings, and drink-offerings. The meat-offerings are not
expressly named, for ריה ניחוח does not signify meat-offerings, but is
used in the law for the odour of all the offerings, both slaughtered
sacrifices and meat-offerings, even though in [Eze
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#019) it is applied to the odour of
the bloodless offerings alone. And in the same way does קרבּן embrace
all the offerings, even the slain offerings, in [Eze
40:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#043), in harmony with [Lev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002); [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), and other passages. That it is
used in this general signification here, is evident from the
introduction of the word כּעס, irritation or provocation of their gifts,
i.e., their gifts which provoked irritation on the part of God, because
they were offered to idols. As this sentence applies to all the
sacrifices (bloody and bloodless), so also does the clause which
follows, 'ויּשׂימוּ שׁם וגו, refer to all the offerings which were
burned upon the altar, without regard to the material employed.
Consequently Ezekiel mentions only slain offerings and drink-offerings,
and, by the two clauses inserted between, describes the offering of the
slaughtered sacrifices as a gift of irritation to God, and of pleasant
fragrance to the idolatrous worshippers who presented them. He does not
mention the meat-offerings separately, because they generally formed an
accompaniment to the slain offerings, and therefore were included in
these. But although God had called the people to account for this
worship on high places, they had not relinquished it even "to this day."
This is no doubt the meaning of. [Eze
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#029), which has been interpreted in
very different ways. The context shows, in the most conclusive manner,
that הבּמה is to be taken collectively, and that the use of the singular
is to be explained from the antithesis to the one divinely appointed
Holy Place in the temple, and not, as Kimchi and Hvernick suppose, from
any allusion to one particular bâmâh of peculiar distinction, viz., "the
great high place at Gibeon." The question מה is not expressive of
contempt (Hitzig), but "is founded upon the assumption that they would
have to give an account of their doings; and merely asks, What kind of
heights are those to which you are going? Who has directed you to go
thither with your worship?" (Kliefoth). There is no need to refute the
trivial fancy of J. D. Michaelis, which has been repeated by Hitzig,
namely, that Ezekiel has taken בּמה as a derivative from בא and מה.
Again, the question does not presuppose a word addressed by God to
Israel, which Ezekiel only has handed down to us; but is simply a
rhetorical mode of presenting the condemnation by God of the worship of
the high places, to which both the law and the earlier prophets had
given utterance. The next clause, "and their name was called Height"
(high place), is not to be regarded as containing merely a historical
notice of the name given to these idolatrous places of worship; but the
giving of the name is a proof of the continued existence of the thing;
so that the words affirm, that notwithstanding the condemnation on the
part of God, Israel had retained these high places, - had not abolished
them to this day. - [Eze 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#030) and
[Eze 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031) facilitate the transition
from the first part of this word of God to the second. What has already
been said in vv. 5-29 concerning the idolatry of the people, from the
time of its election onwards, is here expressly applied to the existing
generation, and carries with it the declaration to them, that inasmuch
as they are defiling themselves by idolatry, as their fathers did,
Jehovah cannot permit Himself to be inquired of by them. The thought is
couched in the form of a question, to express astonishment that those
who denied the Lord, and dishonoured Him by their idolatry, should
nevertheless imagine that they could obtain revelations from Him. The
lifting up (שׂאת, from נשׂא) of gifts signifies the offering of
sacrifices upon the altars of the high places. For [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031), compare [Eze
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#003). - With this declaration God
assigns the reason for the refusal to listen to idolaters, which had
already been given in [Eze 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#003). But
it does not rest with this refusal. God now proceeds to disclose to them
the thoughts of their own hearts, and announces to them that He will
refine them by severe judgments, and bring them thereby to repentance of
their sins, that He may then gather them out of the dispersion, and make
them partakers of the promised salvation as a people willingly serving
Him. - In this way do [Eze 20:32-44](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032)
cast a prophetic glance over the whole of the future history of Israel.

[Ezekiel 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 20:32</span></span>

The Judgment Awaiting Israel of Purification among the Heathen

[Eze 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032). And that which riseth up
in your mind shall not come to pass, in that ye say, We will be like the
heathen, like the families of the lands, to serve wood and stone. [Eze
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#033). As I live, is the saying of the
Lord Jehovah, with strong hand and with outstretched arm, and with wrath
poured out, will I rule over you. [Eze
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034). And I will bring you out of the
nations, and gather you out of the lands in which ye have been
scattered, with strong hand and with outstretched arm, and with wrath
poured out, [Eze 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035). And will bring
you into the desert of the nations, and contend with you there face to
face. [Eze 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#036). As I contended with
your fathers in the desert of the land of Egypt, so will I contend with
you, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah. [Eze
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#037). And I will cause you to pass
through under the rod, and bring you into the bond of the covenant. [Eze
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038). And I will separate from you
the rebellious, and those who are apostates from me; out of the land of
their sojourning will I lead them out, but into the land of Israel shall
they not come; that ye may know that I am Jehovah. - העלה על רוּח, that
which rises up in the spirit, is the thought that springs up in the
mind. What this thought was is shown in [Eze
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032), viz., we will be like the
heathen in the lands of the earth, to serve wood and stone; that is to
say, we will become idolaters like the heathen, pass into heathenism.
This shall not take place; on the contrary, God will rule over them as
King with strong arm and fury. The words, "with strong hand and
stretched-out arm," are a standing expression in the Pentateuch for the
mighty acts by which Jehovah liberated His people from the power of the
Egyptians, and led them out of Egypt (cf. [Exo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001), [Exo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006) with וּבמשׁפּטים גּדולים). Here,
on the contrary, they are connected with בּחמה שׁפוּכה, and are used in
[Eze 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#033) with reference to the
government of God over Israel, whilst in [Eze
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034) they are applied to the bringing
out of Israel from the midst of the heathen. By the introduction of the
clause "with fury poured out," the manifestation of the omnipotence of
God which Israel experience in its dispersion, and which it was still to
experience among the heathen, is described as an emanation of the divine
wrath, a severe and wrathful judgment. The leading and gathering of
Israel out of the nations ([Eze 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034))
is neither their restoration from the existing captivity in Babylon, nor
their future restoration to Canaan on the conversion of the people who
were still hardened, and therefore rejected by God. The former
assumption would be decidedly at variance with both מן העמּים and מן
הארצות, since Israel was dispersed only throughout one land and among
one people at the time of the Babylonian captivity. Moreover, neither of
the assumptions is reconcilable with the context, more especially with
[Eze 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035). According to the context,
this leading out is an act of divine anger, which Israel is to feel in
connection therewith; and this cannot be affirmed of either the
redemption of the people out of the captivity in Babylon, or the future
gathering of Israel from its dispersion. According to [Eze
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035), God will conduct those who are
brought out from the nations and gathered together out of the lands into
the desert of the nations, and contend with them there. The "desert of
the nations" is not the desert lying between Babylonia and Palestine, on
the coastlands of the Mediterranean, through which the Israelites would
have to pass on their way home from Babylon (Rosenmller, Hitzig, and
others). For there is no imaginable reason why this should be called the
desert of the nations in distinction from the desert of Arabia, which
also touched the borders of several nations. The expression is doubtless
a typical one, the future guidance of Israel being depicted as a
repetition of the earlier guidance of the people from Egypt to Canaan;
as it also is in [Hos 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#016). All the
separate features in the description indicate this, more especially [Eze
20:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#036) and [Eze
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#037), where it is impossible to
overlook the allusion to the guidance of Israel in the time of Moses.

The more precise explanation of the words must depend, however, upon the
sense in which we are to understand the expression, "desert of the land
of Egypt." Here also the supposition that the Arabian desert is referred
to, because it touched the border of Egypt, does not furnish a
sufficient explanation. It touched the border of Canaan as well. Why
then did not Ezekiel name it after the land of Canaan? Evidently for no
other reason than that the time spent by the Israelites in the Arabian
desert resembled their sojourn in Egypt much more closely than their
settlement in Canaan, because, while there, they were still receiving
their training for their entrance into Canaan, and their possession and
enjoyment of its benefits, just as much as in the land of Egypt. And in
a manner corresponding to this, the "desert of the nations" is a
figurative expression applied to the world of nations, from whom they
were indeed spiritually distinct, whilst outwardly they were still in
the midst of them, and had to suffer from their oppression. Consequently
the leading of Israel out of the nations ([Eze
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034)) is not a local and corporeal
deliverance out of heathen lands, but a spiritual severance from the
heathen world, in order that they might not be absorbed into it or
become inseparably blended with the heathen. God will accomplish this by
means of severe chastisements, by contending with them as He formerly
contended with their fathers in the Arabian desert. God contends with
His people when He charges them with their sin and guilt, not merely in
words, but also with deeds, i.e., through chastening and punishments.
The words "face to face" point back to [Deu
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#004) : "Jehovah talked with you face to
face in the mount, out of the midst of the fire." Just as at Sinai the
Lord talked directly with Israel, and made know to it the devouring fire
of His own holy nature, in so terrible a manner that all the people
trembled and entreated Moses to act the part of a mediator between them,
promising at the same time obedience to him ([Exo
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019)); so will the Lord make Himself
known to Israel in the desert of the world of nations with the burning
zeal of His anger, that it may learn to fear Him. This contending is
more precisely defined in [Eze 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#037)
and [Eze 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038). I will cause you to
pass through under the (shepherd's) rod. A shepherd lets his sheep pass
through under his rod for the purpose of counting them, and seeing
whether they are in good condition or not (vid., [Jer
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#013)). The figure is here applied to
God. Like a shepherd, He will cause His flock, the Israelites, to pass
through under His rod, i.e., take them into His special care, and bring
them "into the bond of the covenant" (מסרת, not from מסר Raschi, but
from אסר, for מאסרה, a fetter); that is to say, not "I will bind myself
to you and you to me by a new covenant" (Bochart, Hieroz. I. p. 508),
for this is opposed to the context, but, as the Syriac version has
rendered it, b-mardûtâ (in disciplina), "the discipline of the
covenant." By this we are not merely to understand the covenant
punishments, with which transgressors of the law are threatened, as
Hvernick does, but the covenant promises must also be included. For not
only the threats of the covenant, but the promises of the covenant, are
bonds by which God trains His people; and אסר is not only applied to
burdensome and crushing fetters, but to the bonds of love as well (vid.,
[Sol 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006)). Kliefoth understands by the
fetter of the covenant the Mosaic law, as being the means employed by
God to preserve the Israelites from mixing with the nations while placed
in the midst of them, and to keep them to Himself, and adds the
following explanation, - "this law, through which they should have been
able to live, they have now to wear as a fetter, and to feel the
chastisement thereof." But however correct the latter thought may be in
itself, it is hardly contained in the words, "lead them into the fetter
(band) of the law." Moreover, although the law did indeed preserve
Israel from becoming absorbed into the world of nations, the fact that
the Jews were bound to the law did not bring them to the knowledge of
the truth, or bring to pass the purging of the rebellious from among the
people, to which [Eze 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038) refers.
All that the law accomplished in this respect in the case of those who
lived among the heathen was effected by its threatenings and its
promises, and not by its statutes and their faithful observance. This
discipline will secure the purification of the people, by severing from
the nation the rebellious and apostate. God will bring them forth out of
the land of this pilgrimage, but will not bring them into the land of
Israel. ארץ is the standing epithet applied in the Pentateuch to the
land of Canaan, in which the patriarchs lived as pilgrims, without
coming into actual possession of the land (cf. [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008); [Gen
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#004); [Gen
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007); [Exo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#004)). This epithet Ezekiel has
transferred to the lands of Israel's exile, in which it was to lead a
pilgrim-life until it was ripe for entering Canaan. הוציא, to lead out,
is used here for clearing out by extermination, as the following clause,
"into the land of Israel shall they not come," plainly shows. The
singular יבוא is used distributively: not one of the rebels will enter.

[Ezekiel 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">eze 20:39</span></span>

The Ultimate Gathering of Israel, and Its Conversion to the Lord

[Eze 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039). Ye then, O house of
Israel, thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Go ye, serve every one his idols!
but afterwards - truly ye will hearken to me, and no longer desecrate my
holy name with your sacrificial gifts and your idols, [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040). But upon my holy mountain, upon
the high mountain of Israel, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah, there
will all the house of Israel serve me, the whole of it in the land;
there will I accept them gladly; there will I ask for your
heave-offerings and the first-fruits of your gifts in all that ye make
holy. [Eze 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#041). As a pleasant odour
will I accept you gladly, when I bring you out from the nations, and
gather you out of the lands, in which you have been scattered, and
sanctify myself in you before the eyes of the heathen nations. [Eze
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#042). And ye shall know that I am
Jehovah, when I bring you into the land of Israel, into the land which I
lifted up my hand to give to your fathers; [Eze
20:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#043). And there ye will think of your
ways and your deeds, with which ye have defiled yourselves, and will
loathe yourselves (lit., experience loathing before yourselves) on
account of all your evil deeds. which ye have performed; [Eze
20:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#044). And ye will know that I am
Jehovah, when I deal with you for my name's sake, not according to your
evil ways and according to your corrupt deeds, O house of Israel, is the
saying of Jehovah. - After the Lord has declared to the people that He
will prevent its being absorbed into the heathen world, and will
exterminate the ungodly by severe judgments, the address passes on, with
the direction henceforth to serve idols only, to a prediction of the
eventual conversion, and the restoration to Canaan of the purified
nation. The direction, "Go ye, serve every one his idols," contains,
after what precedes it, a powerful appeal to repent. God thereby gives
up the impenitent to do whatever they will, having first of all told
them that not one of them will come into the land of Canaan. Their
opposition will not frustrate His plan of salvation. The words which
follow from ואחר onwards have been interpreted in different ways. It is
opposed to the usage of the language to connect ואחר with עבדוּ, serve
ye hereafter also (De Wette, etc.), for ו has not the force of the Latin
et = etiam, and still less does it signify "afterwards just as before."
Nor is it allowable to connect ואחר closely with what follows, in the
sense of "and hereafter also, if ye will hearken to me, profane ye my
name no more" (Rosenmller, Maurer). For if תּחלּלוּ were used as an
imperative, either it would have to stand at the beginning of the
sentence, or it would be preceded by אל instead of לא. Moreover, the
antithesis between not being willing to hear and not profaning the name
of God, is imported arbitrarily into the text. The name of the Lord is
profaned not only by sacrifices offered in external form to Jehovah and
in the heart to idols, but also by disobedience to the word and
commandments of God. It is much better to take ואחר by itself, and to
render the following particle, אם, as the ordinary sign of an oath: "but
afterwards (i.e., in the future)...verily, ye will hearken to me;" that
is to say, ye will have been converted from your idolatry through the
severe judgments that have fallen upon you. The ground for this thought
is introduced in [Eze 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040) by a
reference to the fact that all Israel will then serve the Lord upon His
holy mountain. כּי is not "used emphatically before a direct address"
(Hitzig), but has a causal signification. For 'הר מרום ישׂ, see the
comm. on [Eze 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023). In the expression
"all Israel," which is rendered more emphatic by the addition of כּלּה,
there is an allusion to the eventual termination of the severance of the
people of God (compare [Eze 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#022)).
Then will the Lord accept with delight both them and their sacrificial
gifts. תּרוּמות, heave-offerings (see the comm. on [Exo
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#002) and [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009)), used here in the broader sense
of all the sacrificial gifts, along with which the gifts of first-fruits
are specially named. משׂאות, as applied to holy offerings in the sense
of ἀναθήματα, belongs to the later usage of the language. בּכל־קדשׁיכם,
consisting of all your consecrated gifts. קדשׁים, as in [Lev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#015). This promise includes implicite
the bringing back of Israel from its banishment. This is expressly
mentioned in [Eze 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#041); but even
there it is only introduced as self-evident in the subordinate clause,
whereas the cheerful acceptance of Israel on the part of God constitutes
the leading thought.

בּריח ניחח, as an odour of delight (ב, the so-called Beth essentiae),
will God accept His people. ריח ניחח, odour of satisfaction, is the
technical expression for the cheerful (well-pleased) acceptance of the
sacrifice, or rather of the feelings of the worshipper presenting the
sacrifice, which ascend to God in the sacrificial odour (see the comm.
on [Gen 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)). The thought therefore
is the following: When God shall eventually gather His people out of
their dispersion, He will accept them as a sacrifice well-pleasing to
Him, and direct all His good pleasure towards them. ונקדּשׁתּי בכם does
not mean, I shall be sanctified through you, and is not to be explained
in the same sense as [Lev 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#032)
(Rosenmller), for ב is not equivalent to בּתוך; but it signifies "I will
sanctify myself on you," as in [Num
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013); [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003), and other passages, where נקדּשׁ
is construed with ב pers. (cf. [Eze
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#025); [Eze
36:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023); [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016); [Eze
39:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#027)), in the sense of proving
oneself holy, mostly by judgment, but here through having made Israel
into a holy nation by the refining judgment, and one to which He can
therefore grant the promised inheritance. - [Eze
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#042). Then will Israel also recognise
its God in His grace, and be ashamed of its former sins. For [Eze
20:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#043), compare [Eze
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009) and [Eze
16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061). - With regard to the
fulfilment, as Kliefoth has correctly observed, "in the prediction
contained in [Eze 20:32-38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032), the whole
of the searching judgments, by which God would lead Israel to
conversion, are summed up in one, which includes not only the Babylonian
captivity, the nearest and the first, but the still more remote
judgment, namely, the present dispersion; for it is only in the present
dispersion of Israel that God has really taken it into the wilderness of
the nations, just as it was only in the rejection of Christ that its
rebellious attitude was fully manifested. And as the prophecy of the
state of punishment combines in this way both the nearer and more
remote; so are both the nearer and more distant combined in what [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040) to 44 affirm with regard to the
ultimate fate of Israel." The gathering of Israel from among the heathen
will be fulfilled in its conversion to Christ, and hitherto it has only
taken place in very small beginnings. The principal fulfilment is still
to come, when Israel, as a nation, shall be converted to Christ. With
regard to the bringing back of the people into "the land of Israel," see
the comm. on Ezekiel 37, where this promise is more fully expanded.

[Ezekiel 20:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">eze 20:45</span></span>

The Burning Forest

[Eze 20:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#045). And the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, [Eze 20:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#046). Son of
man, direct thy face toward the south, and trickle down towards the
south, and prophesy concerning the forest of the field in the south
land; [Eze 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047). And say to the
forest of the south land, Hear the word of Jehovah; Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, Behold, I kindle a fire in thee, which will consume in thee
every green tree, and every dry tree: the blazing flame will not be
extinguished, and all faces from the south to the north will be burned
thereby. [Eze 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#048). And all flesh
shall see that I, Jehovah, have kindled it: it shall not be
extinguished. [Eze 20:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#049). And I said,
Ah, Lord Jehovah! they say of me, Does he not speak in parables? - The
prophet is to turn his face toward the south, and prophesy concerning
the forest of the field there. הטּיף is used for prophesying, as in [Amo
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016) and [Mic
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006), [Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011). The distinction between the
three epithets applied to the south is the following: תּימן is literally
that which lies on the right hand, hence the south is a particular
quarter of the heavens; דּרום, which only occurs in Ezekiel and
Ecclesiastes, with the exception of [Deu
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023) and [Job
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#017), is derived from דּרר, to shine
or emit streams of light, and probably signifies the brilliant quarter;
נגב, the dry, parched land, is a standing epithet for the southern
district of Palestine and the land of Judah (see the comm. on [Jos
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)). - The forest of the field in
the south is a figure denoting the kingdom of Judah (נגב is in
apposition to השּׂדה, and is appended to it as a more precise
definition). שׂדה is not used here for a field, as distinguished from a
city or a garden; but for the fields in the sense of country or
territory, as in [Gen 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007) and [Gen
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#003). In [Eze
20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047), יער , forest of the south land,
is the expression applied to the same object (הנגב, with the article, is
a geographical term for the southern portion of Palestine). The forest
is a figure signifying the population, or the mass of people. Individual
men are trees. The green tree is a figurative representation of the
righteous man, and the dry tree of the ungodly ([Eze
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#003), compare [Luk
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031)). The fire which Jehovah kindles
is the fire of war. The combination of the synonyms להבת שׁלהבת, flame
of the flaming brightness, serves to strengthen the expression, and is
equivalent to the strongest possible flame, the blazing fire. כּל־פּנים,
all faces are not human faces or persons, in which case the prophet
would have dropped the figure; but pânim denotes generally the outside
of things, which is the first to feel the force of the flame. "All the
faces" of the forest are every single thing in the forest, which is
caught at once by the flame. In [Eze
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#004), kŏl-pânim (all faces) is
interpreted by kŏl̇-bâsar (all flesh). From south to north, i.e., through
the whole length of the land. From the terrible fierceness of the fire,
which cannot be extinguished, every one will know that God has kindled
it, that it has been sent in judgment. The words of the prophet himself,
in [Eze 20:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#049), presuppose that he has
uttered these parabolic words in the hearing of the people, and that
they have ridiculed them as obscure (mâshâl is used here in the sense of
obscure language, words difficult to understand, as παραβολή also is in
[Mat 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#010)). At the same time, it
contains within itself request that they may be explained. This request
is granted; and the simile is first of all interpreted in [Eze
21:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#001), and then still further
expanded in [Eze 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 21](eze021)

</div>
