<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze004)  [Next](eze006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 5:0</span></span>

1-4

[Ezekiel 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 5:5</span></span>

The Divine Word which Explains the Symbolical Signs, in which the
judgment that is announced is laid down as to its cause (5-9) and as to
its nature (10-17). - [Eze 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005). Thus
says the Lord Jehovah: This Jerusalem have I placed in the midst of the
nations, and raised about her the countries. [Eze
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#006). But in wickedness she resisted my
laws more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries
which are round about her; for they rejected my laws, and did not walk
in my statutes. [Eze 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007). Therefore
thus says the Lord Jehovah: Because ye have raged more than the nations
round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, and have not obeyed
my laws, and have not done even according to the laws of the nations
which are round about you; [Eze 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#008).
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I, even I, shall be against
thee, and will perform judgments in thy midst before the eyes of the
nations. [Eze 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#009). And I will do unto
thee what I have never done, nor will again do in like manner, on
account of all thine abominations.

'זאת ירוּשׁ not "this is Jerusalem," i.e., this is the destiny of
Jerusalem (Hvernick), but "this Jerusalem" (Hitzig); זאת is placed
before the noun in the sense of iste, as in [Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001); cf. Ewald, 293b. To place the
culpability of Jerusalem in its proper prominence, the censure of her
sinful conduct opens with the mention of the exalted position which God
had assigned her upon earth. Jerusalem is described in [Eze
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005) as forming the central point of
the earth: this is done, however, neither in an external, geographical
(Hitzig), nor in a purely typical sense, as the city that is blessed
more than any other (Calvin, Hvernick), but in a historical sense, in so
far as "God's people and city actually stand in the central point of the
God-directed world-development and its movements" (Kliefoth); or, in
relation to the history of salvation, as the city in which God hath set
up His throne of grace, from which shall go forth the law and the
statutes for all nations, in order that the salvation of the whole world
may be accomplished ([Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002).; [Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001).). But instead of keeping the laws
and statutes of the Lord, Jerusalem has, on the contrary, turned to do
wickedness more than the heathen nations in all the lands round about
(המרה, cum accusat. object., "to act rebelliously towards"). Here we may
not quote [Rom 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012), [Rom
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014) against this, as if the heathen,
who did not know the law of God, did not also transgress the same, but
sinned ἀνόμως; for the sinning ἀνόμως, of which the apostle speaks, is
really a transgression of the law written on the heart of the heathen.
With לכן, in [Eze 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007), the penal
threatening is introduced; but before the punishment is laid down, the
correspondence between guilt and punishment is brought forward more
prominently by repeatedly placing in juxtaposition the godless conduct
of the rebellious city. המנכם is infinitive, from המן, a secondary form
המון, in the sense of המה, "to rage," i.e., to rebel against God; cf.
[Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001). The last clause of [Eze
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007) contains a climax: "And ye have
not even acted according to the laws of the heathen." This is not in any
real contradiction to [Eze 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012)
(where it is made a subject of reproach to the Israelites that they have
acted according to the laws of the heathen), so that we would be
obliged, with Ewald and Hitzig, to expunge the לא in the verse before
us, because wanting in the Peshito and several Hebrew manuscripts. Even
in these latter, it has only been omitted to avoid the supposed
contradiction with [Eze 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012). The
solution of the apparent contradiction lies in the double meaning of the
משׁפּטי הּגוים. The heathen had laws which were opposed to those of God,
but also such as were rooted in the law of God written upon their
hearts. Obedience to the latter was good and praiseworthy; to the
former, wicked and objectionable. Israel, which hated the law of God,
followed the wicked and sinful laws of the heathen, and neglected to
observe their good laws. The passage before us is to be judged by [Jer
2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010), to which Raschi had already
made reference.

(Note: Coccejus had already well remarked on [Eze
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012) : "Haec probe concordant.
Imitabantur Judaei gentiles vel fovendo opiniones gentiles, vel etiam
assumendo ritus et sacra gentilium. Sed non faciebant ut gentes, quae
integre diis suis serviebant. Nam Israelitae nomine Dei abutebantur et
ipsius populus videri volebant.")

In [Eze 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#008) the announcement of the
punishment, interrupted by the repeated mention of the cause, is again
resumed with the words 'לכן כּה וגו. Since Jerusalem has acted worse
than the heathen, God will execute His judgments upon her before the
eyes of the heathen. עשׂה שׁפטים or עשׂה ([Eze
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010), [Eze
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#015); [Eze
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#009); [Eze
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041), etc.), "to accomplish or
execute judgments," is used in [Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012) and [Num
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#004) of the judgments which God
suspended over Egypt. The punishment to be suspended shall be so great
and heavy, that the like has never happened before, nor will ever happen
again. These words do not require us either to refer the threatening,
with Coccejus, to the last destruction of Jerusalem, which was marked by
greater severity than the earlier one, or to suppose, with Hvernick,
that the prophet's look is directed to both the periods of Israel's
punishment - the times of the Babylonian and Roman calamity together.
Both suppositions are irreconcilable with the words, as these can only
be referred to the first impending penal judgment of the destruction of
Jerusalem. This was, so far, more severe than any previous or subsequent
one, inasmuch as by it the existence of the people of God was for a time
suspended, while that Jerusalem and Israel, which were destroyed and
annihilated by the Romans, were no longer the people of God, inasmuch as
the latter consisted at that time of the Christian community, which was
not affected by that catastrophe (Kliefoth).

[Ezekiel 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 5:10</span></span>

Further Execution of this Threat

[Eze 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010). Therefore shall fathers
devour their children in thy midst, and children shall devour their
fathers: and I will exercise judgments upon thee, and disperse all thy
remnant to the winds. [Eze 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011).
Therefore, as I live, is the declaration of the Lord Jehovah, Verily,
because thou hast polluted my sanctuary with all thine abominations and
all thy crimes, so shall I take away mine eye without mercy, and will
not spare. [Eze 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012). A third of thee
shall die by the pestilence, and perish by hunger in thy midst; and the
third part shall fall by the sword about thee; and the third part will I
scatter to all the winds; and will draw out the sword after them. [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013). And my anger shall be fulfilled,
and I will cool my wrath against them, and will take vengeance. And they
shall experience that I, Jehovah, have spoken in my zeal, when I
accomplish my wrath upon them. [Eze
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#014). And I will make thee a
desolation and a mockery among the nations which are round about thee,
before the eyes of every passer-by. [Eze
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#015). And it shall be a mockery and a
scorn, a warning and a terror for the nations round about thee, when I
exercise my judgments upon thee in anger and wrath and in grievous
visitations. I, Jehovah, have said it. [Eze
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016). When I send against thee the
evil arrows of hunger, which minister to destruction, which I shall send
to destroy you; for hunger shall I heap upon you, and shall break to you
the staff of bread. [Eze 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017). And I
shall send hunger upon you, and evil beasts, which shall make thee
childless; and pestilence and blood shall pass over thee; and the sword
will I bring upon thee. I, Jehovah, have spoken it. - As a proof of the
unheard-of severity of the judgment, there is immediately mentioned in
[Eze 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010) a most horrible
circumstance, which had been already predicted by Moses ([Lev
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#029); [Deu
28:53](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#053)) as that which should happen to
the people when hard pressed by the enemy, viz., a famine so dreadful,
during the siege of Jerusalem, that parents would eat their children,
and children their parents; and after the capture of the city, the
dispersion of those who remained "to all the winds, i.e., to all
quarters of the world." This is described more minutely, as an appendix
to the symbolical act in [Eze 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001) and
[Eze 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#002), in [Eze
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011) and [Eze
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012), with a solemn oath, and with
repeated and prominent mention of the sins which have drawn down such
chastisements. As sin, is mentioned the pollution of the temple by
idolatrous abominations, which are described in detail in Ezekiel 8. The
אגרע, which is variously understood by the old translators (for which
some Codices offer the explanatory correction אגדע), is to be explained,
after [Job 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#007), of the "turning away
of the eye," and the עיני following as the object; while ולא־תחוס, "that
it feel no compassion," is interjected between the verb and its object
with the adverbial signification of "mercilessly." For that the words
ולא תחוס are adverbially subordinate to אגרע, distinctly appears from
the correspondence - indicated by וגם אני - between אגרע and לא .
Moreover, the thought, "Jehovah will mercilessly withdraw His care for
the people," is not to be termed "feeble" in connection with what
follows; nor is the contrast, which is indicated in the clause וגם־אני,
lost, as Hvernick supposes. וגם־אני does not require גּרע to be
understood of a positive act, which would correspond to the desecration
of the sanctuary. This is shown by the last clause of the verse. The
withdrawal without mercy of the divine providence is, besides, in
reality, equivalent to complete devotion to destruction, as it is
particularized in [Eze 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012). For [Eze
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012) see on [Eze
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001) and [Eze
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#002). By carrying out the threatened
division of the people into three parts, the wrath of God is to be
fulfilled, i.e., the full measure of the divine wrath upon the people is
to be exhausted (cf. 7, 8), and God is to appear and "cool" His anger.
הניח חמה, "sedavit iram," occurs again in [Eze
16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042); [Eze
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#022); [Eze
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#013). הנּחמתּי, Hithpael, pausal form
for הנּחמתּי, "se consolari," "to procure satisfaction by revenge;" cf.
[Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024), and for the thing, [Deu
28:63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#063). In [Eze
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#014). the discourse turns again from
the people to the city of Jerusalem. It is to become a wilderness, as
was already threatened in [Lev 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031)
and [Lev 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033) to the cities of
Israel, and thereby a "mockery" to all nations, in the manner described
in [Deu 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023). והיתה, in [Eze
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#015), is not to be changed, after the
lxx, Vulgate, and some MSS, into the second person; but Jerusalem is to
be regarded as the subject which is to become the object of scorn and
hatred, etc., when God accomplishes His judgments. מוּסר is a
warning-example. Among the judgments which are to overtake it, in [Eze
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016), hunger is again made specially
prominent (cf. [Eze 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016)) and first in
[Eze 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017) are wild beasts, pestilence,
blood, and sword added, and a quartette of judgments announced as in
[Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021). For pestilence and blood
are comprehended together as a unity by means of the predicate. Their
connection is to be understood according to [Eze
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#019), and the number four is
significant, as in [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021); [Jer
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#003). For more minute details as to
the meaning, see on [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021). The
evil arrows point back to [Deu 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#023);
the evil beasts, to [Lev 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#022) and
[Deu 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024). To produce an impression,
the prophet heaps his words together. Unum ejus consilium fuit penetrare
in animos populi quasi lapideos et ferreos. Haec igitur est ratio, cur
hic tanta varietate utatur et exornet suam doctrnam variis figuris
(Calvin).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 6](eze006)

</div>
