<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze008)  [Next](eze010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001)

[Ezekiel 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 9:1</span></span>

The Angels which Smite Jerusalem

At the call of Jehovah, His servants appear to execute the judgment. -
[Eze 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001). And He called in my ears
with a loud voice, saying, Come hither, ye watchmen of the city, and
every one his instrument of destruction in his hand. [Eze
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002). And behold six men came by the
way of the upper gage, which is directed toward the north, every one
with his smashing-tool in his hand; and a man in the midst of them,
clothed in white linen, and writing materials by his hip; and they came
and stood near the brazen altar. [Eze
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#003). And the glory of the God of
Israel rose up from the cherub, upon which it was, to the threshold of
the house, and called to the man clothed in white linen, by whose hip
the writing materials were. - פּקדּות העיר does not mean the punishments
of the city. This rendering does not suit the context, since it is not
the punishments that are introduced, but the men who execute them; and
it is not established by the usage of the language. פּקדּה is frequently
used, no doubt, in the sense of visitation or chastisement (e.g., [Isa
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003); [Hos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007)); but it is not met with in the
plural in this sense. In the plural it only occurs in the sense of
supervision or protectorate, in which sense it occurs not only in [Jer
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011) and [Eze
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#011), but also (in the singular) in
[Isa 60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017), and as early as [Num
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#038), where it relates to the
presidency of the priests, and very frequently in the Chronicles.
Consequently פּקדּות are those whom God has appointed to watch over the
city, the city-guard ([Kg2 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#018)), -
not earthly, but heavenly watchmen, - who are now to inflict punishment
upon the ungodly, as the authorities appointed by God. קרבוּ is an
imperative Piel, as in [Isa 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021), and
must not be altered into קרבוּ (Kal), as Hitzig proposes. The Piel is
used in an intransitive sense, festinanter appropinquavit, as in [Eze
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#008). The persons called come by the
way of the upper northern gate of the temple, to take their stand before
Jehovah, whose glory had appeared in the inner court. The upper gate is
the gate leading from the outer court to the inner, or upper court,
which stood on higher ground, - the gate mentioned in [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003) and [Eze
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#005). In the midst of the six men
furnished with smashing-tools there was one clothed in white byssus,
with writing materials at his side. The dress and equipment, as well as
the instructions which he afterwards receives and executes, show him to
be the prince or leader of the others.

Kliefoth calls in question the opinion that these seven men are angels;
but without any reason. Angels appearing in human form are frequently
called אנשׁים or אישׁ, according to their external habitus. But the
number seven neither presupposes the dogma of the seven archangels, nor
is copied from the seven Parsic amschaspands. The dress worn by the high
priest, when presenting the sin-offering on the great day of atonement
([Lev 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004), [Lev
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023)), was made of בּד, i.e., of
white material woven from byssus thread (see the comm. on [Exo
28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042)). It has been inferred from
this, that the figure clothed in white linen was the angel of Jehovah,
who appears as the heavenly high priest, to protect and care for his
own. In support of this, the circumstance may be also adduced, that the
man whom Daniel saw above the water of the Tigris, and whose appearance
is described, in [Dan 10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), in the
same manner as that of Jehovah in [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004), [Eze
1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026), and that of the risen Christ
in [Rev 1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013), appears clothed in
בּדּים ([Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005); [Dan
12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006)).

(Note: לבוּשׁ בּדּים is rendered by the lxx, in the passage before us,
ἐνδεδυκώς ποδήρῃ. It is in accordance with this that Christ is described
in [Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013) as clothed with a
ποδήρης, and not after [Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), as
Hengstenberg supposes. In [Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005),
the Septuagint has ἐνδεδυμένος βαδδίν or τὰ βαδδίν. In other places, the
Sept. rendering of בּד is λίνον (thus [Lev
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004), [Lev
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023); [Lev
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003); [Exo
28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042), etc.); and hence the λίνον
λαμπρόν of [Rev 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006) answers to the
בּד made of שׁשׁ, βύσσος, and is really the same as the βύσσινον λαμπρόν
of [Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008).)

Nevertheless, we cannot regard this view as established. The shining
white talar, which is evidently meant by the plural בּדּים, occurring
only here and in Daniel (ut. sup.), is not a dress peculiar to the angel
of Jehovah or to Christ. The seven angels, with the vials of wrath, also
appear in garments of shining white linen (ἐνδεδυμένοι λίνον καθαρὸν
λαμπρόν, [Rev 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006)); and the shining
white colour, as a symbolical representation of divine holiness and
glory (see comm. on [Lev 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004) and [Rev
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)), is the colour generally chosen
for the clothing both of the heavenly spirits and of "just men made
perfect" ([Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)). Moreover, the
angel with the writing materials here is described in a totally
different manner from the appearance of Jehovah in Ezekiel 1 and Daniel
10, or that of Christ in Rev 1; and there is nothing whatever to
indicate a being equal with God. Again, the distinction between him and
the other six men leads to no other conclusion, than that he stood in
the same relation to them as the high priest to the Levites, or the
chancellor to the other officials. This position is indicated by the
writing materials on his hips, i.e., in the girdle on his hips, in which
scribes in the East are accustomed to carry their writing materials
(vid., Rosenmller, A. u. N. Morgenland, IV. p. 323). He is provided with
these for the execution of the commission given to him in [Eze
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004). In this way the description can
be very simply explained, without the slightest necessity for our
resorting to Babylonian representations of the god Nebo, i.e., Mercury,
as the scribe of heaven. The seven men take their station by the altar
of burnt-offering, because the glory of God, whose commands they were
about to receive, had taken up its position there for the moment
(Kliefoth); not because the apostate priesthood was stationed there
(Hvernick). The glory of Jehovah, however, rose up from the cherub to
the threshold of the house. The meaning of this is not that it removed
from the interior of the sanctuary to the outer threshold of the
temple-building (Hvernick), for it was already stationed, according to
[Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016), above the cherub, between
the porch and the altar. It went back from thence to the threshold of
the temple-porch, through which one entered the Holy Place, to give its
orders there. The reason for leaving its place above the cherubim (the
singular כּרוּב is used collectively) to do this, was not that "God
would have had to turn round in order to address the seven from the
throne, since, according to [Eze 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#004)
and [Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016), He had gone from the
north gate of the outer court into the inner court, and His servants had
followed Him" (Hitzig); for the cherubim moved in all four directions,
and therefore God, even from the throne, could turn without difficulty
to every side. God left His throne, that He might issue His command for
the judgment upon Israel from the threshold of the temple, and show
Himself to be the judge who would forsake the throne which He had
assumed in Israel. This command He issues from the temple court, because
the temple was the place whence God attested Himself to His people, both
by mercy and judgment.

[Ezekiel 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 9:4</span></span>

The Divine Command

[Eze 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004). And Jehovah said to him, Go
through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and mark
a cross upon the foreheads of the men who sigh and groan over all the
abominations which take place in their midst. [Eze
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#005). And to those he said in my ears:
Go through the city behind him, and smite. Let not your eye look
compassionately, and do not spare. [Eze
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006). Old men, young men, and maidens,
and children, and women, slay to destruction: but ye shall not touch any
one who has the cross upon him; and begin at my sanctuary. And they
began with the old men, who were before the house. [Eze
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#007). And He said to them, defile the
house, and fill the courts with slain; go ye out. And they went out, and
smote in the city. - God commands the man provided with the writing
materials to mark on the forehead with a cross all the persons in
Jerusalem who mourn over the abominations of the nation, in order that
they may be spared in the time of the judgment. תּו, the last letter of
the Hebrew alphabet, had the form of a cross in the earlier writing.
התוה תּו, to mark a ת, is therefore the same as to make a mark in the
form of a cross; although there was at first no other purpose in this
sign than to enable the servants employed in inflicting the judgment of
God to distinguish those who were so marked, so that they might do them
no harm. [Eze 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006). And this was the
reason why the תּו was to be marked upon the forehead, the most visible
portion of the body; the early Christians, according to a statement in
Origen, looked upon the sign itself as significant, and saw therein a
prophetic allusion to the sign of the cross as the distinctive mark of
Christians. A direct prophecy of the cross of Christ is certainly not to
be found here, since the form of the letter Tâv was the one generally
adopted as a sign, and, according to [Job
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035), might supply the place of a
signature. Nevertheless, as Schmieder has correctly observed, there is
something remarkable in this coincidence to the thoughtful observer of
the ways of God, whose counsel has carefully considered all before hand,
especially when we bear in mind that in the counterpart to this passage
([Rev 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003)) the seal of the living God
is stamped upon the foreheads of the servants of God, who are to be
exempted from the judgment, and that according to [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001) they had the name of God written
upon their foreheads. So much, at any rate, is perfectly obvious from
this, namely, that the sign was not arbitrarily chosen, but was inwardly
connected with the fact which it indicated; just as in the event upon
which our vision is based ([Exo 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013),
[Exo 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022).) the distinctive mark
placed upon the houses of the Israelites in Egypt, in order that the
destroying angel might pass them by, namely, the smearing of the
doorposts with the blood of the paschal lamb that had been slain, was
selected on account of its significance and its corresponding to the
thing signified. The execution of this command is passed over as being
self-evident; and it is not till [Eze
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011) that it is even indirectly
referred to again.

In [Eze 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#005), [Eze
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006) there follows, first of all, the
command given to the other six men. They are to go through the city,
behind the man clothed in white linen, and to smite without mercy all
the inhabitants of whatever age or sex, with this exception, that they
are not to touch those who are marked with the cross. The על for אל
before תּחוס is either a slip of the pen, or, as the continued
transmission of so striking an error is very improbable, is to be
accounted for from the change of א into ע, which is so common in
Aramaean. The Chetib עיניכם is the unusual form grammatically
considered, and the singular, which is more correct, has been
substituted as Keri. תּהרגוּ is followed by למשׁחית, to increase the
force of the words and show the impossibility of any life being saved.
They are to make a commencement at the sanctuary, because it has been
desecrated by the worship of idols, and therefore has ceased to be the
house of the Lord. To this command the execution is immediately
appended; they began with the old men who were before the house, i.e.,
they began to slay them. האנשׁים הזּקנים are neither the twenty-five
priests ([Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016)) nor the seventy
elders ([Eze 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#011)). The latter were
not לפני הבּית, but in a chamber by the outer temple gate; whereas לפני
הבּית, in front of the temple house, points to the inner court. This
locality makes it natural to think of priests, and consequently the lxx
rendered ממּקדּשּׁי by ἀπὸ τῶν ἁγίων μου. But the expression אנשׁים
זקנים is an unsuitable one for the priests. We have therefore no doubt
to think of men advanced in years, who had come into the court possibly
to offer sacrifice, and thereby had become liable to the judgment. In
[Eze 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#007) the command, which was
interrupted in [Eze 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006), is once more
resumed. They are to defile the house, i.e., the temple, namely, by
filling the courts with slain. It is in this way that we are to connect
together, so far as the sense is concerned, the two clauses,
"defile...and fill." This is required by the facts of the case. For
those slain "before the house" could only have been slain in the courts,
as there was no space between the temple house and the courts in which
men could have been found and slain. But לפני cannot be understood as
signifying "in the neighbourhood of the temple," as Kliefoth supposes,
for the simple reason that the progressive order of events would thereby
be completely destroyed. The angels who were standing before the altar
of burnt-offering could not begin their work by going out of the court
to smite the sinners who happened to be in the neighbourhood of the
temple, and then returning to the court to do the same there, and then
again going out into the city to finish their work there. They could
only begin by slaying the sinners who happened to be in the courts, and
after having defiled the temple by their corpses, by going out into the
city to slay all the ungodly there, as is related in the second clause
of the verse ([Eze 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#007)).

[Ezekiel 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 9:8</span></span>

Intercession of the Prophet, and the Answer of the Lord

[Eze 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008). And it came to pass when
they smote and I remained, I fell upon my face, and carried, and said:
Alas! Lord Jehovah, wilt Thou destroy all the remnant of Israel, by
pouring out Thy wrath upon Jerusalem? [Eze
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009). And He said to me: The iniquity
of the house of Israel and Judah is immeasurably great, and the land is
full of blood-guiltiness, and the city full of perversion; for they say
Jehovah hath forsaken the land, and Jehovah seeth not. [Eze
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#010). So also shall my eye not look
with pity, and I will not spare; I will give their way upon their head.
[Eze 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011). And, behold, the man
clothed in white linen, who had the writing materials on his hip,
brought answer, and said: I have done as thou hast commanded me. - The
Chetib נאשׁאר is an incongruous form, composed of participle and
imperfect fused into one, and is evidently a copyist's error. It is not
to be altered into אשּׁאר, however (the 1st pers. imperf. Niph.), but to
be read as a participle נשׁאר, and taken with כּהכּותם as a continuation
of the circumstantial clause. For the words do not mean that Ezekiel
alone was left, but that when the angels smote and he was left, i.e.,
was spared, was not smitten with the rest, he fell on his face, to
entreat the Lord for mercy. These words and the prophet's intercession
both apparently presuppose that among the inhabitants of Jerusalem there
was no one found who was marked with the sign of the cross, and
therefore could be spared. But this is by no means to be regarded as
established. For, in the first place, it is not stated that all had been
smitten by the angels; and, secondly, the intercession of the prophet
simply assumes that, in comparison with the multitude of the slain, the
number of those who were marked with the sign of the cross and spared
was so small that it escaped the prophet's eye, and he was afraid that
they might all be slain without exception, and the whole of the remnant
of the covenant nation be destroyed. The שׁארית of Israel and Judah is
the covenant nation in its existing state, when it had been so reduced
by the previous judgments of God, that out of the whole of what was once
so numerous a people, only a small portion remained in the land.
Although God has previously promised that a remnant shall be preserved
([Eze 5:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#003)), He does not renew this
promise to the prophet, but begins by holding up the greatness of the
iniquity of Israel, which admits of no sparing, but calls for the most
merciless punishment, to show him that, according to the strict demand
of justice, the whole nation has deserved destruction. מטּה ([Eze
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009)) is not equivalent to מוהט,
oppression ([Isa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)), but signifies
perversion of justice; although משׁפּט is not mentioned, since this is
also omitted in [Exo 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002), where הטּה
occurs in the same sense. For [Eze
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009), vid., [Eze
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#012). For נתתּי 'דּרכּם בר ([Eze
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#010) and [Eze
11:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021), 31), vid., [Kg1
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#032). While God is conversing with the
prophet, the seven angels have performed their work; and in [Eze
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011) their leader returns to Jehovah
with the announcement that His orders have been executed. He does this,
not in his own name only, but in that of all the rest. The first act of
the judgment is thus shown to the prophet in a figurative
representation. The second act follows in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 10](eze010)

</div>
