<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze011)  [Next](eze013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 12:0</span></span>

Departure of the King and People; and Bread of Tears

The words of God which follow in Ezekiel 12-19 do not contain any
chronological data defining the exact period at which they were
communicated to the prophet and reported by him. But so far as their
contents are concerned, they are closely connected with the foregoing
announcements of judgment; and this renders the assumption a very
probable one, that they were not far removed from them in time, but fell
within the space of eleven months intervening between [Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001) and [Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001), and were designed to carry out
still further the announcement of judgment in Ezekiel 8-11. This is done
more especially in the light thrown upon all the circumstances, on which
the impenitent people rested their hope of the preservation of the
kingdom and Jerusalem, and of their speedy liberation from the
Babylonian yoke. The purpose of the whole is to show the worthlessness
of this false confidence, and to affirm the certainty and
irresistibility of the predicted destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, in
the hope of awakening the rebellious and hardened generation to that
thorough repentance, without which it was impossible that peace and
prosperity could ever be enjoyed. This definite purpose in the
prophecies which follow is clearly indicated in the introductory remarks
in [Eze 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002); [Eze
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001), and [Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001). In the first of these passages
the hardness of Israel is mentioned as the motive for the ensuing
prophecy; whilst in the other two, the visit of certain elders of Israel
to the prophet, to seek the Lord and to inquire through him, is given as
the circumstance which occasioned the further prophetic declarations. It
is evident from this that the previous words of God had already made
some impression upon the hearers, but that their hard heart had not yet
been broken by them.

In Ezekiel 12, Ezekiel receives instructions to depict, by means of a
symbolical action, the departure of the king and people from Jerusalem
([Eze 12:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003)), and to explain the
action to the refractory generation ([Eze
12:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#008)). After this he is to exhibit,
by another symbolical sign, the want and distress to which the people
will be reduced ([Eze 12:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017)). And
lastly, he is to rebut the frivolous sayings of the people, to the
effect that what is predicted will either never take place at all, or
not till a very distant time ([Eze
12:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021)).

[Ezekiel 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 12:1</span></span>

Symbol of the Emigration

[Eze 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001). And the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, [Eze 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002). Son of
man, thou dwellest amidst the refractory generation, who have eyes to
see, and see not; and have ears to hear, and hear not; for they are a
refractory generation. [Eze 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003). And
thou, son of man, make thyself an outfit for exile, and depart by day
before their eyes; and depart from thy place to another place before
their eyes: perhaps they might see, for they are a refractory
generation. [Eze 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#004). And carry out
thy things like an outfit for exile by day before their eyes; but do
thou go out in the evening before their eyes, as when going out to
exile. [Eze 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#005). Before their eyes
break through the wall, and carry it out there. [Eze
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#006). Before their eyes take it upon
thy shoulder, carry it out in the darkness; cover thy face, and look not
upon the land; for I have set thee as a sign to the house of Israel.
[Eze 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007). And I did so as I was
commanded: I carried out my things like an outfit for exile by day, and
in the evening I broke through the wall with my hand; I carried it out
in the darkness; I took it upon my shoulder before their eyes. - In [Eze
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002) the reason is assigned for the
command to perform the symbolical action, namely, the hard-heartedness
of the people. Because the generation in the midst of which Ezekiel
dwelt was blind, with seeing eyes, and deaf, with hearing ears, the
prophet was to depict before its eyes, by means of the sign that
followed, the judgment which was approaching; in the hope, as is added
in [Eze 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003), that they might possibly
observe and lay the sign to heart. The refractoriness (בּית מרי, as in
[Eze 2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005); [Eze
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026), etc.) is described as obduracy,
viz., having eyes, and not seeing; having ears, and not hearing, after
[Deu 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#003) (cf. [Jer
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#021); [Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009); [Mat
13:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014)). The root of this mental
blindness and deafness was to be found in obstinacy, i.e., in not
willing; "in that presumptuous insolence," as Michaelis says, "through
which divine light can obtain no admission." כּלי גולה, the goods (or
outfit) of exile, were a pilgrim's staff and traveller's wallet, with
the provisions and utensils necessary for a journey. Ezekiel was to
carry these out of the house into the street in the day-time, that the
people might see them and have their attention called to them. Then in
the evening, after dark, he was to go out himself, not by the door of
the house, but through a hole which he had broken in the wall. He was
also to take the travelling outfit upon his shoulder and carry it
through the hole and out of the place, covering his face all the while,
that he might not see the land to which he was going. "Thy place" is thy
dwelling-place. כּמוצאי : as the departures of exiles generally take
place, i.e., as exiles are accustomed to depart, not "at the usual time
of departure into exile," as Hהvernick proposes. For מוחא, see the comm.
on [Mic 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001). בּעלטה differs from
בּערב, and signifies the darkness of the depth of night (cf. [Gen
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017)); not, however, "darkness
artificially produced, equivalent to, with the eyes shut, or the face
covered; so that the words which follow are simply explanatory of
בּעלטה," as Schmieder imagines. Such an assumption would be at variance
not only with [Eze 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007), but also with
[Eze 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#012), where the covering or
concealing of the face is expressly distinguished from the carrying out
"in the dark." The order was to be as follows: In the day-time Ezekiel
was to take the travelling outfit and carry it out into the road; then
in the evening he was to go out himself, having first of all broken a
hole through the wall as evening was coming on; and in the darkness of
night he was to place upon his shoulders whatever he was about to carry
with him, and take his departure. This he was to do, because God had
made him a mōphēth for Israel: in other words, by doing this he was to
show himself to be a marvellous sign to Israel. For mōphēth, see the
comm. on [Exo 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021). In [Eze
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007), the execution of the command,
which evidently took place in the strictness of the letter, is fully
described. There was nothing impracticable in the action, for breaking
through the wall did not preclude the use of a hammer or some other
tool.

[Ezekiel 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 12:8</span></span>

Explanation of the Symbolical Action

[Eze 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#008). And the word of Jehovah
came to me in the morning, saying, [Eze
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#009). Son of man, have they not said
to thee, the house of Israel, the refractory generation, What art thou
doing? [Eze 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#010). Say to them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, This burden applies to the prince in Jerusalem,
and to all the house of Israel to whom they belong. [Eze
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011). Say, I am your sign: as I have
done, so shall it happen to them; into exile, into captivity, will they
go. [Eze 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#012). And the prince who is
in the midst of them he will lift it upon his shoulder in the dark, and
will go out: they will break through the wall, and carry it out thereby:
he will cover his face, that he may not see the land with eyes. [Eze
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013). And I will spread my net over
him, so that he will be caught in my snare: and I will take him to
Babel, into the land of the Chaldeans; but he will not see it, and will
die there. [Eze 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014). And all that is
about him, his help and all his troops, I will scatter into all winds,
and draw out the sword behind them. [Eze
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#015). And they shall learn that I am
Jehovah, when I scatter them among the nations, and winnow them in the
lands. [Eze 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#016). Yet I will leave of
them a small number of men from the sword, from the famine, and from the
pestilence; that they may relate all their abominations among the
nations whither they have come; and learn that I am Jehovah. - As
queries introduced with הלא have, as a rule, an affirmative sense, the
words "have they not asked," etc., imply that the Israelites had asked
the prophet what he was doing, though not in a proper state of mind, not
in a penitential manner, as the epithet בּית plainly shows. The prophet
is therefore to interpret the action which he had just been performing,
and all its different stages. The words הנּשׂיא המּשּׂא הזּה, to which
very different renderings have been given, are to be translated simply
"the prince is this burden," i.e., the object of this burden. Hammassâ
does not mean the carrying, but the burden, i.e., the threatening
prophecy, the prophetic action of the prophet, as in the headings to the
oracles (see the comm. on [Nah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)).
The "prince" is the king, as in [Eze
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#030), though not Jehoiachin, who had
been carried into exile, but Zedekiah. This is stated in the apposition
"in Jerusalem," which belongs to "the prince," though it is not
introduced till after the predicate, as in [Gen
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#024). To this there is appended the
further definition, "the whole house of Israel," which, being
co-ordinated with הנּשׂיא, affirms that all Israel (the covenant nation)
will share the fate of the prince. In the last clause of [Eze
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#010) בּתוכם does not stand for
בּתוכהּ, so that the suffix would refer to Jerusalem, "in the midst of
which they (the house of Israel) are." אשׁר cannot be a nominative,
because in that case המּה to be understood as referring to the persons
addressed, i.e., to the Israelites in exile (Hitzig, Kliefoth): in the
midst of whom they are, i.e., to whom they belong. The sentence explains
the reason why the prophet was to announce to those in exile the fat of
the prince and people in Jerusalem; namely, because the exiles formed a
portion of the nation, and would be affected by the judgment which was
about to burst upon the king and people in Jerusalem. In this sense
Ezekiel was also able to say to the exiles (in [Eze
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011)), "I am your sign;" inasmuch as
his sign was also of importance for them, as those who were already
banished would be so far affected by the departure of the king and
people which Ezekiel depicted, that it would deprive them of all hope of
a speedy return to their native land.

להם, in [Eze 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011), refers to the king
and the house of Israel in Jerusalem. בּגולה is rendered more forcible
by the addition of בּשּׁבי. The announcement that both king and people
must go into exile, is carried out still further in [Eze
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#012) and [Eze
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013) with reference to the king, and
in [Eze 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014) with regard to the
people. The king will experience all that Ezekiel has described. The
literal occurrence of what is predicted here is related in [Jer
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#001)., [Jer
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004).; [Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004). When the Chaldeans forced their
way into the city after a two years' siege, Zedekiah and his men of war
fled by night out of the city through the gate between the two walls. It
is not expressly stated, indeed, in the historical accounts that a
breach was made in the wall; but the expression "through the gate
between the two walls" ([Jer 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004);
[Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007); [Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004)) renders this very probable,
whether the gate had been walled up during the siege, or it was
necessary to break through the wall at one particular spot in order to
reach the gate. The king's attendants would naturally take care that a
breach was made in the wall, to secure for him a way of escape; hence
the expression, "they will break through." The covering of the face,
also, is not mentioned in the historical accounts; but in itself it is
by no means improbable, as a sign of the shame and grief with which
Zedekiah left the city. The words, "that he may not see the land with
eyes," do not appear to indicate anything more than the necessary
consequence of covering the face, and refer primarily to the simple fact
that the king fled in the deepest sorrow, and did not want to see the
land; but, as [Eze 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013) clearly
intimates, they were fulfilled in another way, namely, by the fact that
Zedekiah did not see with his eyes the land of the Chaldeans into which
he was led, because he had been blinded at Riblah ([Jer
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005); [Jer
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011); [Kg2
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007)). לעין, by eye = with his eyes,
is added to give prominence to the idea of seeing. For the same purpose,
the subject, which is already implied in the verb, is rendered more
emphatic by הוּא; and this הוּא is placed after the verb, so that it
stands in contrast with הארץ. The capture of the king was not depicted
by Ezekiel; so that in this respect the announcement ([Eze
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013)) goes further than the
symbolical action, and removes all doubt as to the credibility of the
prophet's word, by a distinct prediction of the fate awaiting him. At
the same time, his not seeing the land of Babylon is left so indefinite,
that it cannot be regarded as a vaticinium post eventum. Zedekiah died
in prison at Babylon ([Jer 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011)).
Along with the king, the whole of his military force will be scattered
in all directions ([Eze 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014)). עזרה,
his help, i.e., the troops that break through with him. כּל־אגפּיו, all
his wings (the wings of his army), i.e., all the rest of his forces. The
word is peculiar to Ezekiel, and is rendered "wings" by Jos. Kimchi,
like kenâphaim in [Isa 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008). For the
rest of the verse compare [Eze 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#002);
and for the fulfilment, [Jer 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#008);
[Jer 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#007), [Jer
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#012). The greater part of the people
will perish, and only a small number remain, that they may relate among
the heathen, wherever they are led, all the abominations of Israel, in
order that the heathen may learn that it is not from weakness, but
simply to punish idolatry, that God has given up His people to them (cf.
[Jer 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#008)).

[Ezekiel 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 12:17</span></span>

Sign Depicting the Terrors and Consequences of the Conquest of Jerusalem

[Eze 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017). And the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, [Eze 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#018). Son of
man, thou shalt eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with
trembling and trouble; [Eze 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#019). And
say to the people of the land, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, in the land of Israel, They will eat their
bread in trouble, and drink their water in amazement, because her land
is laid waste of all its fulness for the wickedness of all who dwell
therein. [Eze 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#020). And the inhabited
cities become desolate, and the land will be laid waste; that ye may
learn that I am Jehovah. - The carrying out of this sign is not
mentioned; not that there is any doubt as to its having been done, but
that it is simply taken for granted. The trouble and trembling could
only be expressed by means of gesture. רעשׁ, generally an earthquake or
violent convulsion; here, simply shaking, synonymous with רגזה,
trembling. "Bread and water" is the standing expression for food; so
that even here the idea of scanty provisions is not to be sought
therein. This idea is found merely in the signs of anxiety and trouble
with which Ezekiel was to eat his food. אל־אדמת = 'על־אד, "upon the
land," equivalent to "in the land." This is appended to show that the
prophecy does not refer to those who had already been carried into
exile, but to the inhabitants of Jerusalem who were still in the land.
For the subject-matter, compare [Eze
4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016). למען indicates not the
intention, "in order that," but the motive, "because."

[Ezekiel 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 12:21</span></span>

Declarations to Remove all Doubt as to the Truth of the Threat

The scepticism of the people as to the fulfilment of these threatening
prophecies, which had been made still more emphatic by signs, manifested
itself in two different ways. Some altogether denied that the prophecies
would ever be fulfilled ([Eze 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#022));
others, who did not go so far as this, thought that it would be a long
time before they came to pass ([Eze
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#027)). These doubts were fed by the
lying statements of false prophets. For this reason the refutation of
these sceptical opinions ([Eze
12:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021)) is followed in the next
chapter by a stern reproof of the false prophets and prophetesses who
led the people astray. - [Eze 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021).
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying, [Eze
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#022). Son of man, what kind of
proverb have ye in the land of Israel, that ye say, The days become
long, and every prophecy comes to nothing? [Eze
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#023). Therefore say to them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, I will put an end to this saying, and they shall
say it no more in Israel; but say to them, The days are near, and the
word of every prophecy. [Eze 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024).
For henceforth there shall be no vain prophecy and flattering
soothsaying in the midst of the house of Israel. [Eze
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025). For I am Jehovah; I speak; the
word which I speak will come to pass, and no longer be postponed; for in
your days, O refractory generation, I speak a word and do it, is the
saying of the Lord Jehovah. - Mâshâl, a proverb, saying current among
the people, and constantly repeated as a truth. "The days become long,"
etc., i.e., the time is lengthening out, and yet the prophecy is not
being fulfilled. אבד, perire, to come to nothing, to fail of fulfilment,
is the opposite of בּוא, to come, to be fulfilled. God will put an end
to these sayings, by causing a very speedy fulfilment of the prophecy.
The days are near, and every word of the prophecy, i.e., the days in
which every word predicted shall come to pass. The reason for this is
given in [Eze 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024) and [Eze
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025), in two co-ordinate sentences,
both of which are introduced with כּי. First, every false prophecy shall
henceforth cease in Israel ([Eze
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024)); secondly, God will bring about
the fulfilment of His own word, and that without delay ([Eze
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025)). Different explanations have
been given of the meaning of [Eze
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024). Kliefoth proposes to take שׁוא
and מקסם as the predicate to חזון: no prophecy in Israel shall be vain
and flattering soothsaying, but all prophecy shall become true, i.e., be
fulfilled. Such an explanation, however, is not only artificial and
unnatural, since מקסם would be inserted as a predicate in a most
unsuitable manner, but it contains this incongruity, that God would
apply the term מקסם, soothsaying, to the predictions of prophets
inspired by Himself. On the other hand, there is no force in the
objection raised by Kliefoth to the ordinary rendering of the words,
namely, that the statement that God was about to put an end to false
prophecy in Israel would anticipate the substance of the sixth word of
God (i.e., Ezekiel 13). It is impossible to see why a thought should not
be expressed here, and then still further expanded in Ezekiel 13. חלק,
smooth, i.e., flattering (compare [Hos
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#002); and for the prediction, [Zac
13:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004)). The same reply serves also to
overthrow the sceptical objection raised by the frivolous despisers of
the prophet's words. Hence there is only a brief allusion made to them
in [Eze 12:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#026). - [Eze
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#026). And the word of Jehovah came to
me, saying, [Eze 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#027). Son of man,
behold, the house of Israel saith, The vision that he seeth is for many
days off, and he prophesies for distant times. [Eze
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#028). Therefore say to them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, All my words shall be no longer postponed: the
word which I shall speak shall come to pass, saith the Lord Jehovah. -
The words are plain; and after what has already been said, they need no
special explanation. [Eze 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#020)
compare with [Eze 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 13](eze013)

</div>
