<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen015)  [Next](gen017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)

[Genesis 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 16:1</span></span>

As the promise of a lineal heir ([Gen
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#004)) did not seem likely to be
fulfilled, even after the covenant had been made, Sarai resolved, ten
years after their entrance into Canaan, to give her Egyptian maid Hagar
to her husband, that if possible she might "be built up by her," i.e.,
obtain children, who might found a house or family ([Gen
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#003)). The resolution seemed a
judicious one, and according to the customs of the East, there would be
nothing wrong in carrying it out. Hence Abraham consented without
opposition, because, as Malachi ([Mal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015)) says, he sought the seed
promised by God. But they were both of them soon to learn, that their
thoughts were the thoughts of man and not of God, and that their wishes
and actions were not in accordance with the divine promise. Sarai, the
originator of the plan, was the first to experience its evil
consequences. When the maid was with child by Abram, "her mistress
became little in her eyes." When Sarai complained to Abram of the
contempt she received from her maid (saying, "My wrong," the wrong done
to me, "come upon thee," cf. [Jer
51:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035); [Gen
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#013)), and called upon Jehovah to
judge between her and her husband,

(Note: בּיניך, with a point over the second Jod, to show that it is
irregular and suspicious; since בּין with the singular suffix is always
treated as a singular, and only with a plural suffix as plural.)

Abram gave her full power to act as mistress towards her maid, without
raising the slave who was made a concubine above her position. But as
soon as Sarai made her feel her power, Hagar fled. Thus, instead of
securing the fulfilment of their wishes, Sarai and Abram had reaped
nothing but grief and vexation, and apparently had lost the maid through
their self-concerted scheme. But the faithful covenant God turned the
whole into a blessing.

[Genesis 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 16:7</span></span>

Hagar no doubt intended to escape to Egypt by a road used from time
immemorial, that ran from Hebron past Beersheba, "by the way of Shur." -
Shur, the present Jifar, is the name given to the north-western portion
of the desert of Arabia (cf. [Exo
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)). There the angel of the Lord
found her by a well, and directed her to return to her mistress, and
submit to her; at the same time he promised her the birth of a son, and
an innumerable multiplication of her descendants. As the fruit of her
womb was the seed of Abram, she was to return to his house and there
bear him a son, who, though not the seed promised by God, would be
honoured for Abram's sake with the blessing of an innumerable posterity.
For this reason also Jehovah appeared to her in the form of the Angel of
Jehovah. הרה is adj. verb. as in [Gen
38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024), etc.: "thou art with child and
wilt bear;" ילדתּ for ילדת ([Gen
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019)) is found again in [Jdg
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005), [Jdg
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#007). This son she was to call Ishmael
("God hears"), "for Jehovah hath hearkened to thy distress." עני
afflictionem sine dubio vocat, quam Hagar afflictionem sentiebat esse,
nempe conditionem servitem et quod castigata esset a Sara (Luther). It
was Jehovah, not Elohim, who had heard, although the latter name was
most naturally suggested as the explanation of Ishmael, because the
hearing, i.e., the multiplication of Ishmael's descendants, was the
result of the covenant grace of Jehovah. Moreover, in contrast with the
oppression which has had endured and still would endure, she received
the promise that her son would endure no such oppression. "He will be a
wild ass of a man." The figure of a פּרא, onager, that wild and
untameable animal, roaming at its will in the desert, of which so highly
poetic a description is given in [Job
39:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005), depicts most aptly "the
Bedouin's boundless love of freedom as he rides about in the desert,
spear in hand, upon his camel or his horse, hardy, frugal, revelling in
the varied beauty of nature, and despising town life in every form;" and
the words, "his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand
against him," describe most truly the incessant state of feud, in which
the Ishmaelites live with one another or with their neighbours. "He will
dwell before the face of all his brethren." פּני על denotes, it is true,
to the east of (cf. [Gen 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018)), and
this meaning is to be retained here; but the geographical notice of the
dwelling-place of the Ishmaelites hardly exhausts the force of the
expression, which also indicated that Ishmael would maintain an
independent standing before (in the presence of) all the descendants of
Abraham. History has confirmed this promise. The Ishmaelites have
continued to this day in free and undiminished possession of the
extensive peninsula between the Euphrates, the Straits of Suez, and the
Red Sea, from which they have overspread both Northern Africa and
Southern Asia.

[Genesis 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 16:13</span></span>

In the angel, Hagar recognised God manifesting Himself to her, the
presence of Jehovah, and called Him, "Thou art a God of seeing; for she
said, Have I also seen here after seeing?" Believing that a man must die
if he saw God ([Exo 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019); [Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)), Hagar was astonished that she
had seen God and remained alive, and called Jehovah, who had spoken to
her, "God of seeing," i.e., who allows Himself to be seen, because here,
on the spot where this sight was granted her, after seeing she still
saw, i.e., remained alive. From this occurrence the well received the
name of "well of the seeing alive," i.e., at which a man saw God and
remained alive. Beer-lahai-roi: according to Ewald, ראי חי is to be
regarded as a composite noun, and ל as a sign of the genitive; but this
explanation, in which ראי is treated as a pausal form of ראי, does not
suit the form ראי with the accent upon the last syllable, which points
rather to the participle ראה with the first pers. suffix. On this ground
Delitzsch and others have decided in favour of the interpretation given
in the Chaldee version, "Thou art a God of seeing, i.e., the all-seeing,
from whose all-seeing eye the helpless and forsaken is not hidden even
in the farthest corner of the desert." "Have I not even here (in the
barren land of solitude) looked after Him, who saw me?" and
Beer-lahai-roi, "the well of the Living One who sees me, i.e., of the
omnipresent Providence." But still greater difficulties lie in the way
of this view. It not only overthrows the close connection between this
and the similar passages [Gen 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#031);
[Exo 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020); [Jdg
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022), where the sight of God excites
a fear of death, but it renders the name, which the well received from
this appearance of God, an inexplicable riddle. If Hagar called the God
who appeared to her ראי אל because she looked after Him whom she saw,
i.e., as we must necessarily understand the word, saw not His face, but
only His back; how could it ever occur to her or to any one else, to
call the well Beer-lahai-roi, "well of the Living One, who sees me,"
instead of Beer-el-roi? Moreover, what completely overthrows this
explanation, is the fact that neither in Genesis nor anywhere in the
Pentateuch is God called "the Living One;" and throughout the Old
Testament it is only in contrast with the dead gods of idols of the
heathen, a contrast never thought of here, that the expressions חי אלהים
and חי אל occur, whilst החי is never used in the Old Testament as a name
of God. For these reasons we must abide by the first explanation, and
change the reading ראי into ראי.

(Note: The objections to this change in the accentuation are entirely
counterbalanced by the grammatical difficulty connected with the second
explanation. If, for example, ראי is a participle with the 1st pers.
suff., it should be written ראני ([Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)) or ראני ([Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010)). ראי cannot mean, "who sees
me," but "my seer," an expression utterly inapplicable to God, which
cannot be supported by a reference to [Job
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#008), for the accentuation varies
there; and the derivation of ראי from ראי "eye of the seeing," for the
eye which looks after me, is apparently fully warranted by the analogous
expression לדה אשׁת in [Jer 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#021).)

With regard to the well, it is still further added that it was between
Kadesh ([Gen 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007)) and Bered. Though
Bered has not been discovered, Rowland believes, with good reason, that
he has found the well of Hagar, which is mentioned again in [Gen
24:62](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062); [Gen
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011), in the spring Ain Kades, to the
south of Beersheba, at the leading place of encampment of the caravans
passing from Syria to Sinai, viz., Moyle, or Moilahi, or Muweilih
(Robinson, Pal. i. p. 280), which the Arabs call Moilahi Hagar, and in
the neighbourhood of which they point out a rock Beit Hagar. Bered must
lie to the west of this.

[Genesis 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 16:15</span></span>

Having returned to Abram's house, Hagar bare him a son in his 86th year.
He gave it the name Ishmael, and regarded it probably as the promised
seed, until, thirteen years afterwards, the counsel of God was more
clearly unfolded to him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 17](gen017)

</div>
