<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen014)  [Next](gen016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 15:0</span></span>

The Covenant - Genesis 15

With the formula "after these things" there is introduced a new
revelation of the Lord to Abram, which differs from the previous ones in
form and substance, and constitutes a new turning point in his life. The
"word of Jehovah" came to him "in a vision;" i.e., neither by a direct
internal address, nor by such a manifestation of Himself as fell upon
the outward senses, nor in a dream of the night, but in a state of
ecstasy by an inward spiritual intuition, and that not in a nocturnal
vision, as in [Gen 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#002), but in the
day-time. The expression "in a vision" applies to the whole chapter.
There is no pause anywhere, nor any sign that the vision ceased, or that
the action was transferred to the sphere of the senses and of external
reality. Consequently the whole process is to be regarded as an internal
one. The vision embraces not only [Gen
15:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001) and [Gen
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#008), but the entire chapter, with
this difference merely, that from [Gen
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#012) onwards the ecstasy assumed the
form of a prophetic sleep produced by God. It is true that the bringing
Abram out, his seeing the stars ([Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)), and still more especially his
taking the sacrificial animals and dividing them ([Gen
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009), [Gen
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#010)), have been supposed by some to
belong to the sphere of external reality, on the ground that these
purely external acts would not necessarily presuppose a cessation of
ecstasy, since the vision was no catalepsy, and did not preclude the
full (?) use of the outward senses. But however true this may be, not
only is every mark wanting, which would warrant us in assuming a
transition from the purely inward and spiritual sphere, to the outward
sphere of the senses, but the entire revelation culminates in a
prophetic sleep, which also bears the character of a vision. As it was
in a deep sleep that Abram saw the passing of the divine appearance
through the carefully arranged portions of the sacrifice, and no
reference is made either to the burning of them, as in [Jdg
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#021), or to any other removal, the
arrangement of the sacrificial animals must also have been a purely
internal process. To regard this as an outward act, we must break up the
continuity of the narrative in a most arbitrary way, and not only
transfer the commencement of the vision into the night, and suppose it
to have lasted from twelve to eighteen hours, but we must interpolate
the burning of the sacrifices, etc., in a still more arbitrary manner,
merely for the sake of supporting the erroneous assumption, that
visionary procedures had no objective reality, or, at all events, less
evidence of reality than outward acts, and things perceived by the
senses. A vision wrought by God was not a mere fancy, or a subjective
play of the thoughts, but a spiritual fact, which was not only in all
respects as real as things discernible by the senses, but which
surpassed in its lasting significance the acts and events that strike
the eye. The covenant which Jehovah made with Abram was not intended to
give force to a mere agreement respecting mutual rights and
obligations-a thing which could have been accomplished by an external
sacrificial transaction, and by God passing through the divided animals
in an assumed human form-but it was designed to establish the purely
spiritual relation of a living fellowship between God and Abram, of the
deep inward meaning of which, nothing but a spiritual intuition and
experience could give to Abram an effective and permanent hold.

[Genesis 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 15:1</span></span>

The words of Jehovah run thus: "Fear not, Abram: I am a shield to thee,
thy reward very much." הרבּה an inf. absol., generally used adverbially,
but here as an adjective, equivalent to "thy very great reward." The
divine promise to be a shield to him, that is to say, a protection
against all enemies, and a reward, i.e., richly to reward his
confidence, his ready obedience, stands here, as the opening words
"after these things" indicate, in close connection with the previous
guidance of Abram. Whilst the protection of his wife in Egypt was a
practical pledge of the possibility of his having a posterity, and the
separation of Lot, followed by the conquest of the kings of the East,
was also a pledge of the possibility of his one day possessing the
promised land, there was as yet no prospect whatever of the promise
being realized, that he should become a great nation, and possess an
innumerable posterity. In these circumstances, anxiety about the future
might naturally arise in his mind. To meet this, the word of the Lord
came to him with the comforting assurance, "Fear not, I am thy shield."
But when the Lord added, "and thy very great reward," Abram could only
reply, as he thought of his childless condition: "Lord Jehovah, what
wilt Thou give me, seeing I go childless?" Of what avail are all my
possessions, wealth, and power, since I have no child, and the heir of
my house is Eliezer the Damascene? משׁק, synonymous with ממשׁק ([Zep
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009)), possession, or the seizure of
possession, is chosen on account of its assonance with דּמּשׂק.
בּן־משׁק, son of the seizing of possession = seizer of possession, or
heir. Eliezer of Damascus (lit., Damascus viz., Eliezer): Eliezer is an
explanatory apposition to Damascus, in the sense of the Damascene
Eliezer; though דּמּשׂק, on account of its position before אליעזר,
cannot be taken grammatically as equivalent to דּמּשׂקי.

(Note: The legend of Abram having been king in Damascus appears to have
originated in this, though the passage before us does not so much as
show that Abram obtained possession of Eliezer on his way through
Damascus.)

To give still more distinct utterance to his grief, Abram adds ([Gen
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#003)): "Behold, to me Thou hast given
no seed; and lo, an inmate of my house (בּן־בּיתי in distinction from
יליד־בּית, home-born, [Gen 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)) will
be my heir." The word of the Lord then came to him: "Not he, but one who
shall come forth from thy body, he will be thine heir." God then took
him into the open air, told him to look up to heaven, and promised him a
posterity as numerous as the innumerable host of stars (cf. [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017); [Gen
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#004); [Exo
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013), etc.). Whether Abram at this
time was "in the body or out of the body," is a matter of no moment. The
reality of the occurrence is the same in either case. This is evident
from the remark made by Moses (the historian) as to the conduct of Abram
in relation to the promise of God: "And he believed in Jehovah, and He
counted it to him for righteousness." In the strictly objective
character of the account in Genesis, in accordance with which the simple
facts are related throughout without any introduction of subjective
opinions, this remark appears so striking, that the question naturally
arises, What led Moses to introduce it? In what way did Abram make known
his faith in Jehovah? And in what way did Jehovah count it to him as
righteousness? The reply to both questions must not be sought in the New
Testament, but must be given or indicated in the context. What reply did
Abram make on receiving the promise, or what did he do in consequence?
When God, to confirm the promise, declared Himself to be Jehovah, who
brought him out of Ur of the Chaldees to give him that land as a
possession, Abram replied, "Lord, whereby shall I know that I shall
possess it?" God then directed him to "fetch a heifer of three years
old," etc.; and Abram fetched the animals required, and arranged them
(as we may certainly suppose, thought it is not expressly stated) as God
had commanded him. By this readiness to perform what God commanded him,
Abram gave a practical proof that he believed Jehovah; and what God did
with the animals so arranged was a practical declaration on the part of
Jehovah, that He reckoned this faith to Abram as righteousness.

The significance of the divine act is, finally, summed up in [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018), in the words, "On that day
Jehovah made a covenant with Abram." Consequently Jehovah reckoned
Abram's faith to him as righteousness, by making a covenant with him, by
taking Abram into covenant fellowship with Himself. האמין, from אמן to
continue and the preserve, to be firm and to confirm, in Hiphil to
trust, believe (πιστεύσιν), expresses "that state of mind which is sure
of its object, and relies firmly upon it;" and as denoting conduct
towards God, as "a firm, inward, personal, self-surrendering reliance
upon a personal being, especially upon the source of all being," it is
construed sometimes with ל (e.g., [Deu
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#023)), but more frequently with בּ
([Num 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011); [Num
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012); [Deu
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#032)), "to believe the Lord," and "to
believe on the Lord," to trust in Him, - πιστεύειν ἐπὶ τὸν Θεόν, as the
apostle has more correctly rendered the ἐπίστευσεν τῷ Θεῷ of the lxx
(vid., [Rom 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)). Faith therefore is
not merely assensus, but fiducia also, unconditional trust in the Lord
and His word, even where the natural course of events furnishes no
ground for hope or expectation. This faith Abram manifested, as the
apostle has shown in Rom 4; and this faith God reckoned to him as
righteousness by the actual conclusion of a covenant with him. צדקה,
righteousness, as a human characteristic, is correspondence to the will
of God both in character and conduct, or a state answering to the divine
purpose of a man's being. This was the state in which man was first
created in the image of God; but it was lost by sin, through which he
placed himself in opposition to the will of God and to his own divinely
appointed destiny, and could only be restored by God. When the human
race had universally corrupted its way, Noah alone was found righteous
before God ([Gen 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)), because he was
blameless and walked with God ([Gen
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009)). This righteousness Abram
acquired through his unconditional trust in the Lord, his undoubting
faith in His promise, and his ready obedience to His word. This state of
mind, which is expressed in the words בּיהוה האמין, was reckoned to him
as righteousness, so that God treated him as a righteous man, and formed
such a relationship with him, that he was placed in living fellowship
with God. The foundation of this relationship was laid in the manner
described in [Gen 15:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007).

[Genesis 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 15:7</span></span>

Abram's question, "Whereby shall I know that I shall take possession of
it (the land)?" was not an expression of doubt, but of desire for the
confirmation or sealing of a promise, which transcended human thought
and conception. To gratify this desire, God commanded him to make
preparation for the conclusion of a covenant. "Take Me, He said, a
heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram
of three years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon;" one of every
species of the animals suitable for sacrifice. Abram took these, and
"divided them in the midst," i.e., in half, "and placed one half of each
opposite to the other (בּתרו אישׁ, every one its half, cf. [Gen
42:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#025); [Num
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#017)); only the birds divided he
not," just as in sacrifice the doves were not divided into pieces, but
placed upon the fire whole ([Lev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017)). The animals chosen, as well as
the fact that the doves were left whole, corresponded exactly to the
ritual of sacrifice. Yet the transaction itself was not a real
sacrifice, since there was neither sprinkling of blood nor offering upon
an altar (oblatio), and no mention is made of the pieces being burned.
The proceeding corresponded rather to the custom, prevalent in many
ancient nations, of slaughtering animals when concluding a covenant, and
after dividing them into pieces, of laying the pieces opposite to one
another, that the persons making the covenant might pass between them.
Thus Ephraem Syrus (1, 161) observes, that God condescended to follow
the custom of the Chaldeans, that He might in the most solemn manner
confirm His oath to Abram the Chaldean. The wide extension of this
custom is evident from the expression used to denote the conclusion of a
covenant, בּרית כּרת to hew, or cut a covenant, Aram. קרם גּרז, Greek
ὅρκια τέμνειν, faedus ferire, i.e., ferienda hostia facere faedus; cf.
Bochart (Hieroz. 1, 332); whilst it is evident from [Jer
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018), that this was still customary
among the Israelites of later times. The choice of sacrificial animals
for a transaction which was not strictly a sacrifice, was founded upon
the symbolical significance of the sacrificial animals, i.e., upon the
fact that they represented and took the place of those who offered them.
In the case before us, they were meant to typify the promised seed of
Abram. This would not hold good, indeed, if the cutting of the animals
had been merely intended to signify, that any who broke the covenant
would be treated like the animals that were there cut in pieces. But
there is no sure ground in [Jer 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018).
for thus interpreting the ancient custom. The meaning which the prophet
there assigns to the symbolical usage, may be simply a different
application of it, which does not preclude an earlier and different
intention in the symbol. The division of the animals probably denoted
originally the two parties to the covenant, and the passing of the
latter through the pieces laid opposite to one another, their formation
into one: a signification to which the other might easily have been
attached as a further consequence and explanation. And if in such a case
the sacrificial animals represented the parties to the covenant, so also
even in the present instance the sacrificial animals were fitted for
that purpose, since, although originally representing only the owner or
offerer of the sacrifice, by their consecration as sacrifices they were
also brought into connection with Jehovah. But in the case before us the
animals represented Abram and his seed, not in the fact of their being
slaughtered, as significant of the slaying of that seed, but only in
what happened to and in connection with the slaughtered animals: birds
of prey attempted to eat them, and when extreme darkness came on, the
glory of God passed through them. As all the seed of Abram was
concerned, one of every kind of animal suitable for sacrifice was taken,
ut ex toto populo et singulis partibus sacrificium unum fieret (Calvin).
The age of the animals, three years old, was supposed by Theodoret to
refer to the three generations of Israel which were to remain in Egypt,
or the three centuries of captivity in a foreign land; and this is
rendered very probable by the fact, that in [Jdg
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#025) the bullock of seven years old
undoubtedly refers to the seven years of Midianitish oppression. On the
other hand, we cannot find in the six halves of the three animals and
the undivided birds, either 7 things or the sacred number 7, for two
undivided birds cannot represent one whole, but two; nor can we
attribute to the eight pieces any symbolical meaning, for these numbers
necessarily followed from the choice of one specimen of every kind of
animal that was fit for sacrifice, and from the division of the larger
animals into two.

[Genesis 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 15:11</span></span>

"Then birds of prey (העיט with the article, as [Gen
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)) came down upon the carcases,
and Abram frightened them away." The birds of prey represented the foes
of Israel, who would seek to eat up, i.e., exterminate it. And the fact
that Abram frightened them away was a sign, that Abram's faith and his
relation to the Lord would preserve the whole of his posterity from
destruction, that Israel would be saved for Abram's sake ([Psa
105:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#042)).

[Genesis 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 15:12</span></span>

"And when the sun was just about to go down (on the construction, see
Ges. 132), and deep sleep (תּרדּמה, as in [Gen
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021), a deep sleep produced by God)
had fallen upon Abram, behold there fell upon him terror, great
darkness." The vision here passes into a prophetic sleep produced by
God. In this sleep there fell upon Abram dread and darkness; this is
shown by the interchange of the perfect נפלה and the participle נפלת.
The reference to the time is intended to show "the supernatural
character of the darkness and sleep, and the distinction between the
vision and a dream" (O. v. Gerlach). It also possesses a symbolical
meaning. The setting of the sun prefigured to Abram the departure of the
sun of grace, which shone upon Israel, and the commencement of a dark
and dreadful period of suffering for his posterity, the very
anticipation of which involved Abram in darkness. For the words which he
heard in the darkness were these ([Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013).): "Know of a surety, that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve
them (the lords of the strange land), and they (the foreigners) shall
oppress them 400 years." That these words had reference to the sojourn
of the children of Israel in Egypt, is placed beyond all doubt by the
fulfilment. The 400 years were, according to prophetic language, a round
number for the 430 years that Israel spent in Egypt ([Exo
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040)). "Also that nation whom they
shall serve will I judge (see the fulfilment, [Exo
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#011)); and afterward shall they come
out with great substance (the actual fact according to [Exo
12:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031)). And thou shalt go to thy
fathers in peace, and be buried in a good old age (cf. [Gen
25:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007)); and in the fourth generation
they shall come hither again." The calculations are made here on the
basis of a hundred years to a generation: not too much for those times,
when the average duration of life was above 150 years, and Isaac was
born in the hundredth year of Abraham's life. "For the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full." Amorite, the name of the most powerful tribe
of the Canaanites, is used here as the common name of all the
inhabitants of Canaan, just as in [Jos
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015) (cf. [Gen
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005)), [Jdg
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#010), etc.).

By this revelation Abram had the future history of his seed pointed out
to him in general outlines, and was informed at the same time why
neither he nor his descendants could obtain immediate possession of the
promised land, viz., because the Canaanites were not yet ripe for the
sentence of extermination.

[Genesis 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 15:17</span></span>

When the sun had gone down, and thick darkness had come on (היה
impersonal), "behold a smoking furnace, and (with) a fiery torch, which
passed between those pieces," - a description of what Abram saw in his
deep prophetic sleep, corresponding to the mysterious character of the
whole proceeding. תּנּוּר, a stove, is a cylindrical fire-pot, such as
is used in the dwelling-houses of the East. The phenomenon, which passed
through the pieces as they lay opposite to one another, resembled such a
smoking stove, from which a fiery torch, i.e., a brilliant flame, was
streaming forth. In this symbol Jehovah manifested Himself to Abram,
just as He afterwards did to the people of Israel in the pillar of cloud
and fire. Passing through the pieces, He ratified the covenant which He
made with Abram. His glory was enveloped in fire and smoke, the produce
of the consuming fire, - both symbols of the wrath of God (cf. [Psa
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009), and Hengstenberg in loc.), whose
fiery zeal consumes whatever opposes it (vid., [Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)). - To establish and give reality
to the covenant to be concluded with Abram, Jehovah would have to pass
through the seed of Abram when oppressed by the Egyptians and threatened
with destruction, and to execute judgment upon their oppressors ([Exo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004); [Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012)). In this symbol, the passing of
the Lord between the pieces meant something altogether different from
the oath of the Lord by Himself in [Gen
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016), or by His life in [Deu
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#040), or by His soul in [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008) and [Jer
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014). It set before Abram the
condescension of the Lord to his seed, in the fearful glory of His
majesty as the judge of their foes. Hence the pieces were not consumed
by the fire; for the transaction had reference not to a sacrifice, which
God accepted, and in which the soul of the offerer was to ascend in the
smoke to God, but to a covenant in which God came down to man. From the
nature of this covenant, it followed, however, that God alone went
through the pieces in a symbolical representation of Himself, and not
Abram also. For although a covenant always establishes a reciprocal
relation between two individuals, yet in that covenant which God
concluded with a man, the man did not stand on an equality with God, but
God established the relation of fellowship by His promise and His
gracious condescension to the man, who was at first purely a recipient,
and was only qualified and bound to fulfil the obligations consequent
upon the covenant by the reception of gifts of grace.

[Genesis 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 15:18</span></span>

In [Gen 15:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018) this divine
revelation is described as the making of a covenant (בּרית, from בּרה to
cut, lit., the bond concluded by cutting up the sacrificial animals),
and the substance of this covenant is embraced in the promise, that God
would give that land to the seed of Abram, from the river of Egypt to
the great river Euphrates. The river (נהר) of Egypt is the Nile, and not
the brook (נחל) of Egypt ([Num 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#005)),
i.e., the boundary stream Rhinocorura, Wady el Arish. According to the
oratorical character of the promise, the two large rivers, the Nile and
the Euphrates, are mentioned as the boundaries within which the seed of
Abram would possess the promised land, the exact limits of which are
more minutely described in the list of the tribes who were then in
possession. Ten tribes are mentioned between the southern border of the
land and the extreme north, "to convey the impression of universality
without exception, of unqualified completeness, the symbol of which is
the number ten" (Delitzsch). In other passages we find sometimes seven
tribes mentioned ([Deu 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001); [Jos
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010)), at other times six ([Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008), [Exo
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017); [Exo
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#023); [Deu
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#017)), at others five ([Exo
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005)), at others again only two ([Gen
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#007)); whilst occasionally they are
all included in the common name of Canaanites ([Gen
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006)). The absence of the Hivites is
striking here, since they are not omitted from any other list where as
many as five or seven tribes are mentioned. Out of the eleven
descendants of Canaan ([Gen 10:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015))
the names of four only are given here; the others are included in the
common name of the Canaanites. On the other hand, four tribes are given,
whose descent from Canaan is very improbable. The origin of the Kenites
cannot be determined. According to [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016); [Jdg
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#011), Hobab, the brother-in-law of
Moses, was a Kenite. His being called Midianite ([Num
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029)) does not prove that he was
descended from Midian ([Gen 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002)), but
is to be accounted for from the fact that he dwelt in the land of
Midian, or among the Midianites ([Exo
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)). This branch of the Kenites went
with the Israelites to Canaan, into the wilderness of Judah ([Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016)), and dwelt even in Saul's time
among the Amalekites on the southern border of Judah ([Sa1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006)), and in the same towns with
members of the tribe of Judah ([Sa1
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#029)). There is nothing either in
this passage, or in [Num 24:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#021), to
compel us to distinguish these Midianitish Kenites from those of Canaan.
The Philistines also were not Canaanites, and yet their territory was
assigned to the Israelites. And just as the Philistines had forced their
way into the land, so the Kenites may have taken possession of certain
tracts of the country. All that can be inferred from the two passages
is, that there were Kenites outside Midian, who were to be exterminated
by the Israelites. On the Kenizzites, all that can be affirmed with
certainty is, that the name is neither to be traced to the Edomitish
Kenaz ([Gen 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015), [Gen
36:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#042)), nor to be identified with the
Kenezite Jephunneh, the father of Caleb of Judah ([Num
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#012); [Jos
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006) : see my Comm. on Joshua, p. 356,
Eng. tr.). - The Kadmonites are never mentioned again, and their origin
cannot be determined. On the Perizzites see [Gen
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#007); on the Rephaims, [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005); and on the other names, [Gen
10:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 16](gen016)

</div>
