<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen044)  [Next](gen046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)

[Genesis 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 45:1</span></span>

The Recognition. - [Gen 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001). After
this appeal, in which Judah, speaking for his brethren, had shown the
tenderest affection for the old man who had been bowed down by their
sin, and the most devoted fraternal love and fidelity to the only
remaining son of his beloved Rachel, and had given a sufficient proof of
the change of mind, the true conversion, that had taken place in
themselves, Joseph could not restrain himself any longer in relation to
all those who stood round him. He was obliged to relinquish the part
which he had hitherto acted for the purpose of testing his brothers'
hearts, and to give full vent to his feelings. "He called out: Cause
every man to go out from me. And there stood no man (of his Egyptian
attendants) with him, while Joseph made himself known to his brethren,"
quia effusio illa affectuum et στοργῆς erga fratres et parentem tanta
fuit, ut non posset ferre alienorum praesentiam et aspectum (Luther).

[Gen 45:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#002)

As soon as all the rest were gone, he broke out into such loud weeping,
that the Egyptians outside could hear it; and the house of Pharaoh,
i.e., the royal family, was told of it (cf. [Gen
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#002) and [Gen
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016)). He then said to his brethren:
"I am Joseph. Is my father still alive?" That his father was still
living, he had not only been informed before ([Gen
43:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#027)), but had just been told again;
but his filial heart impels him to make sure of it once more. "But his
brethren could not answer him, for they were terrified before him:" they
were so smitten in their consciences, that from astonishment and terror
they could not utter a word.

[Gen 45:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#004)

Joseph then bade his brethren approach nearer, and said: "I am Joseph,
your brother, whom he sold into Egypt. But now be not grieved nor angry
with yourselves (בּעיניכם אל־חר as in [Gen
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#035)) that ye sold me hither; for God
hath sent me before you to preserve life." Sic enim Joseph interpretatur
venditionem. Vos quidem me vendidistis, sed Deus emit, asseruit et
vindicavit me sibi pastorem, principem et salvatorem populorum eodem
consilio, quo videbar amissus et perditus (Luther). "For," he continues
in explanation, "now there are two years of famine in the land, and
there are five years more, in which there will be no ploughing and
reaping. And God hath sent me before you to establish you a remnant (cf.
[Sa2 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#007)) upon the earth (i.e., to
secure to you the preservation of the tribe and of posterity during this
famine), and to preserve your lives to a great deliverance," i.e., to a
great nation delivered from destruction, cf. [Gen
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#020). פּליטה that which has escaped,
the band of men or multitude escaped from death and destruction ([Kg2
19:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#030)). Joseph announced
prophetically here, that God had brought him into Egypt to preserve
through him the family which He had chosen for His own nation, and to
deliver them out of the danger of starvation which threatened them now,
as a very great nation.

[Gen 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#008)

"And now (this was truly the case) it was not you that sent me hither;
but God (Ha-Elohim, the personal God, on contrast with his brethren)
hath made me a father to Pharaoh (i.e., his most confidential counsellor
and friend; cf. 1 Macc. 11:32, Ges. thes. 7), and lord of all his house,
and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt;" cf. [Gen
41:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040).

[Gen 45:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#009)

Joseph then directed his brethren to go up to their father with all
speed, and invite him in his name to come without delay, with all his
family and possessions, into Egypt, where he would keep him near
himself, in the land of Goshen (see [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011)), that he might not perish in
the still remaining five years of famine. הוּרשׁ: [Gen
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#011), lit., to be robbed of one's
possessions, to be taken possession of by another, from ירשׁ to take
possession.

[Gen 45:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#012)

But the brethren were so taken by surprise and overpowered by this
unexpected discovery, that to convince them of the reality of the whole
affair, Joseph was obliged to add, "Behold, your eyes see, and the eyes
of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.

And tell my father all my glory in Egypt, and all that ye have seen, and
bring my father quickly hither."

[Gen 45:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#014)

He then fell upon Benjamin's neck and wept, and kissed all his brethren
and wept on them, i.e., whilst embracing them; "and after that, his
brethren talked with him." כּן אחרי: after Joseph by a triple assurance,
that what they had done was the leading of God for their own good, had
dispelled their fear of retribution, and, by embracing and kissing them
with tears, had sealed the truth and sincerity of his words.

[Genesis 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 45:16</span></span>

Invitation to Jacob to Come into Egypt. - [Gen
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016). The report of the arrival of
Joseph's brethren soon found it sway into the palace, and made so
favourable an impression upon Pharaoh and his courtiers, that the king
sent a message through Joseph to his brethren to come with their father
and their families ("your houses") into Egypt, saying that he would give
them "the good of the land of Egypt," and they should eat "the fat of
the land." טוּב, "the good," is not the best part, but the good things
(produce) of the land, as in [Gen
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#020), [Gen
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#023), [Gen
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#010); [Kg2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#009). חלב, fat, i.e., the finest
productions.

[Genesis 45:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 45:19</span></span>

At the same time Pharaoh empowered Joseph ("thou art commanded") to give
his brethren carriages to take with them, in which to convey their
children and wives and their aged father, and recommended them to leave
their goods behind them in Canaan, for the good of all Egypt was at
their service. From time immemorial Egypt was rich in small, two-wheeled
carriages, which could be used even where there were no roads (cf. [Gen
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#009); [Exo
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#006). with [Isa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#009)). "Let not your eye look with
mourning (תּחס) at your goods;" i.e., do not trouble about the
house-furniture which you are obliged to leave behind. The good-will
manifested in this invitation of Pharaoh towards Jacob's family was to
be attributed to the feeling of gratitude to Joseph, and "is related
circumstantially, because this free and honourable invitation involved
the right of Israel to leave Egypt again without obstruction"
(Delitzsch).

[Genesis 45:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 45:21</span></span>

The sons of Israel carried out the instructions of Joseph and the
invitation of Pharaoh ([Gen 45:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#025)).
But Joseph not only sent carriages according to Pharaoh's directions,
and food for the journey, he also gave them presents, changes of
raiment, a suit for every one, and five suits for Benjamin, as well as
300 shekels of silver. שׂמלות חלפות: change of clothes, clothes to
change; i.e., dress clothes which were worn on special occasions and
frequently changed ([Jdg 13:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#012),
[Jdg 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#019); [Kg2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#005)). "And to his father he sent like
these;" i.e., not changes of clothes, but presents also, viz., ten asses
"carrying of the good of Egypt," and ten she-asses with corn and
provisions for the journey; and sent them off with the injunction:
אל־תּרגּזוּ :noitcnu, μὴ ὀργἱζεσθε (lxx), "do not get angry by the way."
Placatus erat Joseph fratribus, simul eos admonet, ne quid turbarum
moveant. Timendum enim erat, ne quisque se purgando crimen transferre in
alios studeret atque its surgeret contentio (Calvin).

[Genesis 45:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 45:25</span></span>

When they got back, and brought word to their father, "Joseph is still
living, yea (וכי an emphatic assurance, Ewald, 3306) he is ruler in all
the land of Egypt, his heart stopped, for he believed them not;" i.e.,
his heart did not beat at this joyful news, for he put no faith in what
they said. It was not till they told him all that Joseph had said, and
he saw the carriages that Joseph had sent, that "the spirit of their
father Jacob revived; and Israel said: It is enough! Joseph my son is
yet alive: I will go and see him before I die." Observe the significant
interchange of Jacob and Israel. When once the crushed spirit of the old
man was revived by the certainty that his son Joseph was still alive,
Jacob was changed into Israel, the "conqueror overcoming his grief at
the previous misconduct of his sons" (Fr. v. Meyer).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 46](gen046)

</div>
