<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen041)  [Next](gen043) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001)

[Genesis 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 42:1</span></span>

With the words "Why do ye look at one another!" viz., in such a helpless
and undecided manner. Jacob exhorted his sons to fetch corn from Egypt,
to preserve his family from starvation. Joseph's ten brothers went, as
their aged father would not allow his youngest son Benjamin to go with
them, for fear that some calamity might befall him (קרא = קרה, [Gen
44:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#029) as in [Gen
42:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#038) and [Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)); and they came "in the midst of
the comers," i.e., among others who came from the same necessity, and
bowed down before Joseph with their faces to the earth. For he was "the
ruler over the land," and had the supreme control of the sale of the
corn, so that they were obliged to apply to him. השּׁלּיט seems to have
been the standing title which the Shemites gave to Joseph as ruler in
Egypt; and from this the later legend of Σάλατις the first king of the
Hyksos arose (Josephus c. Ap. i. 14). The only other passages in which
the word occurs in the Old Testament are in writings of the captivity or
a still later date, and there it is taken from the Chaldee; it belongs,
however, not merely to the Aramaean thesaurus, but to the Arabic also,
from which it was introduced into the passage before us.

[Genesis 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 42:7</span></span>

Joseph recognised his brothers at once; but they could not recognise a
brother who had not been seen for 20 years, and who, moreover, had not
only become thoroughly Egyptianized, but had risen to be a great lord.
And he acted as a foreigner (יתנכּר) towards them, speaking harshly, and
asking them whence they had come. In [Gen
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#007), according to a truly Semitic
style of narrative, we have a condensation of what is more
circumstantially related in [Gen
42:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#008).

[Genesis 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 42:9</span></span>

As the sight of his brethren bowing before him with the deepest
reverence reminded Joseph of his early dreams of the sheaves and stars,
which had so increased the hatred of his brethren towards him as to lead
to a proposal to kill him, and an actual sale, he said to them, "Ye are
spies; to see the nakedness of the land (i.e., the unfortified parts of
the kingdom which would be easily accessible to a foe) ye are come;" and
persisted in this charge notwithstanding their reply, "nay, my lord, but
(ו see Ges. 155, 1b) to buy food are thy servants come. We are all one
man's sons (נחנוּ for אנחנוּ, only in [Exo
16:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007); [Num
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#032); [Sa2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#012); [Lam
3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042)): honest (כּנים) are we; thy
servants are no spies." Cum exploratio sit delictum capitale, non est
verisimile; quod pater tot filios uno tempore vitae periculo expositurus
sit (J. Gerhard). But as their assertion failed to make any impression
upon the Egyptian lord, they told him still more particularly about
their family ([Gen 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#013).): "Twelve
are thy servants, brothers are we, sons of a man in the land of Canaan;
and behold the youngest is now with our father, and one is no more
(אימנּוּ as in [Gen 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)). Joseph then
replied, "That is it (הוּא neut. like [Gen
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016)) that I spake unto you, saying
ye are spies. By this shall ye be proved: By the life of Pharaoh! ye
shall not (אם, like [Gen 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#023)) go
hence, unless your youngest brother come hither. Send one of you, and
let him fetch your brother; but he shall be in bonds, and your words
shall be proved, whether there be truth in you or not. By the life of
Pharaoh! ye are truly spies!" He then had them put into custody for
three days. By the coming of the youngest brother, Joseph wanted to test
their assertion, not because he thought it possible that he might not be
living with them, and they might have treated him as they did Joseph
(Kn.), but because he wished to discover their feelings towards
Benjamin, and see what affection they had for this son of Rachel, who
had taken Joseph's place as his father's favourite. And with his harsh
mode of addressing them, Joseph had no intention whatever to administer
to his brethren "a just punishment for their wickedness towards him,"
for his heart could not have stooped to such mean revenge; but he wanted
to probe thoroughly the feelings of their hearts, "whether they felt
that they deserved the punishment of God for the sin they had
committed," and how they felt towards their aged father and their
youngest brother.

(Note: Joseph nihil aliud agit quam ut revelet peccatum fratrum hoc
durissimo opere et sermone. Descendunt enim in Aegyptum una cum aliis
emtum frumentum, securi et negligentes tam atrocis delicti, cujus sibi
erant conscii, quasi nihil unquam deliguissent contra patrem decrepitum
aut fratrem innocentem, cogitant Joseph jam diu exemtum esse rebus
humanis, patrem vero rerum omnium ignarum esse. Quid ad nos? Non agunt
poenitentiam. Hi silices et adamantes frangendi et conterendi sunt ac
aperiendi oculi eorum, ut videant atrocitatem sceleris sui, idque ubi
perfecit Joseph statim verbis et gestibus humaniorem se praebet eosque
honorifice tractat. - Haec igitur atrocitas scelerum movit Joseph ad
explorandos animos fratrum accuratius, ita ut non solum priorum
delictorum sed et cogitationum pravarum memoriam renovaret, ac fuit sane
inquisitio satis ingrata et acerba et tamen ab animo placidissimo
profecta. Ego durius eos tractassem. Sed haec acerbitas, quam prae se
fert, non pertinet ad vindicandum injuriam sed ad salutarem eorum
poenitentiam, ut humilientur. Luther.)

Even in the fact that he did not send the one away directly to fetch
Benjamin, and merely detain the rest, but put the whole ten in prison,
and afterwards modified his threat ([Gen
42:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#018).), there was no indecision as to
the manner in which he should behave towards them - no "wavering between
thoughts of wrath and revenge on the one hand, and forgiving love and
meekness on the other;" but he hoped by imprisoning them to make his
brethren feel the earnestness of his words, and to give them time for
reflection, as the curt "is no more" with which they had alluded to
Joseph's removal was a sufficient proof that they had not yet truly
repented of the deed.

[Genesis 42:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 42:18</span></span>

On the third day Joseph modified his severity. "This do and live," i.e.,
then ye shall live: "I fear God." One shall remain in prison, but let
the rest of you take home "corn for the famine of your families," and
fetch your youngest brother, that your words may be verified, and ye may
not die, i.e., may not suffer the death that spies deserve. That he
might not present the appearance of despotic caprice and tyranny by too
great severity, and so render his brethren obdurate, Joseph stated as
the reason for his new decision, that he feared God. From the fear of
God, he, the lord of Egypt, would not punish or slay these strangers
upon mere suspicion, but would judge them justly. How differently had
they acted towards their brother! The ruler of all Egypt had compassion
on their families who were in Canaan suffering from hunger; but they had
intended to leave their brother in the pit to starve! These and similar
thoughts could hardly fail to pass involuntarily through their minds at
Joseph's words, and to lead them to a penitential acknowledgement of
their sin and unrighteousness. The notion that Joseph altered his first
intention merely from regard to his much afflicted father, appears
improbable, for the simple reason, that he can only have given utterance
to the threat that he should keep them all in prison till one of them
had gone and fetched Benjamin, for the purpose of giving the greater
force to his accusation, that they were spies. But as he was not serious
in making this charge, he could not for a moment have thought of
actually carrying out the threat. "And they did so:" in these words the
writer anticipates the result of the colloquy which ensued, and which is
more fully narrated afterwards. Joseph's intention was fulfilled. The
brothers now saw in what had happened to them a divine retribution:
"Surely we atone because of our brother, whose anguish of soul we saw,
when he entreated us and we would not hear; therefore is this distress
come upon us." And Reuben reminded them how he had warned them to no
purpose, not to sin against the boy - "and even his blood...behold it is
required" (cf. [Gen 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005)); i.e., not
merely the sin of casting him into the pit and then selling him, but his
death also, of which we have been guilty through that sale. Thus they
accused themselves in Joseph's presence, not knowing that he could
understand; "for the interpreter was between them." Joseph had conversed
with them through an interpreter, as an Egyptian who was ignorant of
their language. "The interpreter," viz., the one appointed for that
purpose; בּינות like [Gen 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#028). But
Joseph understood their words, and "turned away and wept" ([Gen
42:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#024)), with inward emotion at the
wonderful leadings of divine grace, and at the change in his brothers'
feelings. He then turned to them again, and, continuing the conversation
with them, had Simeon bound before their eyes, to be detained as a
hostage (not Reuben, who had dissuaded them from killing Joseph, and had
taken no part in the sale, but Simeon, the next in age). He then ordered
his men to fill their sacks with corn, to give every one (אישׁ as in
[Gen 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#010)) his money back in his
sack, and to provide them with food for the journey.

[Genesis 42:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 42:26</span></span>

Thus they started with their asses laden with the corn. On the way, when
they had reached their halting-place for the night, one of them opened
his sack to feed the ass, and found his money in it. מלון, camping-place
for the night, is merely a resting-place, not an inn, both here and in
[Exo 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#024); for there can hardly have
been caravanserais at that time, either in the desert or by the desert
road. אמתחת: an antiquated word for a corn-sack, occurring only in these
chapters, and used even here interchangeably with שׂק.

[Genesis 42:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 42:28</span></span>

When this discovery was made known to the brethren, their hearts sank
within them. They turned trembling to one another, and said, "What is
this that God hath done to us!" Joseph had no doubt had the money
returned, "merely because it was against his nature to trade with his
father and brethren for bread;" just as he had caused them to be
supplied with food for the journey, for no other reason than to give
them a proof of his good-will. And even if he may have thought it
possible that the brothers would be alarmed when they found the money,
and thrown into a state of much greater anxiety from the fear of being
still further accused by the stern lord of Egypt of cheating or of
theft, there was no reason why he should spare them this anxiety, since
it could only help to break their hard hearts still more. At any rate,
this salutary effect was really produced, even if Joseph had no such
intention. The brothers looked upon this incomprehensible affair as a
punishment from God, and neglected in their alarm to examine the rest of
the sacks.

[Genesis 42:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 42:29</span></span>

On their arrival at home, they told their father all that had occurred.

[Genesis 42:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 42:35</span></span>

But when they emptied their sacks, and, to their own and their father's
terror, found their bundles of money in their separate sacks, Jacob
burst out with the complaint, "Ye are making me childless! Joseph is
gone, and Simeon is gone, and will ye take Benjamin! All this falls upon
me" (כּלּנה for כּלּן as in [Pro
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#029)).

[Genesis 42:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 42:37</span></span>

Reuben then offered his two sons to Jacob as pledges for Benjamin, if
Jacob would entrust him to his care: Jacob might slay them, if he did
not bring Benjamin back-the greatest and dearest offer that a son could
make to a father. But Jacob refused to let him go. "If mischief befell
him by the way, he would bring down my grey hairs with sorrow into
Sheol" (cf. [Gen 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 43](gen043)

</div>
