<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen034)  [Next](gen036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)

[Genesis 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 35:1</span></span>

Journey to Bethel. - Jacob had allowed ten years to pass since his
return from Mesopotamia, without performing the vow which he made at
Bethel when fleeing from Esau ([Gen
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020).), although he had recalled it
to mind when resolving to return ([Gen
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#013)), and had also erected an altar
in Shechem to the "God of Israel" ([Gen
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020)). He was now directed by God
([Gen 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)) to go to Bethel, and there
build an altar to the God who had appeared to him on his flight from
Esau. This command stirred him up to perform what had been neglected,
viz., to put away from his house the strange gods, which he had
tolerated in weak consideration for his wives, and which had no doubt
occasioned the long neglect, and to pay to God the vow that he had made
in the day of his trouble. He therefore commanded his house ([Gen
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002), [Gen
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#003)), i.e., his wives and children,
and "all that were with him," i.e., his men and maid-servants, to put
away the strange gods, to purify themselves, and wash their clothes. He
also buried "all the strange gods," i.e., Rachel's teraphim ([Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)), and whatever other idols there
were, with the earrings which were worn as amulets and charms, "under
the terebinth at Shechem," probably the very tree under which Abraham
once pitched his tent ([Gen 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006)), and
which was regarded as a sacred place in Joshua's time (vid., [Jos
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026), though the pointing is אלּה
there). The burial of the idols was followed by purification through the
washing of the body, as a sign of the purification of the heart from the
defilement of idolatry, and by the putting on of clean and festal
clothes, as a symbol of the sanctification and elevation of the heart to
the Lord ([Jos 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#023)). This decided
turning to the Lord was immediately followed by the blessing of God.
When they left Shechem a "terror of God," i.e., a supernatural terror,
"came upon the cities round about," so that they did not venture to
pursue the sons of Jacob on account of the cruelty of Simeon and Levi
([Gen 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#005)). Having safely arrived in
Bethel, Jacob built an altar, which he called El Bethel (God of Bethel)
in remembrance of the manifestation of God on His flight from Esau.

[Genesis 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 35:8</span></span>

There Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died, and was buried below Bethel under
an oak, which was henceforth called the "oak of weeping," a mourning
oak, from the grief of Jacob's house on account of her death. Deborah
had either been sent by Rebekah to take care of her daughters-in-law and
grandsons, or had gone of her own accord into Jacob's household after
the death of her mistress. The mourning at her death, and the
perpetuation of her memory, are proofs that she must have been a
faithful and highly esteemed servant in Jacob's house.

[Genesis 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 35:9</span></span>

The Fresh Revelation at Bethel. - After Jacob had performed his vow by
erecting the altar at Bethel, God appeared to him again there ("again,"
referring to Gen 28), "on his coming out of Padan-Aram," as He had
appeared to him 30 years before on his journey thither, - though it was
then in a dream, now by daylight in a visible form (cf. [Gen
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#013), "God went up from him"). The
gloom of that day of fear had now brightened into the clear daylight of
salvation. This appearance was the answer, which God gave to Jacob on
his acknowledgement of Him; and its reality is thereby established, in
opposition to the conjecture that it is merely a legendary repetition of
the previous vision.

(Note: This conjecture derives no support from the fact that the
manifestations of God are ascribed to Elohim in [Gen
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001) and [Gen
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#009)., although the whole chapter
treats of the display of mercy by the covenant God, i.e., Jehovah. For
the occurrence of Elohim instead of Jehovah in [Gen
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001) may be explained, partly from the
antithesis of God and man (because Jacob, the man, had neglected to
redeem his vow, it was necessary that he should be reminded of it by
God), and partly from the fact that there is no allusion to any
appearance of God, but the words "God said" are to be understood, no
doubt, as relating to an inward communication. The use of Elohim in [Gen
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#009). follows naturally from the
injunction of Elohim in [Gen 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001); and
there was the less necessity for an express designation of the God
appearing as Jehovah, because, on the one hand, the object of this
appearance was simply to renew and confirm the former appearance of
Jehovah ([Gen 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012).), and on the
other hand, the title assumed in [Gen
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011), El Shaddai, refers to [Gen
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001), where Jehovah announces Himself
to Abram as El Shaddai.)

The former theophany had promised to Jacob divine protection in a
foreign land and restoration to his home, on the ground of his call to
be the bearer of the blessings of salvation. This promise God had
fulfilled, and Jacob therefore performed his vow. On the strength of
this, God now confirmed to him the name of Israel, which He had already
given him in [Gen 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028), and with it
the promised of a numerous seed and the possession of Canaan, which, so
far as the form and substance are concerned, points back rather to [Gen
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#006) and [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008) than to [Gen
28:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013), and for the fulfilment of
which, commencing with the birth of his sons and his return to Canaan,
and stretching forward to the most remote future, the name of Israel was
to furnish him with a pledge. - Jacob alluded to this second
manifestation of God at Bethel towards the close of his life ([Gen
48:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003)); and Hosea ([Hos
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)) represents it as the result of
his wrestling with God. The remembrance of this appearance Jacob
transmitted to his descendants by erecting a memorial stone, which he
not only anointed with oil like the former one in [Gen
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017), but consecrated by a
drink-offering and by the renewal of the name Bethel.

[Genesis 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 35:16</span></span>

Birth of Benjamin and Death of Rachel. - Jacob's departure from Bethel
was not in opposition to the divine command, "dwell there" ([Gen
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)). For the word שׁב does not
enjoin a permanent abode; but, when taken in connection with what
follows, "make there an altar," it merely directs him to stay there and
perform his vow. As they were travelling forward, Rachel was taken in
labour not far from Ephratah. הארץ כּברת is a space, answering probably
to the Persian parassang, though the real meaning of כּברה is unknown.
The birth was a difficult one. בּלדתּהּ תּקשׁ: she had difficulty in her
labour (instead of Piel we find Hiphil in [Gen
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#017) with the same signification).
The midwife comforted her by saying: "Fear not, for this also is to thee
a son," - a wish expressed by her when Joseph was born ([Gen
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#024)). But she expired; and as she
was dying, she called him Been-oni, "son of my pain." Jacob, however,
called him Ben-jamin, probably son of good fortune, according to the
meaning of the word jamin sustained by the Arabic, to indicate that his
pain at the loss of his favourite wife was compensated by the birth of
this son, who now completed the number twelve. Other explanations are
less simple. He buried Rachel on the road to Ephratah, or Ephrath
(probably the fertile, from פּרה), i.e., Bethlehem (bread-house), by
which name it is better known, though the origin of it is obscure. He
also erected a monument over her grave (מצּבה, στήλη), on which the
historian observes, "This is the pillar of Rachel's grave unto this
day:" a remark which does not necessarily point to a post-Mosaic period,
but which could easily have been made even 10 or 20 years after its
erection. For the fact that a grave-stone had been preserved upon the
high road in a foreign land, the inhabitants of which had no interest
whatever in it, might appear worthy of notice even though only a single
decennary had passed away.

(Note: But even if this Mazzebah was really preserved till the conquest
of Canaan by the Israelites, i.e., more than 450 years, and the remark
referred to that time, it might be an interpolation by a later hand. The
grave was certainly a well-known spot in Samuel's time ([Sa1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002)); but a monumentum ubi Rachel
posita est uxor Jacob is first mentioned again by the Bordeaux pilgrims
of a.d. 333 and Jerome. The Kubbet Rahil (Rachel's grave), which is now
shown about half an hour's journey to the north of Bethlehem, to the
right of the road from Jerusalem to Hebron, is merely "an ordinary
Muslim wely, or tomb of a holy person, a small square building of stone
with a dome, and within it a tomb in the ordinary Mohammedan form" (Rob.
Pal. 1, p. 322). It has been recently enlarged by a square court with
high walls and arches on the eastern side (Rob. Bibl. Researches. p.
357). Now although this grave is not ancient, the correctness of the
tradition, which fixes upon this as the site of Rachel's grave, cannot
on the whole be disputed. At any rate, the reasons assigned to the
contrary by Thenius, Kurtz, and others are not conclusive.)

[Genesis 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 35:21</span></span>

[Gen 35:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021)

Reuben's Incest. - As they travelled onward, Jacob pitched his tent on
the other side of Migdal Eder, where Reuben committed incest with
Bilhah, his father's concubine. It is merely alluded to her in the
passing remark that Israel heard it, by way of preparation for [Gen
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004). Migdal Eder (flock-tower) was a
watch-tower built for the protection of flocks against robbers (cf. [Kg2
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008); [Ch2
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#010); [Ch2
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#004)) on the other side of Bethlehem,
but hardly within 1000 paces of the town, where it has been placed by
tradition since the time of Jerome. The piska in the middle of [Gen
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022) does not indicate a gap in the
text, but the conclusion of a parashah, a division of the text of
greater antiquity and greater correctness than the Masoretic division.

[Gen 35:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022)

Jacob's Return to His Father's House, and Death of Isaac. - Jacob had
left his father's house with no other possession than a staff, and now
he returned with 12 sons. Thus had he been blessed by the faithful
covenant God. To show this, the account of his arrival in his father's
tent at Hebron is preceded by a list of his 12 sons, arranged according
to their respective mothers; and this list is closed with the remark,
"These are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padan-Aram"
(ילּד for ילּדוּ; Ges. 143, 1), although Benjamin, the twelfth, was not
born in Padan-Aram, but on the journey back.

[Genesis 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 35:27</span></span>

Jacob's arrival in "Mamre Kirjath-Arbah," i.e., in the terebinth-grove
of Mamre ([Gen 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#018)) by Kirjath-Arbah
or Hebron (vid., [Gen 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002)),
constituted his entrance into his father's house, to remain there as
Isaac's heir. He had probably visited his father during the ten years
that had elapsed since his return from Mesopotamia, though no allusion
is made to this, since such visits would have no importance, either in
themselves or their consequences, in connection with the sacred history.
This was not the case, however, with his return to enter upon the family
inheritance. With this, therefore, the history of Isaac's life is
brought to a close. Isaac died at the age of 180, and was buried by his
two sons in the cave of Machpelah ([Gen
49:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#031)), Abraham's family grave, Esau
having come from Seir to Hebron to attend the funeral of his father. But
Isaac's death did not actually take place for 12 years after Jacob's
return to Hebron. For as Joseph was 17 years old when he was sold by his
brethren ([Gen 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002)), and Jacob was
then living at Hebron ([Gen 37:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#014)), it
cannot have been more than 31 years after his flight from Esau when
Jacob returned home (cf. [Gen 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)).
Now since, according to our calculation at [Gen
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#001), he was 77 years old when he
fled, he must have been 108 when he returned home; and Isaac would only
have reached his 168th year, as he was 60 years old when Jacob was born
([Gen 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)). Consequently Isaac lived
to witness the grief of Jacob at the loss of Joseph, and died but a
short time before his promotion in Egypt, which occurred 13 years after
he was sold ([Gen 41:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#046)), and only 10
years before Jacob's removal with his family to Egypt, as Jacob was 130
years old when he was presented to Pharaoh ([Gen
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009)). But the historical significance
of his life was at an end, when Jacob returned home with his twelve
sons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 36](gen036)

</div>
