<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen021)  [Next](gen023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

[Genesis 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 22:1</span></span>

Offering Up of Isaac. - For many years had Abraham waited to be
fulfilled. At length the Lord had given him the desired heir of his body
by his wife Sarah, and directed him to send away the son of the maid.
And now that this son had grown into a young man, the word of God came
to Abraham to offer up this very son, who had been given to him as the
heir of the promise, for a burnt-offering, upon one of the mountains
which should be shown him. This word did not come from his own heart, -
was not a thought suggested by the sight of the human sacrifices of the
Canaanites, that he would offer a similar sacrifice to his God; nor did
it originate with the tempter to evil. The word came from Ha-Elohim, the
personal, true God, who tried him (נסּה), i.e., demanded the sacrifice
of the only, beloved son, as a proof and attestation of his faith. The
issue shows, that God did not desire the sacrifice of Isaac by slaying
and burning him upon the altar, but his complete surrender, and a
willingness to offer him up to God even by death.

Nevertheless the divine command was given in such a form, that Abraham
could not understand it in any other way than as requiring an outward
burnt-offering, because there was no other way in which Abraham could
accomplish the complete surrender of Isaac, than by an actual
preparation for really offering the desired sacrifice. This constituted
the trial, which necessarily produced a severe internal conflict in his
mind. Ratio humana simpliciter concluderet aut mentiri promissionem aut
mandatum non esse Dei sed Diaboli; est enim contradictio manifesta. Si
enim debet occidi Isaac, irrita est promissio; sin rata est promissio,
impossibile est hoc esse Dei mandatum (Luther). But Abraham brought his
reason into captivity to the obedience of faith. He did not question the
truth of the word of God, which had been addressed to him in a mode that
was to his mind perfectly infallible (not in a vision of the night,
however, of which there is not a syllable in the text), but he stood
firm in his faith, "accounting that god was able to raise him up, even
from the dead" [Heb 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019)). Without
taking counsel with flesh and blood, Abraham started early in the
morning ([Gen 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003), [Gen
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#004)), with his son Isaac and two
servants, to obey the divine command; and on the third day (for the
distance from Beersheba to Jerusalem is about 20 1/2 hours; Rob. Pal.
iii. App. 66, 67) he saw in the distance the place mentioned by God, the
land of Moriah, i.e., the mountainous country round about Jerusalem. The
name מריּה, composed of the Hophal partic. of ראה and the divine name
יה, an abbreviation of יהוה (lit., "the shown of Jehovah," equivalent to
the manifestation of Jehovah), is no doubt used proleptically in [Gen
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002), and given to the mountain upon
which the sacrifice was to be made, with direct reference to this event
and the appearance of Jehovah to Abraham there. This is confirmed by
[Gen 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014), where the name is
connected with the event, and explained in the fuller expression
Jehovah-jireh. On the ground of this passage the mountain upon which
Solomon built the temple is called המּריּה with reference to the
appearance of the angel of the Lord to David on that mountain at the
threshing-floor of Araunah ([Sa2
24:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016)), the old name being revived
by this appearance.

[Genesis 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 22:5</span></span>

When in sight of the distant mountain, Abraham left the servants behind
with the ass, that he might perform the last and hardest part of the
journey alone with Isaac, and, as he said to the servants, "worship
yonder and then return." The servants were not to see what would take
place there; for they could not understand this "worship," and the issue
even to him, notwithstanding his saying "we will come again to you," was
still involved in the deepest obscurity. This last part of the journey
is circumstantially described in [Gen
22:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006), to show how strong a conflict
every step produced in the paternal heart of the patriarch. They go both
together, he with the fire and the knife in his hand, and his son with
the wood for the sacrifice upon his shoulder. Isaac asks his father,
where is the lamb for the burnt-offering; and the father replies, not
"Thou wilt be it, my son," but "God (Elohim without the article - God as
the all-pervading supreme power) will provide it;" for he will not and
cannot yet communicate the divine command to his son. Non vult filium
macerare longa cruce et tentatione (Luther).

[Genesis 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 22:9</span></span>

Having arrived at the appointed place, Abraham built an altar, arranged
the wood upon it, bound his son and laid him upon the wood of the altar,
and then stretched out his hand and took the knife to slay his son.

[Genesis 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 22:11</span></span>

In this eventful moment, when Isaac lay bound like a lamb upon the
altar, about to receive the fatal stroke, the angel of the Lord called
down from heaven to Abraham to stop, and do his son no harm. For the
Lord now knew that Abraham was אלהים ירא God-fearing, and that his
obedience of faith did extend even to the sacrifice of his own beloved
son. The sacrifice was already accomplished in his heart, and he had
fully satisfied the requirements of God. He was not to slay his son:
therefore God prevented the outward fulfilment of the sacrifice by an
immediate interposition, and showed him a ram, which he saw, probably
being led to look round through a rustling behind him, with its horns
fast in a thicket (אחר adv. behind, in the background); and as an
offering provided by God Himself, he sacrificed it instead of his son.

[Genesis 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 22:14</span></span>

From this interposition of God, Abraham called the place Jehovah-jireh,
"Jehovah sees," i.e., according to [Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008), provides, providet; so that
(אשׁר, as in [Gen 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#016), is equivalent
to כּן על, [Gen 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#009)) men are still
accustomed to say, "On the mountain where Jehovah appears" (יראה), from
which the name Moriah arose. The rendering "on the mount of Jehovah it
is provided" is not allowable, for the Niphal of the verb does not mean
provideri, but "appear." Moreover, in this case the medium of God's
seeing or interposition was His appearing.

[Genesis 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 22:15</span></span>

After Abraham had offered the ram, the angel of the Lord called to him a
second time from heaven, and with a solemn oath renewed the former
promises, as a reward for this proof of his obedience of faith (cf. [Gen
12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002)). To confirm their
unchangeableness, Jehovah swore by Himself (cf. [Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013).), a thing which never occurs
again in His intercourse with the patriarchs; so that subsequently not
only do we find repeated references to this oath ([Gen
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#007); [Gen
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#003); [Gen
50:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024); [Exo
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005), [Exo
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011); [Exo
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001), etc.), but, as Luther observes,
all that is said in [Psa 89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036); [Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011); [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004) respecting the oath given to
David, is founded upon this. Sicut enim promissio seminis Abrahae
derivata est in semen Davidis, ita Scriptura S. jusjurandum Abrahae
datum in personam Davidis transfert. For in the promise upon which these
psalms are based nothing is said about an oath (cf. 2 Sam 7; [Ch1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001)). The declaration on oath is
still further confirmed by the addition of יהוה נאם "edict (Ausspruch)
of Jehovah," which, frequently as it occurs in the prophets, is met with
in the Pentateuch only in [Num 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#028),
and (without Jehovah) in the oracles of Balaam, [Num
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#003), [Num
24:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#015). As the promise was
intensified in form, so was it also in substance. To express the
innumerable multiplication of the seed in the strongest possible way, a
comparison with the sand of the sea-shore is added to the previous
simile of the stars. And this seed is also promised the possession of
the gate of its enemies, i.e., the conquest of the enemy and the capture
of his cities (cf. [Gen 24:60](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#060)).

This glorious result of the test so victoriously stood by Abraham, not
only sustains the historical character of the event itself, but shows in
the clearest manner that the trial was necessary to the patriarch's life
of faith, and of fundamental importance to his position in relation to
the history of salvation. The question, whether the true God could
demand a human sacrifice, was settled by the fact that God Himself
prevented the completion of the sacrifice; and the difficulty, that at
any rate God contradicted Himself, if He first of all demanded a
sacrifice and then prevented it from being offered, is met by the
significant interchange of the names of God, since God, who commanded
Abraham to offer up Isaac, is called Ha-Elohim, whilst the actual
completion of the sacrifice is prevented by "the angel of Jehovah," who
is identical with Jehovah Himself. The sacrifice of the heir, who had
been both promised and bestowed, was demanded neither by Jehovah, the
God of salvation or covenant God, who had given Abraham this only son as
the heir of the promise, nor by Elohim, God as creator, who has the
power to give life and take it away, but by He-Elohim, the true God,
whom Abraham had acknowledged and adored as his personal God, and with
whom he had entered into a personal relation. Coming from the true God
whom Abraham served, the demand could have no other object than to
purify and sanctify the feelings of the patriarch's heart towards his
son and towards his God, in accordance with the great purpose of his
call. It was designed to purify his love to the son of his body from all
the dross of carnal self-love and natural selfishness which might still
adhere to it, and so to transform it into love to God, from whom he had
received him, that he should no longer love the beloved son as his flesh
and blood, but simply and solely as a gift of grace, as belonging to his
God-a trust committed to him, which he should be ready at any moment to
give back to God. As he had left his country, kindred, and father's
house at the call of God ([Gen 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)),
so was he in his walk with God cheerfully to offer up even his only son,
the object of all his longing, the hope of his life, the joy of his old
age. And still more than this, not only did he possess and love in Isaac
the heir of his possessions ([Gen
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002)), but it was upon him that all
the promises of God rested: in Isaac should his seed be called ([Gen
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)). By the demand that he should
sacrifice to God this only son of his wife Sarah, in whom his seed was
to grow into a multitude of nations ([Gen
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#004), [Gen
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#006), [Gen
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#016)), the divine promise itself
seemed to be cancelled, and the fulfilment not only of the desires of
his heart, but also of the repeated promises of his God, to be
frustrated. And by this demand his faith was to be perfected into
unconditional trust in God, into the firm assurance that God could even
raise him up from the dead. - But this trial was not only one of
significance to Abraham, by perfecting him, through the conquest of
flesh and blood, to be the father of the faithful, the progenitor of the
Church of God; Isaac also was to be prepared and sanctified by it for
his vocation in connection with the history of salvation. In permitting
himself to be bound and laid upon the altar without resistance, he gave
up his natural life to death, to rise to a new life through the grace of
God. On the altar he was sanctified to God, dedicated as the first
beginning of the holy Church of God, and thus "the dedication of the
first-born, which was afterwards enjoined in the law, was perfectly
fulfilled in him." If therefore the divine command exhibits in the most
impressive way the earnestness of the demand of God upon His people to
sacrifice all to Him, not excepting the dearest of their possessions
(cf. [Mat 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037), and [Luk
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026)); the issue of the trial teaches
that the true God does not demand a literal human sacrifice from His
worshippers, but the spiritual sacrifice of an unconditional denial of
the natural life, even to submission to death itself. By the sacrifice
of a ram as a burnt-offering in the place of his son, under divine
direction, not only was animal sacrifice substituted for human, and
sanctioned as an acceptable symbol of spiritual self-sacrifice, but the
offering of human sacrifices by the heathen was condemned and rejected
as an ungodly ἐθελοθρησεία. And this was done by Jehovah, the God of
salvation, who prevented the outward completion of the sacrifice. By
this the event acquires prophetic importance for the Church of the Lord,
to which the place of sacrifice points with peculiar clearness, viz.,
Mount Moriah, upon which under the legal economy all the typical
sacrifices were offered to Jehovah; upon which also, in the fulness of
time, God the Father gave up His only-begotten Son as an atoning
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, that by this one true
sacrifice the shadows of the typical sacrifices might be rendered both
real and true. If therefore the appointment of Moriah as the scene of
the sacrifice of Isaac, and the offering of a ram in his stead, were
primarily only typical in relation to the significance and intent of the
Old Testament institution of sacrifice; this type already pointed to the
antitype to appear in the future, when the eternal love of the heavenly
Father would perform what it had demanded of Abraham; that is to say,
when God would not spare His only Son, but give Him up to the real
death, which Isaac suffered only in spirit, that we also might die with
Christ spiritually, and rise with Him to everlasting life ([Rom
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032); [Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005), etc.).

[Genesis 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 22:20</span></span>

Descendants of Nahor. - With the sacrifice of Isaac the test of
Abraham's faith was now complete, and the purpose of his divine calling
answered: the history of his life, therefore, now hastens to its
termination. But first of all there is introduced quite appropriately an
account of the family of his brother Nahor, which is so far in place
immediately after the story of the sacrifice of Isaac, that it prepares
the way for the history of the marriage of the heir of the promise. The
connection is pointed out in [Gen
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020), as compared with [Gen
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#029), in the expression, "she also."
Nahor, like Ishmael and Jacob, had twelve sons, eight by his wife Milcah
and four by his concubine; whereas Jacob had his by two wives and two
maids, and Ishmael apparently all by one wife. This difference with
regard to the mothers proves that the agreement as to the number twelve
rests upon a good historical tradition, and is no product of a later
myth, which traced to Nahor the same number of tribes as to Ishmael and
Jacob. For it is a perfectly groundless assertion or assumption, that
Nahor's twelve sons were the fathers of as many tribes. There are only a
few names, of which it is probable that their bearers were the founders
of tribes of the same name. On Uz, see [Gen
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#023). Buz is mentioned in [Jer
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023) along with Dedan and Tema as an
Arabian tribe; and Elihu was a Buzite of the family of Ram ([Job
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002)). Kemuel, the father of Aram, was
not the founder of the Aramaeans, but the forefather of the family of
Ram, to which the Buzite Elihu belonged, - Aram being written for Ram,
like Arammim in [Kg2 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#029) for Rammim
in [Ch2 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#005). Chesed again was not the
father of the Chasdim (Chaldeans), for they were older than Chesed; at
the most he was only the founder of one branch of the Chasdim, possibly
those who stole Job's camels (Knobel; vid., [Job
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#017)). Of the remaining names, Bethuel
was not the founder of a tribe, but the father of Laban and Rebekah
([Gen 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#020)). The others are never met
with again, with the exception of Maachach, from whom probably the
Maachites ([Deu 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014); [Jos
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#005)) in the land of Maacah, a small
Arabian kingdom in the time of David ([Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006), [Sa2
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#008); [Ch1
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#006)), derived their origin and name;
though Maachah frequently occurs as the name of a person ([Kg1
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#039); [Ch1
11:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#043); [Ch1
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#016)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 23](gen023)

</div>
