<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen017)  [Next](gen019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 18:0</span></span>

Visit of Jehovah, With Two Angels, to Abraham's Tent - Genesis 18

Having been received into the covenant with God through the rite of
circumcision, Abraham was shortly afterwards honoured by being allowed
to receive and entertain the Lord and two angels in his tent. This fresh
manifestation of God had a double purpose, viz., to establish Sarah's
faith in the promise that she should bear a son in her old age ([Gen
18:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)), and to announce the judgment
on Sodom and Gomorrah (vv. 16-33).

[Genesis 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 18:1</span></span>

When sitting, about mid-day, in the grove of Mamre, in front of his
tent, Abraham looked up and unexpectedly saw three men standing at some
distance from him (עליו above him, looking down upon him as he sat),
viz., Jehovah ([Gen 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#013)) and two
angels ([Gen 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)); all three in human
form. Perceiving at once that one of them was the Lord (אדני, i.e.,
God), he prostrated himself reverentially before them, and entreated
them not to pass him by, but to suffer him to entertain them as his
guests: "Let a little water be fetched, and wash your feet, and recline
yourselves (השּׁען( sevle to recline, leaning upon the arm) under the
tree." - "Comfort your hearts:" lit., "strengthen the heart," i.e.,
refresh yourselves by eating and drinking ([Jdg
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#005); [Kg1
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#007)). "For therefore (sc., to give me
an opportunity to entertain you hospitably) have ye come over to your
servant:" כּן על כּי does not stand for כּי כּן על (Ges. thes. p. 682),
but means "because for this purpose" (vid., Ewald, 353).

[Genesis 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 18:6</span></span>

When the three men had accepted the hospitable invitation, Abraham, just
like a Bedouin sheikh of the present day, directed his wife to take
three seahs (374 cubic inches each) of fine meal, and back cakes of it
as quickly as possible (עגּות round unleavened cakes baked upon hot
stones); he also had a tender calf killed, and sent for milk and butter,
or curdled milk, and thus prepared a bountiful and savoury meal, of
which the guests partook. The eating of material food on the part of
these heavenly beings was not in appearance only, but was really eating;
an act which may be attributed to the corporeality assumed, and is to be
regarded as analogous to the eating on the part of the risen and
glorified Christ ([Luk 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041).),
although the miracle still remains physiologically incomprehensible.

[Genesis 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 18:9</span></span>

During the meal, at which Abraham stood, and waited upon them as the
host, they asked for Sarah, for whom the visit was chiefly intended. On
being told that she was in the tent, where she could hear, therefore,
all that passed under the tree in front of the tent, the one whom
Abraham addressed as Adonai (my Lord), and who is called Jehovah in [Gen
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#013), said, "I will return to thee
(חיּה כּעת) at this time, when it lives again" (חיּה, reviviscens,
without the article, Ges. 111, 2b), i.e., at this time next year; "and,
behold, Sarah, thy wife, will (then) have a son." Sarah heard this at
the door of the tent; "and it was behind Him" (Jehovah), so that she
could not be seen by Him as she stood at the door. But as the fulfilment
of this promise seemed impossible to her, on account of Abraham's
extreme age, and the fact that her own womb had lost the power of
conception, she laughed within herself, thinking that she was not
observed. But that she might know that the promise was made by the
omniscient and omnipotent God, He reproved her for laughing, saying, "Is
anything too wonderful (i.e., impossible) for Jehovah? at the time
appointed I will return unto thee," etc.; and when her perplexity led
her to deny it, He convicted her of falsehood. Abraham also had laughed
at this promise ([Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017)), and
without receiving any reproof. For his laughing was the joyous outburst
of astonishment; Sarah's, on the contrary, the result of doubt and
unbelief, which had to be broken down by reproof, and, as the result
showed, really was broken down, inasmuch as she conceived and bore a
son, whom she could only have conceived in faith ([Heb
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011)).

[Genesis 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 18:16</span></span>

After this conversation with Sarah, the heavenly guests rose up and
turned their faces towards the plain of Sodom (פּני על, as in [Gen
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#028); [Num
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#020); [Num
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#028)). Abraham accompanied them some
distance on the road; according to tradition, he went as far as the site
of the later Caphar barucha, from which you can see the Dead Sea through
a ravine, - solitudinem ac terras Sodomae. And Jehovah said, "Shall I
hide from Abraham what I propose to do? Abraham is destined to be a
great nation and a blessing to all nations ([Gen
12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002)); for I have known, i.e.,
acknowledged him (chosen him in anticipative love, ידע as in [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002); [Hos
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#004)), that he may command his whole
posterity to keep the way of Jehovah, to practise justice and
righteousness, that all the promises may be fulfilled in them." God then
disclosed to Abraham what he was about to do to Sodom and Gomorrah, not,
as Kurtz supposes, because Abraham had been constituted the hereditary
possessor of the land, and Jehovah, being mindful of His covenant, would
not do anything to it without his knowledge and assent (a thought quite
foreign to the context), but because Jehovah had chosen him to be the
father of the people of God, in order that, by instructing his
descendants in the fear of God, he might lead them in the paths of
righteousness, so that they might become partakers of the promised
salvation, and not be overtaken by judgment. The destruction of Sodom
and the surrounding cities was to be a permanent memorial of the
punitive righteousness of God, and to keep the fate of the ungodly
constantly before the mind of Israel. To this end Jehovah explained to
Abraham the cause of their destruction in the clearest manner possible,
that he might not only be convinced of the justice of the divine
government, but might learn that when the measure of iniquity was full,
no intercession could avert the judgment-a lesson and a warning to his
descendants also.

[Genesis 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 18:20</span></span>

"The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah, yea it is great; and their sin, yea it
is very grievous." The cry is the appeal for vengeance or punishment,
which ascends to heaven ([Gen 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)).
The כּי serves to give emphasis to the assertion, and is placed in the
middle of the sentence to give the greater prominence to the leading
thought (cf. Ewald, 330).

[Genesis 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 18:21</span></span>

God was about to go down, and convince Himself whether they had done
entirely according to the cry which had reached Him, or not. כלה עשׂה,
lit., to make completeness, here referring to the extremity of iniquity,
generally to the extremity of punishment ([Nah
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008); [Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027); [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010)): כּלה is a noun, as [Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023) shows, not an adverb, as in [Exo
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#001). After this explanation, the men
(according to [Gen 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001), the two
angels) turned from thence to go to Sodom ([Gen
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#022)); but Abraham continued standing
before Jehovah, who had been talking with him, and approached Him with
earnestness and boldness of faith to intercede for Sodom. He was urged
to this, not by any special interest in Lot, for in that case he would
have prayed for his deliverance; nor by the circumstance that, as he had
just before felt himself called upon to become the protector, avenger,
and deliverer of the land from its foes, so he now thought himself
called upon to act as mediator, and to appeal from Jehovah's judicial
wrath to Jehovah's covenant grace (Kurtz), for he had not delivered the
land from the foe, but merely rescued his nephew Lot and all the booty
that remained after the enemy had withdrawn; nor did he appeal to the
covenant grace of Jehovah, but to His justice alone; and on the
principle that the Judge of all the earth could not possibly destroy the
righteous with the wicked, he founded his entreaty that God would
forgive the city if there were but fifty righteous in it, or even if
there were only ten. He was led to intercede in this way, not by
"communis erga quinque populos misericordia" (Calvin), but by the love
which springs from the consciousness that one's own preservation and
rescue are due to compassionate grace alone; love, too, which cannot
conceive of the guilt of others as too great for salvation to be
possible. This sympathetic love, springing from the faith which was
counted for righteousness, impelled him to the intercession which Luther
thus describes: "sexies petiit, et cum tanto ardore ac affectu sic
urgente, ut prae nimia angustia, qua cupit consultum miseris
civitatibus, videatur quasi stulte loqui." There may be apparent folly
in the words, "Wilt Thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?"
but they were only "violenta oratio et impetuosa, quasi cogens Deum ad
ignoscendum." For Abraham added, "peradventure there be fifty righteous
within the city; wilt Thou also destroy and not forgive (נשׁא, to take
away and bear the guilt, i.e., forgive) the place for the fifty
righteous that are therein?" and described the slaying of the righteous
with the wicked as irreconcilable with the justice of God. He knew that
he was speaking to the Judge of all the earth, and that before Him he
was "but dust and ashes" - "dust in his origin, and ashes in the end;"
and yet he made bold to appeal still further, and even as low as ten
righteous, to pray that for their sake He would spare the city. - הפּעם
אך ([Gen 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#032)) signifies "only this
(one) time more," as in [Exo 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#017).
This "seemingly commercial kind of entreaty is," as Delitzsch observes,
"the essence of true prayer. It is the holy ἀναίδεια, of which our Lord
speaks in [Luk 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#008), the shamelessness
of faith, which bridges over the infinite distance of the creature from
the Creator, appeals with importunity to the heart of God, and ceases
not till its point is gained. This would indeed be neither permissible
nor possible, had not God, by virtue of the mysterious interlacing of
necessity and freedom in His nature and operations, granted a power to
the prayer of faith, to which He consents to yield; had He not, by
virtue of His absoluteness, which is anything but blind necessity,
placed Himself in such a relation to men, that He not merely works upon
them by means of His grace, but allows them to work upon Him by means of
their faith; had He not interwoven the life of the free creature into
His own absolute life, and accorded to a created personality the right
to assert itself in faith, in distinction from His own." With the
promise, that even for the sake of ten righteous He would not destroy
the city, Jehovah "went His way," that is to say, vanished; and Abraham
returned to his place, viz., to the grove of Mamre. The judgment which
fell upon the wicked cities immediately afterwards, proves that there
were not ten "righteous persons" in Sodom; by which we understand, not
merely ten sinless or holy men, but ten who through the fear of God and
conscientiousness had kept themselves free from the prevailing sin and
iniquity of these cities.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 19](gen019)

</div>
