<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen045)  [Next](gen047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

[Genesis 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 46:1</span></span>

"So Israel took his journey (from Hebron, [Gen
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#014)) with all who belonged to him,
and came to Beersheba." There, on the border of Canaan, where Abraham
and Isaac had called upon the name of the Lord ([Gen
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#033); [Gen
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#025)), he offered sacrifices to the
God of his father Isaac, ut sibi firmum et ratum esse testetur faedus,
quod Deus ipse cum Patribus pepigerat (Calvin). Even though Jacob might
see the ways of God in the wonderful course of his son Joseph, and
discern in the friendly invitation of Joseph and Pharaoh, combined with
the famine prevailing in Canaan, a divine direction to go into Egypt;
yet this departure from the land of promise, in which his fathers had
lived as pilgrims, was a step which necessarily excited serious thoughts
in his mind as to his own future and that of his family, and led him to
commend himself and his followers to the care of the faithful covenant
God, whether in so doing he thought of the revelation which Abram had
received ([Gen 15:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013)), or not.

[Gen 46:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#002)

Here God appeared to him in a vision of the night (מראת, an intensive
plural), and gave him, as once before on his flight from Canaan ([Gen
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012).), the comforting promise, "I am
האל (the Mighty One), the God of thy father: fear not to go down into
Egypt (מרדה for מרדת, as in [Exo 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#004)
דּעה for דּעת, cf. Ges. 69, 3, Anm. 1); for I will there make thee a
great nation. I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I - bring thee up
again also will I, and Joseph shall close thine eyes." גּם־עלה an inf.
abs. appended emphatically (as in [Gen
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#015)); according to Ges. inf. Kal.

[Gen 46:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#005)

Strengthened by this promise, Jacob went into Egypt with children and
children's children, his sons driving their aged father together with
their wives and children in the carriages sent by Pharaoh, and taking
their flocks with all the possessions that they had acquired in Canaan.

(Note: Such a scene as this, with the emigrants taking their goods laden
upon asses, and even two children in panniers upon an ass's back, may be
seen depicted upon a tomb at Beni Hassan, which might represent the
immigration of Israel, although it cannot be directly connected with it.
(See the particulars in Hengstenberg, Egypt and the Books of Moses.))

[Genesis 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 46:8</span></span>

The size of Jacob's family, which was to grow into a great nation, is
given here, with evident allusion to the fulfilment of the divine
promise with which he went into Egypt. The list of names includes not
merely the "sons of Israel" in the stricter sense; but, as is added
immediately afterwards, "Jacob and his sons," or, as the closing formula
expresses it ([Gen 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027)), "all the
souls of the house of Jacob, who came into Egypt" (הבּאה for בּאה אשׁר,
Ges. 109), including the patriarch himself, and Joseph with his two
sons, who were born before Jacob's arrival in Egypt. If we reckon these,
the house of Jacob consisted of 70 souls; and apart from these, of 66,
besides his sons' wives. The sons are arranged according to the four
mothers. Of Leah there are given 6 sons, 23 grandsons, 2 great-grandsons
(sons of Pharez, whereas Er and Onan, the sons of Judah who died in
Canaan, are not reckoned), and 1 daughter, Dinah, who remained
unmarried, and was therefore an independent member of the house of
Jacob; in all, therefore, 6 + 23 + 2 + 1 = 32, or with Jacob, 33 souls.
Of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, there are mentioned 2 sons, 11 grandsons, 2
great-grandsons, and 1 daughter (who is reckoned like Dinah, both here
and [Num 26:46](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#046), for some special
reason, which is not particularly described); in all, 2 + 11 + 2 + 1 =
16 souls. Of Rachel, "Jacob's (favourite) wife," 2 sons and 12 grandsons
are named, of whom, according to [Num
26:40](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#040), two were great-grandsons, = 14
souls; and of Rachel's maid Bilhah, 2 sons and 5 grandsons = 7 souls.
The whole number therefore was 33 + 16 + 14 + 7 = 70.

(Note: Instead of the number 70 given here, [Exo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005), and [Deu
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022), Stephen speaks of 75 ([Act
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014)), according to the lxx, which has
the number 75 both here and [Exo 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005),
on account of the words which follow the names of Manasseh and Ephraim
in [Gen 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#020) : ἐγένοντο δὲ οἱοὶ
Μανασσῆ, οὓς ἔτεκεν αὐτῷ ἡ παλλακῆ ἡ Σύρα, τοὺ Μαχίρ· Μαχὶρ δὲ ἐγέννησε
τὸν Γαλαάδ, υίοὶ δὲ Ἐφραΐ́μ ἀδελφοῦ Μανασσῆ Σουταλαὰμ καὶ Ταάμ. υίοὶ δὲ
Σουταλαάμ. Ἐδώμ: and which are interpolated by conjecture from [Gen
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#023), and [Num
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#029), [Num
26:35](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#035), and [Num
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#036) (33, 39, and 40), these three
grandsons and two great-grandsons of Joseph being reckoned in.)

The wives of Jacob's sons are neither mentioned by name nor reckoned,
because the families of Israel were not founded by them, but by their
husbands alone. Nor is their parentage given either here or anywhere
else. It is merely casually that one of the sons of Simeon is called the
son of a Canaanitish woman ([Gen
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010)); from which it may be inferred
that it was quite an exceptional thing for the sons of Jacob to take
their wives from among the Canaanites, and that as a rule they were
chosen from their paternal relations in Mesopotamia; besides whom, there
were also their other relations, the families of Ishmael, Keturah, and
Edom. Of the "daughters of Jacob" also, and the "daughters of his sons,"
none are mentioned except Dinah and Serah the daughter of Asher, because
they were not the founders of separate houses.

If we look more closely into the list itself, the first thing which
strikes us is that Pharez, one of the twin-sons of Judah, who were not
born till after the sale of Joseph, should already have had two sons.
Supposing that Judah's marriage to the daughter of Shuah the Canaanite
occurred, notwithstanding the reasons advanced to the contrary in Gen
38, before the sale of Joseph, and shortly after the return of Jacob to
Canaan, during the time of his sojourn at Shechem ([Gen
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)), it cannot have taken place
more than five, or at the most six, years before Joseph was sold; for
Judah was only three years older than Joseph, and was not more than 20
years old, therefore, at the time of his sale. But even then there would
not be more than 28 years between Judah's marriage and Jacob's removal
to Egypt; so that Pharez would only be about 11 years old, since he
could not have been born till about 17 years after Judah's marriage, and
at that age he could not have had two sons. Judah, again, could not have
taken four sons with him into Egypt, since he had at the most only two
sons a year before their removal ([Gen
42:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#037)); unless indeed we adopt the
extremely improbable hypothesis, that two other sons were born within
the space of 11 or 12 months, either as twins, or one after the other.
Still less could Benjamin, who was only 23 or 24 years old at the time
(vid., pp. 200f. and 204f.), have had 10 sons already, or, as [Num
26:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#038) shows, eight sons and two
grandsons. From all this it necessarily follows, that in the list before
us grandsons and great-grandsons of Jacob are named who were born
afterwards in Egypt, and who, therefore, according to a view which we
frequently meet with in the Old Testament, though strange to our modes
of thought, came into Egypt in lumbis patrum. That the list is really
intended to be so understood, is undoubtedly evident from a comparison
of the "sons of Israel" ([Gen 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008)),
whose names it gives, with the description given in Num 26 of the whole
community of the sons of Israel according to their fathers' houses, or
their tribes and families. In the account of the families of Israel at
the time of Moses, which is given there, we find, with slight
deviations, all the grandsons and great-grandsons of Jacob whose names
occur in this chapter, mentioned as the founders of the families, into
which the twelve tribes of Israel were subdivided in Moses' days. The
deviations are partly in form, partly in substance. To the former belong
the differences in particular names, which are sometimes only different
forms of the same name; e.g., Jemuel and Zohar ([Gen
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010)), for Nemuel and Zerah ([Num
26:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#012)); Ziphion and Arodi ([Gen
46:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#016)), for Zephon and Arod ([Num
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#015) and [Num
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#017)); Huppim ([Gen
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021)) for Hupham ([Num
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#039)); Ehi ([Gen
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021)), an abbreviation of Ahiram
([Num 26:38](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#038)); sometimes different
names of the same person; viz., Ezbon ([Gen
46:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#016)) and Ozni ([Num
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#016)); Muppim ([Gen
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021)) and Shupham ([Num
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#039)); Hushim ([Gen
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#023)) and Shuham ([Num
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#042)). Among the differences in
substance, the first to be noticed is the fact, that in Num 26 Simeon's
son Ohad, Asher's son Ishuah, and three of Benjamin's sons, Becher,
Gera, and Rosh, are missing from the founders of families, probably for
no other reason than that they either died childless, or did not leave a
sufficient number of children to form independent families. With the
exception of these, according to Num 26, all the grandsons and
great-grandsons of Jacob mentioned in this chapter were founders of
families in existence in Moses' time. From this it is obvious that our
list is intended to contain, not merely the sons and grandsons of Jacob,
who were already born when he went down to Egypt, but in addition to the
sons, who were the heads of the twelve tribes of the nation, all the
grandsons and great-grandsons who became the founders of mishpachoth,
i.e., of independent families, and who on that account took the place or
were advanced into the position of the grandsons of Jacob, so far as the
national organization was concerned.

On no other hypothesis can we explain the fact, that in the time of
Moses there was not one of the twelve tribes, except the double tribe of
Joseph, in which there were families existing, that had descended from
either grandsons or great-grandsons of Jacob who are not already
mentioned in this list. As it is quite inconceivable that no more sons
should have been born to Jacob's sons after their removal into Egypt, so
is it equally inconceivable, that all the sons born in Egypt either died
childless, or founded no families. The rule by which the nation
descending from the sons of Jacob was divided into tribes and families
(mishpachoth) according to the order of birth was this, that as the
twelve sons founded the twelve tribes, so their sons, i.e., Jacob's
grandsons, were the founders of the families into which the tribes were
subdivided, unless these grandsons died without leaving children, or did
not leave a sufficient number of male descendants to form independent
families, or the natural rule for the formation of tribes and families
was set aside by other events or causes. On this hypothesis we can also
explain the other real differences between this list and Num 26; viz.,
the fact that, according to [Num
26:40](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#040), two of the sons of Benjamin
mentioned in [Gen 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021), Naaman and
Ard, were his grandsons, sons of Belah; and also the circumstance, that
in [Gen 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#020) only the two sons of
Joseph, who were already born when Jacob arrived in Egypt, are
mentioned, viz., Manasseh and Ephraim, and none of the sons who were
born to him afterwards ([Gen 48:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#006)).
The two grandsons of Benjamin could be reckoned among his sons in our
list, because they founded independent families just like the sons. And
of the sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim alone could be admitted into
our list, because they were elevated above the sons born to Joseph
afterwards, by the fact that shortly before Jacob's death he adopted
them as his own sons and thus raised them to the rank of heads of
tribes; so that wherever Joseph's descendants are reckoned as one tribe
(e.g., [Jos 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001), [Jos
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#004)), Manasseh and Ephraim form the
main divisions, or leading families of the tribe of Joseph, the
subdivisions of which were founded partly by their brothers who were
born afterwards, and partly by their sons and grandsons. Consequently
the omission of the sons born afterwards, and the grandsons of Joseph,
from whom the families of the two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, who were
elevated into tribes, descended, forms only an apparent and not a real
exception to the general rule, that this list mentions all the grandsons
of Jacob who founded the families of the twelve tribes, without regard
to the question whether they were born before or after the removal of
Jacob's house to Egypt, since this distinction was of no importance to
the main purpose of our list. That this was the design of our list, is
still further confirmed by a comparison of [Exo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#005) and [Deu
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022), where the seventy souls of the
house of Jacob which went into Egypt are said to constitute the seed
which, under the blessing of the Lord, had grown into the numerous
people that Moses led out of Egypt, to take possession of the land of
promise. From this point of view it was a natural thing to describe the
seed of the nation, which grew up in tribes and families, in such a way
as to give the germs and roots of all the tribes and families of the
whole nation; i.e., not merely the grandsons who were born before the
migration, but also the grandsons and great-grandsons who were born in
Egypt, and became founders of independent families. By thus embracing
all the founders of tribes and families, the significant number 70 was
obtained, in which the number 7 (formed of the divine number 3, and the
world number 4, as the seal of the covenant relation between God and
Israel) is multiplied by the number 10, as the seal of completeness, so
as to express the fact that these 70 souls comprehended the whole of the
nation of God.

(Note: This was the manner in which the earlier theologians solved the
actual difficulties connected with our list; and this solution has been
adopted and defended against the objections offered to it by
Hengstenberg (Dissertations) and Kurtz (History of the Old Covenant).)

[Genesis 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 46:28</span></span>

This list of the house of Jacob is followed by an account of the arrival
in Egypt.

[Gen 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028)

Jacob sent his son Judah before him to Joseph, "to show (להורת) before
him to Goshen;" i.e., to obtain from Joseph the necessary instructions
as to the place of their settlement, and then to act as guide to Goshen.

[Gen 46:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#029)

As soon as they had arrived, Joseph had his chariot made ready to go up
to Goshen and meet his father (ויּעל applied to a journey from the
interior to the desert or Canaan), and "showed himself to him there
(lit., he appeared to him; נראה, which is generally used only of the
appearance of God, is selected here to indicate the glory in which
Joseph came to meet his father); and fell upon his neck, continuing
(עוד) upon his neck (i.e., in his embrace) weeping."

[Gen 46:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#030)

Then Israel said to Joseph: "Now (הפּעם lit., this time) will I die,
after I have seen thy face, that thou (art) still alive."

[Gen 46:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#031)

But Joseph told his brethren and his father's house (his family) that he
would to up to Pharaoh (עלה here used of going to the court, as an ideal
ascent), to announce the arrival of his relations, who were מקנה אנשׁי
"keepers of flocks," and had brought their sheep and oxen and all their
possessions with them.

[Gen 46:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#033)

At the same time Joseph gave these instructions to his brethren, in case
Pharaoh should send for them and inquire about their occupation: "Say,
Thy servants have been keepers of cattle from our youth even until now,
we like our fathers; that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every
shepherd is an abomination of the Egyptians." This last remark formed
part of Joseph's words, and contained the reason why his brethren should
describe themselves to Pharaoh as shepherds from of old, namely, that
they might receive Goshen as their dwelling-place, and that their
national and religion independence might not be endangered by too close
an intercourse with the Egyptians. The dislike of the Egyptians to
shepherds arose from the fact, that the more completely the foundations
of the Egyptian state rested upon agriculture with its perfect
organization, the more did the Egyptians associate the idea of rudeness
and barbarism with the very name of a shepherd. This is not only
attested in various ways by the monuments, on which shepherds are
constantly depicted as lanky, withered, distorted, emaciated, and
sometimes almost ghostly figures (Graul, Reise 2, p. 171), but is
confirmed by ancient testimony. According to Herodotus (2, 47), the
swine-herds were the most despised; but they were associated with the
cow-herds (βουκόλοι) in the seven castes of the Egyptians (Herod. 2,
164), so that Diodorus Siculus (1, 74) includes all herdsmen in one
caste; according to which the word βουκόλοι in Herodotus not only
denotes cow-herds, but a potiori all herdsmen, just as we find in the
herds depicted upon the monuments, sheep, goats, and rams introduced by
thousands, along with asses and horned cattle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 47](gen047)

</div>
