<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen038)  [Next](gen040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001)

[Genesis 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 39:1</span></span>

In Potiphar's House. - Potiphar had bought him of the Ishmaelites, as is
repeated in [Gen 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001) for the purpose
of resuming the thread of the narrative; and Jehovah was with him, so
that the prospered in the house of his Egyptian master. מצליח אישׁ: a
man who has prosperity, to whom God causes all that he undertakes and
does to prosper. When Potiphar perceived this, Joseph found favour in
his eyes, and became his servant, whom he placed over his house (made
manager of his household affairs), and to whom he entrusted all his
property (כּל־ישׁ־לו [Gen 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#004) =
ישׁ־לו כּל־אשׁר [Gen 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#005), [Gen
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#006)). This confidence in Joseph
increased, when he perceived how the blessing of Jehovah (Joseph's God)
rested upon his property in the house and in the field; so that now "he
left to Joseph everything that he had, and did not trouble himself אתּו
(with or near him) about anything but his own eating."

[Genesis 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 39:6</span></span>

Joseph was handsome in form and feature; and Potiphar's wife set her
eyes upon the handsome young man, and tried to persuade him to lie with
her. But Joseph resisted the adulterous proposal, referring to the
unlimited confidence which his master had placed in him. He (Potiphar)
was not greater in that house than he, and had given everything over to
him except her, because she was his wife. "How could he so abuse this
confidence, as to do this great wickedness and sin against God!"

[Genesis 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 39:10</span></span>

But after she had repeated her enticements day after day without
success, "it came to pass at that time (הזּה כּהיּום for the more usual
הזּה כּיּום ([Gen 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#020)), lit., about
this day, i.e., the day in the writer's mind, on which the thing to be
narrated occurred) that Joseph came into his house to attend to his
duties, and there were none of the house-servants within." And she laid
hold of him by his garment and entreated him to lie with her; but he
left his garment in her hand and fled from the house.

[Genesis 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 39:13</span></span>

When this daring assault upon Joseph's chastity had failed, on account
of his faithfulness and fear of God, the adulterous woman reversed the
whole affair, and charged him with an attack upon her modesty, in order
that she might have her revenge upon him and avert suspicion from
herself. She called her house-servants and said, "See, he (her husband,
whom she does not think worth naming) has brought us a Hebrew man ("no
epitheton ornans to Egyptian ears: [Gen
43:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032)") to mock us (צחק to show his
wantonness; us, the wife and servants, especially the female portion):
he came in unto me to lie with me; and I cried with a loud voice...and
he left his garment by me." She said אצלי "by my side," not "in my
hand," as that would have shown the true state of the case. She then
left the garment lying by her side till the return of Joseph's master,
to whom she repeated her tale.

[Genesis 39:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 39:19</span></span>

Joseph in Prison. - Potiphar was enraged at what he heard, and put
Joseph into the prison where (אשׁר for שׁם אשׁר, [Gen
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#003) like [Gen
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#013)) the king's prisoners
(state-prisoners) were confined. הסּהר בּית: lit., the house of
enclosure, from סהר, to surround or enclose (ὀχύρωμα, lxx); the
state-prison surrounded by a wall. This was a very moderate punishment.
For according to Diod. Sic. (i. 78) the laws of the Egyptians were
πικροὶ περὶ τῶν γυναιῶν νόμοι. An attempt at adultery was to be punished
with 1000 blows, and rape upon a free woman still more severely. It is
possible that Potiphar was not fully convinced of his wife's chastity,
and therefore did not place unlimited credence in what she said.

(Note: Credibile est aliquod fuisse indicium, quo Josephum innocentem
esse Potiphari constiteret; neque enim servi vita tanti erat ut ei
parceretur in tam gravi delicto. Sed licet innocuum, in carcere tamen
detinebat, ut uxoris honori et suo consuleret (Clericus). The chastity
of Egyptian women has been in bad repute from time immemorial (Diod.
Sic. i. 59; Herod. ii. 111). Even in the middle ages the Fatimite Hakim
thought it necessary to adopt severe measures against their immorality
(Bar-Hebraei, chron. p. 217), and at the present day, according to
Burckhardt (arab. Sprichwrter, pp. 222, 227), chastity is "a great
rarity" among women of every rank in Cairo.)

But even in that case it was the mercy of the faithful covenant God,
which now as before ([Gen 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#020).)
rescued Joseph's life.

[Genesis 39:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 39:21</span></span>

In the prison itself Jehovah was with Joseph, procuring him favour in
the eyes of the governor of the prison, so that he entrusted all the
prisoners to his care, leaving everything that they had to do, to be
done through him, and not troubling himself about anything that was in
his hand, i.e., was committed to him, because Jehovah made all that he
did to prosper. "The keeper" was the governor of the prison, or
superintendent of the gaolers, and was under Potiphar, the captain of
the trabantes and chief of the executioners ([Gen
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 40](gen040)

</div>
