<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen012)  [Next](gen014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001)

[Genesis 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 13:1</span></span>

Abram, having returned from Egypt to the south of Canaan with his wife
and property uninjured, through the gracious protection of God,
proceeded with Lot למסּעיו "according to his journeys" (lit., with the
repeated breaking up of his camp, required by a nomad life; on נסע to
break up a tent, to remove, see [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)) into the neighbourhood of
Bethel and Ai, where he had previously encamped and built an altar ([Gen
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008)), that he might there call upon
the name of the Lord again. That ויּקרא ([Gen
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#004)) is not a continuation of the
relative clause, but a resumption of the main sentence, and therefore
corresponds with ויּלך ([Gen 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003)),
"he went...and called upon the name of the Lord there," has been
correctly concluded by Delitzsch from the repetition of the subject
Abram.

[Genesis 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 13:5</span></span>

But as Abram was very rich (כּבד, lit., weighty) in possessions (מקנה,
cattle and slaves), and Lot also had flocks, and herds, and tents אהלים
for אהלים, Ges. 93, 6, 3) for his men, of whom there must have been many
therefore, the land did not bear them when dwelling together (נשׁא,
masculine at the commencement of the sentence, as is often the case when
the verb precedes the subject, vid., Ges. 147), i.e., the land did not
furnish space enough for the numerous herd to graze. Consequently
disputes arose between the two parties of herdsmen. The difficulty was
increased by the fact that the Canaanites and Perizzites were then
dwelling in the land, so that the space was very contracted. The
Perizzites, who are mentioned here and in [Gen
34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030); [Jdg
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004), along with the Canaanites, and
who are placed in the other lists of the inhabitants of Canaan among the
different Canaanitish tribes ([Gen
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#020); [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008), [Exo
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017), etc.), are not mentioned among
the descendants of Canaan ([Gen
10:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015)), and may therefore, like the
Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, and Rephaim ([Gen
15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#019)), not have been descendants
of Ham at all. The common explanation of the name Perizzite as
equivalent to פּרזות ארץ ישׁב "inhabitant of the level ground" ([Eze
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011)), is at variance not only with
the form of the word, the inhabitant of the level ground being called
הפּרזי ([Deu 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005)), but with the fact
of their combination sometimes with the Canaanites, sometimes with the
other tribes of Canaan, whose names were derived from their founders.
Moreover, to explain the term "Canaanite," as denoting "the civilised
inhabitants of towns," or "the trading Phoenicians," is just as
arbitrary as if we were to regard the Kenites, Kenizzites, and the other
tribes mentioned [Gen 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#019). along
with the Canaanites, as all alike traders or inhabitants of towns. The
origin of the name Perizzite is involved in obscurity, like that of the
Kenites and other tribes settled in Canaan that were not descended from
Ham. But we may infer from the frequency with which they are mentioned
in connection with the Hamitic inhabitants of Canaan, that they were
widely dispersed among the latter. Vid., [Gen
15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#019).

[Genesis 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 13:8</span></span>

To put an end to the strife between their herdsmen, Abram proposed to
Lot that they should separate, as strife was unseemly between אחים
אנשׁים, men who stood in the relation of brethren, and left him to
choose his ground. "If thou to the left, I will turn to the right; and
if thou to the right, I will turn to the left." Although Abram was the
older, and the leader of the company, he was magnanimous enough to leave
the choice to his nephew, who was the younger, in the confident
assurance that the Lord would so direct the decision, that His promise
would be fulfilled.

[Genesis 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 13:10</span></span>

Lot chose what was apparently the best portion of the land, the whole
district of the Jordan, or the valley on both sides of the Jordan from
the Lake of Gennesareth to what was then the vale of Siddim. For
previous to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, this whole country
was well watered, "as the garden of Jehovah," the garden planted by
Jehovah in paradise, and "as Egypt," the land rendered so fertile by the
overflowing of the Nile, "in the direction of Zoar." Abram therefore
remained in the land of Canaan, whilst Lot settled in the cities of the
plain of the Jordan, and tented (pitched his tents) as far as Sodom. In
anticipation of the succeeding history (Gen 19), it is mentioned here
([Gen 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013)), that the inhabitants of
Sodom were very wicked, and sinful before Jehovah.

[Genesis 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 13:14</span></span>

After Lot's departure, Jehovah repeated to Abram (by a mental, inward
assurance, as we may infer from the fact that אמר "said" is not
accompanied by ויּרא "he appeared") His promise that He would give the
land to him and to his seed in its whole extent, northward, and
southward, and eastward, and westward, and would make his seed
innumerable like the dust of the earth. From this we may see that the
separation of Lot was in accordance with the will of God, as Lot had no
share in the promise of God; though God afterwards saved him from
destruction for Abram's sake. The possession of the land is promised
עולם עד "for ever." The promise of God is unchangeable. As the seed of
Abraham was to exist before God for ever, so Canaan was to be its
everlasting possession. But this applied not to the lineal posterity of
Abram, to his seed according to the flesh, but to the true spiritual
seed, which embraced the promise in faith, and held it in a pure
believing heart. The promise, therefore, neither precluded the expulsion
of the unbelieving seed from the land of Canaan, nor guarantees to
existing Jews a return to the earthly Palestine after their conversion
to Christ. For as Calvin justly says, "quam terra in saeculum
promittitur, non simpliciter notatur perpetuitas; sed quae finem accepit
in Christo." Through Christ the promise has been exalted from its
temporal form to its true essence; through Him the whole earth becomes
Canaan (vid., [Gen 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008)). That Abram
might appropriate this renewed and now more fully expanded promise,
Jehovah directed him to walk through the land in the length of it and
the breadth of it. In doing this he came in his "tenting," i.e., his
wandering through the land, to Hebron, where he settled by the terebinth
of the Amorite Mamre ([Gen 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)), and
built an altar to Jehovah. The term ישׁב (set himself, settled down,
sat, dwelt) denotes that Abram made this place the central point of his
subsequent stay in Canaan (cf. [Gen
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013); [Gen
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001), and Gen 23). On Hebron, see [Gen
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 14](gen014)

</div>
