<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](hab002)  [Next](zep000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)

[Habakkuk](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hab 3:0</span></span>

Prayer for Compassion in the Midst of the Judgment - Habakkuk 3

In this chapter, which is called a prayer in the heading, the prophet
expresses the feelings which the divine revelation of judgment described
in ch. 1 and 2 had excited in his mind, and ought to excite in the
congregation of believers, so that this supplicatory psalm may be called
an echo of the two answers which the prophet had received from the Lord
to his complaints in [Hab 1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002) and
[Hab 1:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012) (vid., [Hab
1:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005) and 2:2-20). Deeply agitated as
he was by the revelation he had received concerning the terrible
judgment, which the Lord would execute first of all upon Judah, through
the wild and cruel Chaldaean nation, and then upon the Chaldaean
himself, because he deified his own power, the prophet prays to the Lord
that He will carry out this work of His "within years," and in the
revelation of His wrath still show mercy ([Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)). He then proceeds in [Hab
3:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003) to depict in a majestic
theophany the coming of the Lord to judge the world, and bring salvation
to His people and His anointed; and secondly, in [Hab
3:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016), to describe the fruit of
faith which this divine manifestation produces, namely, first of all
fear and trembling at the day of tribulation ([Hab
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016), [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017)), and afterwards joy and
rejoicing in the God of salvation ([Hab
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018) and [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019)). Consequently we may regard [Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002) as the theme of the psalm, which
is distributed thus between the two parts. In the first part ([Hab
3:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)) we have the prayer for the
accomplishment of the work ([Hab 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002))
announced by God in [Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005),
expressed in the form of a prophetico-lyric description of the coming of
the Lord to judgment; and in the second part ([Hab
3:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016)), the prayer in wrath to
remember mercy ([Hab 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)), expanded
still more fully in the form of a description of the feelings and state
of mind excited by that prayer in the hearts of the believing church.

[Habakkuk 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hab 3:1</span></span>

The song has a special heading, after the fashion of the psalms, in
which the contents, the author, and the poetical character of the ode
are indicated. The contents are called tephillâh, a prayer, like [Psa
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001); 86; 90; 102, and [Psa
142:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001), not merely with reference to
the fact that it commences with a prayer to God, but because that prayer
announces the contents of the ode after the manner of a theme, and the
whole of the ode is simply the lyrical unfolding of that prayer. In
order, however, to point at the same time to the prophetic character of
the prayer, that it may not be regarded as a lyrical effusion of the
subjective emotions, wishes, and hopes of a member of the congregation,
but may be recognised as a production of the prophets, enlightened by
the Spirit of Jehovah, the name of the author is given with the
predicate "the prophet;" and to this there is added על שׁגינות, to
indicate the poetico-subjective character, through which it is
distinguished from prophecy in the narrower sense. The expression "upon
Shigionoth" cannot refer to the contents or the object of the ode; for
although shiggâyōn, according to its etymon shâgâh = shâgag, to
transgress by mistake, to sin, might have the meaning transgression in a
moral sense, and consequently might be referred to the sins of
transgressors, either of the Judaeans or the Chaldaeans, such an
assumption is opposed both to the use of shiggâyōn in the heading to
Psalm 7, and also to the analogy between ‛al shigyōnōth, and such
headings to the psalms as ‛al haggittı̄th, ‛al negı̄nōth, and other words
introduced with ‛al. Whilst shiggâyōn in [Psa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001) indicates the style of poetry in
which the psalm is composed, all the notices in the headings to the
psalms that are introduced with ‛al refer either to the melody or style
in which the psalms are to be sung, or to the musical accompaniment with
which they are to be introduced into the worship of God. This
musico-liturgical signification is to be retained here also, since it is
evident from the subscription in [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019), and the repetition of Selah
three times ([Hab 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003), [Hab
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009), [Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)), that our hymn was to be used
with musical accompaniment. Now, as shâgâh, to err, then to reel to and
fro, is applied to the giddiness both of intoxication and of love ([Isa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007); [Pro
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#001); [Pro
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#020)), shiggâyōn signifies reeling,
and in the terminology of poetry a reeling song, i.e., a song delivered
in the greatest excitement, or with a rapid change of emotion,
dithyrambus (see Clauss on [Psa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001);
Ewald, Delitzsch, and others); hence על שׁגינות, after dithyrambs, or
"after the manner of a stormy, martial, and triumphal ode" (Schmieder).

[Habakkuk 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hab 3:2</span></span>

"Jehovah, I have heard Thy tidings, am alarmed. Jehovah, Thy work, in
the midst of the years call it to life, in the midst of the years make
it known; in wrath remember mercy." שׁמעך is the tidings (ἀκοή) of God;
what the prophet has heard of God, i.e., the tidings of the judgment
which God is about to inflict upon Judah through the Chaldaeans, and
after that upon the Chaldaeans themselves. The prophet is alarmed at
this. The word יראתי (I am alarmed) does not compel us to take what is
heard as referring merely to the judgment to be inflicted upon Judah by
the Chaldaeans. Even in the overthrow of the mighty Chaldaean, or of the
empire of the world, the omnipotence of Jehovah is displayed in so
terrible a manner, that this judgment not only inspires with joy at the
destruction of the foe, but fills with alarm at the omnipotence of the
Judge of the world. The prayer which follows, "Call Thy work to life,"
also refers to this twofold judgment which God revealed to the prophet
in ch. 1 and 2. פּעלך, placed absolutely at the head for the sake of
emphasis, points back to the work (pō‛al) which God was about to do
([Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)); but this work of God is
not limited to the raising up of the Chaldaean nation, but includes the
judgment which will fall upon the Chaldaean after he has offended ([Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011)). This assumption is not at
variance even with חיּיהוּ. For the opinion that חיּה never means to
call a non-existent thing to life, but always signifies either to give
life to an inorganic object ([Job
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004)), or to keep a living thing
alive, or (and this most frequently) to restore a dead thing to life,
and that here the word must be taken in the sense of restoring to life,
because in the description which follows Habakkuk looks back to Psalm 77
and the pō‛al depicted there, viz., the deliverance out of Egyptian
bondage, is not correct. חיּה does not merely mean to restore to life
and keep alive, but also to give life and call to life. In [Job
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004), where תּחיּני is parallel to
עשׂתני, the reference is not to the impartation of life to an inorganic
object, but to the giving of life in the sense of creating; and so also
in [Gen 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#003) and [Gen
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#032), חיּה זרע means to call seed to
life, or raise it up, i.e., to call a non-existent thing to life.
Moreover, the resemblances in the theophany depicted in what follows to
Psalm 77 do not require the assumption that Habakkuk is praying for the
renewal of the former acts of God for the redemption of His people, but
may be fully explained on the ground that the saving acts of God on
behalf of His people are essentially the same in all ages, and that the
prophets generally were accustomed to describe the divine revelations of
the future under the form of imagery drawn from the acts of God in the
past. There is special emphasis in the use of בּקרב שׁנים twice, and the
fact that in both instances it stands at the head. It has been
interpreted in very different ways; but there is an evident allusion to
the divine answer in [Hab 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003), that
the oracle is for an appointed time, etc. "In the midst of the years,"
or within years, cannot of course mean by itself "within a certain
number, or a small number, of years," or "within a brief space of time"
(Ges., Ros., and Maurer); nevertheless this explanation is founded upon
a correct idea of the meaning. When the prophet directs his eye to the
still remote object of the oracle (ch. 2), the fulfilment of which was
to be delayed, but yet assuredly to come at last ([Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)), the interval between the present
time and the mō‛ēd appointed by God ([Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)) appears to him as a long series
of years, at the end only of which the judgment is to come upon the
oppressors of His people, namely the Chaldaeans. He therefore prays that
the Lord will not delay too long the work which He designs to do, or
cause it to come to life only at the end of the appointed interval, but
will bring it to life within years, i.e., within the years, which would
pass by if the fulfilment were delayed, before that mō‛ēd arrived.

Grammatically considered, qerebh shânı̄m cannot be the centre of the
years of the world, the boundary-line between the Old and New Testament
aeons, as Bengel supposes, who takes it at the same time, according to
this explanation, as the starting-point for a chronological calculation
of the whole course of the world. Moreover, it may also be justly
argued, in opposition to this view and application of the words, that it
cannot be presupposed that the prophets had so clear a consciousness as
this, embracing all history by its calculus; and still less can be
expect to find in a lyrical ode, which is the outpouring of the heart of
the congregation, a revelation of what God Himself had not revealed to
him according to [Hab 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003).
Nevertheless the view which lies at the foundation of this application
of our passage, viz., that the work of God, for the manifestation of
which the prophet is praying, falls in the centre of the years of the
world, has this deep truth, that it exhibits the overthrow not only of
the imperial power of Chaldaea, but that of the world-power generally,
and the deliverance of the nation from its power, and forms the
turning-point, with which the old aeon closes and the new epoch of the
world commences, with the completion of which the whole of the earthly
development of the universe will reach its close. The repetition of
בּקרב שׁנים is expressive of the earnest longing with which the
congregation of the Lord looks for the tribulation to end. The object to
תּודיע, which is to be taken in an optative sense, answering to the
imperative in the parallel clause, may easily be supplied from the
previous clause. To the prayer for the shortening of the period of
suffering there is appended, without the copula Vav, the further prayer,
in wrath to remember mercy. The wrath (rōgez, like râgaz in [Isa
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021) and [Pro
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#009)) in which God is to remember
mercy, namely for His people Israel, can only be wrath over Israel, not
merely the wrath manifested in the chastisement of Judah through the
Chaldaeans, but also the wrath displayed in the overthrow of the
Chaldaeans. In the former case God would show mercy by softening the
cruelty of the Chaldaeans; in the latter, by accelerating their
overthrow, and putting a speedy end to their tyranny. This prayer is
followed in [Hab 3:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003) by a
description of the work of God which is to be called to life, in which
the prophet expresses confidence that his petition will be granted.

[Habakkuk 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hab 3:3</span></span>

Coming of the Lord to judge the nations and to redeem His people. The
description of this theophany rests throughout upon earlier lyrical
descriptions of the revelations of God in the earlier times of Israel.
Even the introduction ([Hab 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)) has
its roots in the song of Moses in [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); and in the further course of the
ode we meet with various echoes of different psalms (compare [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006) with [Psa
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008); [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008) with [Psa
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010); [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019) with [Psa
18:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033); also [Hab
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#005) with [Psa
68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025); [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008) with [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005), [Psa
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034)). The points of contact in [Hab
3:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010) with Ps. 77:17-21, are still
more marked, and are of such a kind that Habakkuk evidently had the
psalm in his mind, and not the writer of the psalm the hymn of the
prophet, and that the prophet has reproduced in an original manner such
features of the psalm as were adapted to his purpose. This is not only
generally favoured by the fact that Habakkuk's prayer is composed
throughout after the poetry of the Psalms, but still more decidedly by
the circumstance that Habakkuk depicts a coming redemption under figures
borrowed from that of the past, to which the singer of this psalm looks
back from his own mournful times, comforting himself with the picture of
the miraculous deliverance of his people out of Egypt (see Hengstenberg
and Delitzsch on Psalm 77). For it is very evident that Habakkuk does
not describe the mighty acts of the Lord in the olden time, in order to
assign a motive for his prayer for the deliverance of Israel out of the
affliction of exile which awaits it in the future, as many of the
earlier commentators supposed, but that he is predicting a future
appearance of the Lord to judge the nations, from the simple fact that
he places the future יבוא ([Hab 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003))
at the head of the whole description, so as to determine all that
follows; whilst it is placed beyond the reach of doubt by the
impossibility of interpreting the theophany historically, i.e., as
relating to an earlier manifestation of God.

[Hab 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)

"Eloah comes from Teman, and the Holy One from the mountains of Paran.
Selah. His splendour covers the sky, and the earth is full of His glory.
[Hab 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004). And brightness appears like
sunlight, rays are at His hand, and there His power is concealed. [Hab
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#005). Before Him goes the plague, and
pestilence follows His feet." As the Lord God once came down to His
people at Sinai, when they had been redeemed out of Egypt, to establish
the covenant of His grace with them, and make them into a kingdom of
God, so will He appear in the time to come in the terrible glory of His
omnipotence, to liberate them from the bondage of the power of the
world, and dash to pieces the wicked who seek to destroy the poor. The
introduction to this description is closely connected with [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002). As Moses depicts the appearance
of the Lord at Sinai as a light shining from Seir and Paran, so does
Habakkuk also make the Holy One appears thence in His glory; but apart
from other differences, he changes the preterite בּא (Jehovah came from
Sinai) into the future יבוא, He will come, or comes, to indicate at the
very outset that he is about to describe not a past, but a future
revelation of the glory of the Lord. This he sees in the form of a
theophany, which is fulfilled before his mental eye; hence יבוא does not
describe what is future, as being absolutely so, but is something
progressively unfolding itself from the present onwards, which we should
express by the present tense. The coming one is called Eloah (not
Jehovah, as in [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002), and the
imitation in [Jdg 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004)), a form of the
name Elohim which only occurs in poetry in the earlier Hebrew writings,
which we find for the first time in [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), where it is used of God as the
Creator of Israel, and which is also used here to designate God as the
Lord and Governor of the whole world. Eloah, however, comes as the Holy
One (qâdōsh), who cannot tolerate sin ([Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)), and who will judge the world
and destroy the sinners ([Hab
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#012)). As Eloah and Qâdōsh are
names of one God; so "from Teman" and "from the mountain of Paran" are
expressions denoting, not two starting-points, but simply two localities
of one single starting-point for His appearance, like Seir and the
mountains of Paran in [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002).
Instead of Seir, the poetical name of the mountainous country of the
Edomites, Teman, the southern district of Edomitish land, is used per
synecdochen for Idumaea generally, as in [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009) and [Amo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012) (see p. 168). The mountains of
Paran are not the Et-Tih mountains, which bounded the desert of Paran
towards the south, but the high mountain-land which formed the eastern
half of that desert, and the northern portion of which is now called,
after its present inhabitants, the mountains of the Azazimeh (see comm.
on [Num 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#012)). The two localities lie
opposite to one another, and are only separated by the Arabah (or deep
valley of the Ghor). We are not to understand the naming of these two,
however, as suggesting the idea that God was coming from the Arabah,
but, according to the original passage in [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002), as indicating that the splendour
of the divine appearance spread over Teman and the mountains of Paran,
so that the rays were reflected from the two mountainous regions. The
word Selâh does not form part of the subject-matter of the text, but
shows that the music strikes in here when the song is used in the
temple, taking up the lofty thought that God is coming, and carrying it
out in a manner befitting the majestic appearance, in the prospect of
the speedy help of the Lord. The word probably signified elevatio, from
sâlâh = sâlal, and was intended to indicate the strengthening of the
musical accompaniment, by the introduction, as is supposed, of a blast
from the trumpets blown by the priests, corresponding therefore to the
musical forte. (For further remarks, see Hvernick's Introduction to the
Old Testament, iii. p. 120ff., and Delitzsch on [Psa
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001).) In [Hab
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003) the glory of the coming of God is
depicted with reference to its extent, and in [Hab
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004) with reference to its intensive
power. The whole creation is covered with its splendour. Heaven and
earth reflect the glory of the coming one. הודו, His splendour or
majesty, spreads over the whole heaven, and His glory over the earth.
Tehillâh does not mean the praise of the earth, i.e., of its
inhabitants, where (Chald., Ab. Ezr., Ros., and others); for there is no
allusion to the manner in which the coming of God is received, and
according to [Hab 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006) it fills the
earth with trembling; but it denotes the object of the praise or fame,
the glory, ἡ δόξα, like hâdâr in [Job
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#010), or kâbhōd in [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003); [Isa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008), and [Num
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#021). Grammatically considered,
תּהלּתו is the accusative governed by מלאה, and הארץ is the subject.

[Habakkuk 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hab 3:4</span></span>

A splendour shines or arises like the light. תּהיה does not point back
to תּהלּתו, "splendour like the sun will His glory be" (Hitzig); but it
is the predicate to nōgah in the sense of to become, or to arise. האור
is the light of the sun. Like this light, or like the rising sun, when
the Lord comes, there arises (spreads) a brilliant light, from which the
rays emanate on its two sides. קרנים, according to קרן in [Exo
34:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029), is to be taken in the sense
of rays; and this meaning has developed itself from a comparison of the
first rays of the rising sun, which shoot out above the horizon, to the
horns or antlers of the gazelle, which is met with in the Arabian poets.
מיּדו, from His hand, i.e., since the hand is by the side, "at His side"
(after the analogy of מימינו and משּׂמאלו), and indeed "His hand" in a
general sense, as signifying the hand generally, and not one single
hand, equivalent therefore to "on both sides" (Delitzsch). As the disc
of the sun is surrounded by a splendid radiance, so the coming of God is
enclosed by rays on both sides. לו refers to God. "Such a radiant
splendour (קרנים) surrounding God is presupposed when it is affirmed of
Moses, that on coming from the presence of Jehovah his face was radiant,
or emitted rays" (קרן, [Exo 34:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029)).
This interpretation of the words is established beyond all doubt, not
only by the מימינו of the original passage in [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002), but also by the expressions
which follow in [Hab 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#005), viz., לפניו
(before him) and לרגלויו (behind him); and consequently the
interpretation "rays (emanating) from His hand are to Him," with the
idea that we are to think of flashes of lightning darting out of God's
hand (Schnur., Ros., Hitzig, Maurer, etc.), is proved to be untenable.
According to Hebrew notions, flashes of lightning do not proceed from
the hand of God (in [Psa 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009), which
has been appealed to in support of this explanation, we have ממּנּוּ);
and קרנים does not occur either in Arabic or the later Hebrew in the
sense of flashes of lightning, but only in the sense of the sun's rays.
ושׁם חביון עזּה, and there - namely, in the sun-like splendour, with the
rays emanating from it - is the hiding of His omnipotence, i.e., the
place where His omnipotence hides itself; in actual fact, the splendour
forms the covering of the Almighty God at His coming, the manifestation
of the essentially invisible God. The cloudy darkness is generally
represented as the covering of the glory of God ([Exo
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#021); [Kg1
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012)), not merely when His coming is
depicted under the earthly substratum of a storm ([Psa
18:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012)), but also when God was
manifested in the pillar of cloud and fire ([Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)) on the journey of the
Israelites through the desert, where it was only by night that the cloud
had the appearance of fire ([Num
9:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)). Here, on the contrary, the
idea of the splendour of the rising sun predominates, according to which
light is the garment in which God clothes Himself ([Psa
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002), cf. [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)), answering to His coming as the
Holy One ([Hab 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)). For the
sun-light, in its self-illumining splendour, is the most suitable
earthly element to serve as a symbol of the spotless purity of the Holy
One, in whom there is no variation of light and darkness ([Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017); see at [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)). The alteration of ושׁם into
ושׂם (he provides or contrives the concealment of His power), which
Hitzig proposes after the lxx (Aq., Symm., and Syr.), must be rejected,
inasmuch as in that case the object, which he makes into the covering
(cf. [Psa 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012)), could not be
omitted; and this thought is by no means suitable here, and has merely
been brought into the text on the assumption that God appears in a
storm. As the Holy One, God comes to judgment upon the unholy world
([Hab 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#005)). Before Him goes debher,
plague, and after His feet, i.e., behind Him, resheph, lit., burning
heat, or a blaze ([Sol 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006)), here the
burning heat of the pestilence, fever-heat, as in [Deu
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024). Plague and pestilence, as
proceeding from God, are personified and represented as satellites; the
former going before Him, as it were, as a shield-bearer ([Sa1
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007)), or courier ([Sa2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001)); the latter coming after Him as
a servant ([Sa1 25:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#042)). This verse
prepares the way for the description, which commences with [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006), of the impression produced by the
coming of God upon the world and its inhabitants.

[Habakkuk 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hab 3:6</span></span>

"He stands, and sets the earth reeling: He looks, and makes nations
tremble; primeval mountains burst in pieces, the early hills sink down:
His are ways of the olden time. [Hab
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007). I saw the tents of Cushan under
affliction: the curtains of the land of Midian tremble." God coming from
afar has now drawn near and taken His stand, to smite the nations as a
warlike hero (cf. [Hab 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008), [Hab
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009), and [Hab
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011), [Hab
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#012)). This is affirmed in עמד, He has
stationed Himself, not "He steps forth or appears." This standing of
Jehovah throws the earth and the nations into trembling. ימדד cannot
mean to measure here, for there is no thought of any measuring of the
earth, and it cannot be shown that mâdad is used in the sense of
measuring with the eye (Ros. and Hitzig). Moreover, the choice of the
poel, instead of the piel, would still remain unexplained, and the
parallelism of the clauses would be disregarded. We must therefore
follow the Chaldee, Ges., Delitzsch, and others, who take מדד as the
poel of מוּד = טוּט, to set in a reeling motion. It is only with this
interpretation that the two parallel clauses correspond, in which יתּר,
the hiphil of נתר, to cause to shake or tremble, answers to ימדד. This
explanation is also required by what follows. For just as [Hab
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007) unquestionably gives a further
expansion of יתּר גּוים, so does לולם ... יתפּצצוּ contain the
explanation of ימדד ארץ. The everlasting hills crumble (יתפּצצוּ from
פּוּץ), i.e., burst and resolve themselves into dust, and the hills sink
down, pass away, and vanish (compare the similar description in [Nah
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#005) and [Mic
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004)). הררי־עד (= הררי קדם, [Deu
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#015)) in parallelism with נּבעות עולם
are the primeval mountains, as being the oldest and firmest constituents
of the globe, which have existed from the beginning (מנּי עד, [Job
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004)), and were formed at the creation
of the earth ([Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002); [Job
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007); [Pro
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025)). הליכות עולם לו is not to be
taken relatively, and connected with what precedes, "which are the old
paths," according to which the hills of God are called everlasting ways
(Hitzig); because this does not yield a sense in harmony with the
context. It is a substantive clause, and to be taken by itself:
everlasting courses or goings are to Him, i.e., He now goes along, as He
went along in the olden time. הליכה, the going, advancing, or ways of
God, analogous to the דּרך עפולם, the course of the primitive world
([Job 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015)). The prophet had [Psa
68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025) floating before his mind, in
which hălı̄khōth 'ĕlōhı̄m denote the goings of God with His people, or the
ways which God had taken from time immemorial in His guidance of them.
As He once came down upon Sinai in the cloudy darkness, the thunder,
lightning, and fire, to raise Israel up to be His covenant nation, so
that the mountains shook (cf. [Jdg
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#005)); so do the mountains and hills
tremble and melt away at His coming now. And as He once went before His
people, and the tidings of His wondrous acts at the Red Sea threw the
neighbouring nations into fear and despair ([Exo
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014)); so now, when the course of
God moves from Teman to the Red Sea, the nations on both sides of it are
filled with terror. Of these, two are individualized in [Hab
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007), viz., Cushan and Midian. By
Cushan we are not to understand the Mesopotamian king named Cushan
Rishathaim, who subjugated Israel for eight years after the death of
Joshua ([Jdg 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008).); for this neither
agrees with אהלי, nor with the introduction of Midian in the parallel
clause. The word is a lengthened form for Such, and the name of the
African Ethiopians. The Midianites are mentioned along with them, as
being inhabitants of the Arabian coast of the Red Sea, which was
opposite to them (see at [Exo 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)).
אהלי כ, the tents with their inhabitants, the latter being principally
intended. The same remark applies to יריעות, lit., the tent-curtains of
the land of Midian, i.e., of the tents pitched in the land of Midian.

[Habakkuk 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hab 3:8</span></span>

To the impression produced upon the nations by the coming of the Lord to
judge the world, there is now appended in [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008). a description of the execution of
the judgment. [Hab 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008). "Was it
against rivers, O Jehovah, against the rivers that Thy wrath was
kindled? that Thou ridest hither upon Thy horses, Thy chariots of
salvation. [Hab 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009). Thy bow lays
itself bare; rods are sworn by word. Selah. Thou splittest the earth
into rivers." The ode, taking a new turn, now passes from the
description of the coming of God, to an address to God Himself. To the
mental eye of the prophet, God presents Himself as Judge of the world,
in the threatening attitude of a warlike hero equipped for conflict, so
that he asks Him what is the object of His wrath. The question is merely
a poetical turn given to a lively composition, which expects no answer,
and is simply introduced to set forth the greatness of the wrath of God,
so that in substance it is an affirmation. The wrath of God is kindled
over the rivers, His fury over the sea. The first clause of the question
is imperfect; Jehovah is not the subject, but a vocative, or an appeal,
since chârâh, when predicated of God, is construed with ל. The subject
follows in the double clause, into which the question divides itself, in
אפּך and עברתך. Here the indefinite בּנהרים is defined by בּנּהרים.
Hannehârı̄m, the rivers, are not any particular rivers, such as the arms
of the Nile in Lower Egypt, or the rivers of Ethiopia, the Nile and
Astaboras, the nahărē Khūsh ([Isa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001); [Zep
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010) : see Delitzsch), but the rivers
of the earth generally; and "the sea" (hayyâm) is not the Red Sea, but
the world-sea, as in [Nah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#004) (cf.
[Psa 89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010); [Job
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008)). It is true that this
description rests upon the two facts of the miraculous dividing of the
Red Sea and of the Jordan ([Exo 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#018);
[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003), [Psa
114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005)); but it rises far above these
to a description of God as the Judge of the world, who can smite in His
wrath not only the sea of the world, but all the rivers of the earth.
עברה is stronger than אף, the wrath which passes over, or breaks through
every barrier. Kı̄, quod, explaining and assigning the reason for the
previous question. The riding upon horses is not actual riding, but
driving in chariots with horses harnessed to them, as the explanatory
words "thy chariots" (מרכּבתיך) clearly shows, and as râkhabh (to ride)
always signifies when predicated of God (cf. [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026); [Psa
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034); [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)). Yeshū‛âh is governed by
markebhōthekhâ, with the freedom of construction allowed in poetry, as
in [Sa2 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#033); [Psa
71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007), whereas in prose the noun is
generally repeated in the construct state (vid., [Gen
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#023), and Ewald, 291, b). Yeshū‛âh
signifies salvation, even in this case, and not victory, - a meaning
which it never has, and which is all the more inapplicable here, because
yeshū‛âh is interpreted in [Hab 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)
by לישׁע. By describing the chariots of God as chariots of salvation,
the prophet points at the outset to the fact, that the riding of God has
for its object the salvation or deliverance of His people.

[Habakkuk 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hab 3:9</span></span>

God has already made bare the bow, to shoot His arrows at the foe.
תּעור, third pers. imperf. niph. of עוּר, equivalent to ערר ([Isa
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#011)), and the more usual ערה, to be
naked. To strengthen the thought, the noun עריה is written before the
verb instead of the inf. abs. (cf. [Mic
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)). The bow is made bare, not by
the shooting of the arrows, but by its covering (γωρυτός, corytus) being
removed, in order to use it as a weapon. The reference is to the bow
used in war, which God carries as a warrior; so that we are not to think
of the rainbow, even if the chariots might be understood as signifying
the clouds, as in [Isa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001) and [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003), since the rainbow is a sign of
peace and of the covenant, whereas God is represented as attacking His
enemies. The next clause, שׁבעות מטּות אמר, is very obscure, and has not
yet been satisfactorily explained. Of the two meanings which may be
given to mattōth, viz., branches, rods, or staffs, and tribes of the
people of Israel, the latter can hardly be thought of here, since
mattōth would certainly have been defined by either a suffix or some
determining clause, if the tribes of Israel were intended. On the other
hand, the meaning staffs or sticks is very naturally suggested both by
the context - viz. the allusion to the war-bow - and also by [Hab
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014), where mattı̄m unquestionably
signifies staves or lances. At the same time, the meaning spears or
darts cannot be deduced from either [Hab
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014) or [Sa2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014). In both passages the meaning
staves, used as lances or weapons, is quite sufficient. Matteh, a stick
or staff with which blows were struck, might stand, as an instrument of
chastisement, for the punishment or chastisement itself (cf. [Isa
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003); [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005)), and in [Mic
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009) it denotes the rod. שׁבעות may be
either the plural construct of שׁבוּע, the seventh, the heptad, or the
plural of שׁבוּעה, an oath, or the passive participle of שׁבע, to be
sworn, like שׁבעי שׁבעות in [Eze
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#023). There is no material difference
in the meaning obtained from the last two; and the view we take of the
word אמר must decide between them and the first explanation. This word,
which is peculiar to poetry, denotes a discourse or a word, and in [Job
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#028) the affair, or the occasion,
like דּבר. Here, at any rate, it signifies the address or word of God,
as in [Psa 68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012); [Psa
77:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009), and is either a genitive
dependent upon mattōth or an adverbial accusative. The Masoretic
pointing, according to which mattōth is separated from 'ōmer by
tiphchah, and the latter joined to selâh by munach, is connected with
the evidently false rabbinical rendering of selah as eternity (in
sempiternum), and being decidedly erroneous, cannot be taken into
consideration at all. But the interpretation of שׁבעות as the seventh,
does not suit either of these two possible views of 'ōmer. We therefore
prefer the second meaning, chastising rods or chastisements. אמר,
however, cannot be a genitive dependent upon mattōth; since
chastisements of speech would hardly stand for chastisements which God
had spoken, but, according to the analogy of שׁבט פּיו in [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004), would point to chastisements
consisting in words, and this does not agree with the present train of
thought. 'Omer is rather an adverbial accusative, and belongs to שׁבעות,
indicating the instrument or media employed in the swearing: sworn with
the word or through the word, like חרבּך in [Psa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013) (for the use of the accusative
to describe the substance or the instrumental medium of an action, see
Ewald, 282, c).

Hence שׁבעות cannot be a noun, but must be a passive participle, sworn.
The expression, "chastising rods (chastisements) are sworn through the
word," points to the solemn oath with which God promised in [Deu
32:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#040) to take vengeance upon His
enemies, and avenge the blood of His servants: "For I lift up my hand to
heaven, and say, As I live for ever, when I have sharpened my glittering
sword, and my hand grasps for judgment, I will render vengeance to mine
adversaries, and repay them that hate me. I will make mine arrows drunk
with blood, and my sword will eat flesh; from the blood of the slain and
the captives, from the hairy head of the enemy." That Habakkuk had in
his mind this promise of the vengeance of God upon His enemies, which is
strengthened by a solemn oath, is unmistakeably evident, if we compare
בּרק חניתך in [Hab 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011) with בּרק
חרבּי in [Deu 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041), and observe the
allusion in ראשׁ מבּית רשׁע and ראשׁ פּרזו in [Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013) and [Hab
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014) to ראשׁ פּרעות אויב in [Deu
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042). From this promise the words of
the prophet, which are so enigmatical in themselves, obtain the
requisite light to render them intelligible. Gesenius (Thes. p. 877) has
explained the prophet's words in a similar manner, jurejurando firmatae
sunt castigationes promissae (the threatened rods, i.e., chastisements,
are sworn), even without noticing the allusion to [Deu
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#040). upon which these words are
founded. Delitzsch was the first to call attention to the allusion to
[Deu 32:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#040).; but in his explanation,
"the darts are sworn through his word of power (jurejurando adstricta
sunt tela verbo tuo)," the swearing is taken in a sense which is foreign
to Deuteronomy, and therefore conceals the connection with the original
passage. Of the other explanations not one can be vindicated. The
rabbinical view which we find in the Vulgate, juramenta tribubus quae
locutus es, is overthrown by the fact that שׁבעות without a preposition
cannot mean per, or ob, or juxta juramenta, as we should have to render
it, and as Luther actually has rendered it in his version ("as Thou
hadst sworn to the tribes"). Ewald's rendering, "sevenfold darts of the
word," is precluded by the combination of ideas, "darts of the word,"
which is quite foreign to the context. According to our explanation, the
passage does indeed form simply a parenthesis in the description of the
judicial interposition of God, but it contains a very fitting thought,
through which the description gains in emphasis. In the last clause of
the verse the description is continued in the manner already begun, and
the effect indicated, which is produced upon the world of nature by the
judicial interposition of God: "Thou splittest the earth into rivers."
בּקּע is construed with a double accusative, as in [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004). This may be understood either as
signifying that the earth trembles at the wrath of the Judge, and rents
arise in consequence, through which rivers of water burst forth from the
deep, or so that at the quaking of the earth the sea pours its waves
over the land and splits it into rivers. The following verses point to
an earthquake through which the form of the earth's surface is changed.

[Habakkuk 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hab 3:10</span></span>

"The mountains see Thee, they writhe: a shower of waters passes along:
the abyss lifts up its voice, it lifts up its hands on high. [Hab
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011). Sun, moon, enter into their
habitation at the light of Thine arrows which shoot by, at the shining
of the lightning of Thy spear." The effect of the coming of God upon the
mountains was already referred to in [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006). There they crumbled into ruins,
here they writhe with terror. This difference is to be explained from
the fact that there ([Hab 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006)) the
general effect of the omnipotence of God upon nature was intended,
whereas here ([Hab 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010), [Hab
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011)) the special effect is described,
which is produced upon nature by the judgment about to be executed by
God upon the nations. The perfects in the description represent this
effect as following immediately upon the coming of God. But in the first
clause of [Hab 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010) the perfect ראוּך
is followed by the imperfect יחילוּ, because the writhing is a lasting
condition. The force of the description is heightened by the omission of
the copula before the clauses and the particular objects. The two verbs
of the first clause stand in the relation of cause and effect to one
another: when the mountains have seen Thee, they writhe with terror. The
further description is not founded upon the idea of a terrible storm;
for there is no reference to thunder, nor even to lightnings, but only
to the arrows ([Hab 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011)), which may
be explained from the idea of God, as a warlike hero, making bare His
bow. The colours and different features of the description are borrowed
from the judgment of the flood. [Hab
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010) (a and b) points to this divine
judgment of the olden time, both the coming of the showers of water
(geshem as in [Gen 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#012) and [Gen
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#002), and strengthened by mayim,
analogous to hammabbūl hâyâh mayim in [Gen
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#006); ‛âbhar as in [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019); [Psa
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)), and also the nâthan tehōm qōlō,
the raging outburst of the abyss. Tehōm is the mass of water in the
abyss, not merely that of the ocean, but that of the subterranean waters
also ([Gen 49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025); [Deu
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013)), the "great deep" (tehōm
rabbâh), whose fountains were broken up at the flood ([Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011)); and not the ocean of heaven, as
Hitzig erroneously infers from [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011); [Gen
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#002), and [Pro
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027). To this mass of water, which is
called tehōm from its roaring depth, the prophet attributes a voice,
which it utters, to express the loud, mighty roaring of the waters as
they rush forth from the bursting earth. As at the time of the flood,
which was a type of the last judgment ([Isa
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018)), the windows of heaven and the
fountains of the deep were opened, so that the upper and lower waters,
which are divided by the firmament, rushed together again, and the earth
returned, as it were, to its condition before the second day of
creation; so here also the rivers of the earth and rain-showers of
heaven come together, so that the abyss roars up with a loud noise
(Delitzsch). This roaring outburst of the mass of waters from the heart
of the earth is then represented as a lifting up of the hands to heaven,
with reference to the fact that the waves are thrown up. Rōm = rūm ([Pro
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#003); [Pro
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#004)) is an accusative of direction,
like mârōm in [Kg2 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#022). ידיהוּ, for
ידיו, a full-sounding and more extended form, possibly to express by the
rhythm the greatness of the prodigy, how magna vi brachii tollunt
(Delitzsch). The lifting up of the hands is not a gesture denoting
either an oath or rebellion; but it is an involuntary utterance of
terror, of restlessness, of anguish, as it were, with a prayer for help
(Delitzsch).

[Habakkuk 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hab 3:11</span></span>

The chaotic condition into which the earth has been brought is
heightened by the darkness in which the heaven clothes itself. Sun and
moon, which give light to day and night, have put themselves, or
entered, into their habitation. זבוּל with ה local, a dwelling-place,
is, according to oriental view, the place from which the stars come out
when they rise, and to which they return when they set. Nevertheless it
is not actual setting that is spoken of here, but simply their
obscuration, which is not the effect of heavy clouds that pour out their
water in showers of rain, but is caused by the shining of the arrows of
God (ל in לאור and לנגהּ denoting the outward cause or occasion). It is
not, however, that they "turn pale in consequence of the surpassing
brilliancy of the lightnings" (Ewald), but that they "withdraw
altogether, from the fear and horror which pervade all nature, and which
are expressed in the mountains by trembling, in the waters by roaring,
and in the sun and moon by obscuration" (Delitzsch). The idea that this
verse refers to the standing still of the sun and moon at the believing
word of Joshua ([Jos 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#012).), in which
nearly all the earlier commentators agreed, is quite untenable, inasmuch
as עמד זבוּלה cannot mean to stand still in the sky. The arrows and
spear (chănı̄th) of God are not lightnings, as in [Psa
77:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#018); [Psa
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015), etc., because this theophany is
not founded upon the idea of a storm, but the darts with which God as a
warrior smites down His foes, as the instruments and effects of the
wrath of God. A brilliant splendour is attributed to them, because they
emanate from Him whose coming, like the sunlight, pours out its rays on
both sides ([Hab 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004)). בּרק חנית has
the same meaning here as in [Nah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#003) :
the flashing, because naked and sharpened, spear. And just as we cannot
understand the "bright sword" of [Nah
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#003) as signifying flashes of
lightning, so here we cannot take the arrows as lightnings. יהלּכוּ is
to be taken relatively, "which pass alone, or shoot by."

[Habakkuk 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hab 3:12</span></span>

In [Hab 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#012) there follows a
description of the judgment upon the nations for the rescue of the
people of God. [Hab 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#012). "In fury
Thou walkest through the earth, in wrath Thou stampest down nations.
[Hab 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013). Thou goest out to the
rescue of Thy people, to the rescue of Thine anointed one; Thou dashest
in pieces the head from the house of the wicked one, laying bare the
foundation even to the neck. Selah. [Hab
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014). Thou piercest with his spears
the head of his hordes, which storm hither to beat me to powder, whose
rejoicing is, as it were, to swallow the poor in secret. [Hab
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#015). Thou treadest upon the sea: Thy
horses, upon the heap of great waters." The Lord, at whose coming in the
terrible glory of the majesty of the Judge of the world all nature
trembles and appears to fall into its primary chaotic state, marches
over the earth, and stamps or tramples down the nations with His feet
(compare the kindred figure of the treader of the winepress in [Isa
63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)). Not all nations, however, but
only those that are hostile to Him; for He has come forth to save His
people and His anointed one. The perfects in [Hab
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013) are prophetic, describing the
future in spirit as having already occurred. יצא, referring to the going
out of God to fight for His people, as in [Jdg
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004); [Sa2
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024); [Isa
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013), etc. ישׁע, rescue, salvation,
is construed the second time with an accusative like an inf. constr.
(see Ewald, 239, a). The anointed of God is not the chosen, consecrated
nation (Schnur., Ros., Hitzig, Ewald, etc.); for the nation of Israel is
never called the anointed one (hammâshı̄ăch) by virtue of its calling to
be "a kingdom of priests" (mamlekheth kohănı̄m, [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)), neither in [Psa
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008) nor in [Psa
84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010); [Psa
89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039). Even in [Psa
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015) it is not the Israelites who
are called by God "my anointed" (meshı̄chai), but the patriarchs, as
princes consecrated by God ([Gen
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#006)). And so here also משׁיחך is the
divinely-appointed king of Israel; not, however, this or that historical
king - say Josiah, Jehoiakim, or even Jehoiachin - but the Davidic king
absolutely, including the Messiah, in whom the sovereignty of David is
raised to an eternal duration, "just as by the Chaldaean king here and
in [Psa 2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) we must understand the
Chaldaean kings generally" (Delitzsch), wince the prophecy spreads from
the judgment upon the Chaldaeans to the universal judgment upon the
nations, and the Chaldaean is merely introduced as the possessor of the
imperial power. The Messiah as the Son of David is distinguished from
Jehovah, and as such is the object of divine help, just as in [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009), where He is called נושׁע in this
respect, and in the royal Messianic psalms. This help God bestows upon
His people and His anointed, by dashing in pieces the head from the
house of the wicked one. The râshâ‛ (wicked one) is the Chaldaean, not
the nation, however, which is spoken of for the first time in [Hab
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014), but the Chaldaean king, as chief
of the imperial power which is hostile to the kingdom of God. But, as
the following clause clearly shows, the house is the house in the
literal sense, so that the "head," as part of the house, is the gable. A
distinction is drawn between this and yeshōd, the foundation, and צוּאר,
the neck, i.e., the central part looking from the gable downwards. The
destruction takes place both from above and below at once, so that the
gable and the foundation are dashed in pieces with one blow, and that
even to the neck, i.e., up to the point at which the roof or gable rests
upon the walls. עד, inclusive, embracing the part mentioned as the
boundary; not exclusive, so as to leave the walls still rising up as
ruins. The description is allegorical, the house representing the
Chaldaean dynasty, the royal family including the king, but not
"including the exalted Chaldaean kingdom in all its prosperity"
(Hitzig). ערות, a rare form of the inf. abs., like שׁתות in [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013) (cf. Ewald, 240, b), from ערה,
to make bare, to destroy from the very foundation, the infinitive in the
sense of the gerund describing the mode of the action.

The warlike nation meets with the same fate as the royal house ([Hab
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014)). The meaning of the first clause
of the verse depends upon the explanation to be given to the word
perâzâv. There is no foundation for the meaning leaders or judges, which
has been claimed for the word perâzı̄m ever since the time of Schroeder
and Schnur. In Hebrew usage perâzı̄ signifies the inhabitant of the plain
([Deu 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005); [Sa1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018)), and perâzōth the plains, the
open flat land, as distinguished from walled cities ([Eze
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011)). Perâzōn has the same meaning
in [Jdg 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007) and [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011). Consequently Delitzsch derives
perâzâv from a segholate noun perez or pērez, in the sense of the
population settled upon the open country, the villagers and peasantry,
whence the more general signification of a crowd or multitude of people,
and here, since the context points to warriors, the meaning hordes, or
hostile companies, which agrees with the Targum, Rashi, and Kimchi, who
explain the word as signifying warriors or warlike troops. ראשׁ, the
head of his hordes, cannot be the leader, partly because of what
follows, "who come storming on," which presupposes that not the leader
only, but the hordes or warriors, will be destroyed, and partly also
because of the preceding verse, in which the destruction of the king is
pronounced, and also because the distinction between the king and the
leader of the army is at variance with the complex character of the
prophetic description. We must take ראשׁ in the literal sense, but
collectively, "heads." The prophet was led to the unusual figure of the
piercing of the head by the reminiscence of the piercing of Sisera's
head by Jael ([Jdg 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026)). The suffixes
in בּמטּיו and פּרזו refer back to רשׁע. מטּיו, sticks, for lance or
spears, after [Sa2 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014). The meaning
of the words is this: with the spear of the king God pierces the heads
of his warlike troops; and the thought expressed is, that the hostile
troops will slay one another in consequence of the confusion, as was the
case in the wars described in [Sa1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#020) and [Ch2
20:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#023), and as, according to
prophecy, the last hostile power of the world is to meet with its ruin
when it shall attack the kingdom of God ([Eze
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#021); [Zac
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#013)). יסערוּ להף is to be taken
relatively: "which storm hither (sâ‛ar, approach with the swiftness and
violence of a storm) to destroy me." The prophet includes himself along
with the nation, and uses hēphı̄ts with reference to the figure of the
dispersion or powdering of the chaff by a stormy wind ([Isa
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#016); [Jer
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#024); [Jer
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#017)). עליצתם forms a substantive
clause by itself: "their rejoicing is," for they who rejoice, as if to
swallow, i.e., whose rejoicing is directed to this, to swallow the poor
in secret. The enemies are compared to highway murderers, who lurk in
dark corners for the defenceless traveller, and look forward with
rejoicing for the moment when they may be able to murder him. עני forms
the antithesis to רשׁע. Inasmuch as "the wicked" denotes the Chaldaean;
"the poor" is the nation of Israel, i.e., the congregation of the
righteous, who are really the people of God. To devour the poor, i.e.,
to take violent possession of his life and all that he has (cf. [Pro
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#014), and for the fact itself, [Psa
10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008)), is, when applied to a
nation, to destroy it (vid., [Deu 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016)
and [Jer 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)).

In order that these enemies may be utterly destroyed, God passes through
the sea. This thought in [Hab 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#015)
connects the conclusion of the description of the judicial coming of God
with what precedes. The drapery of the thought rests upon the fact of
the destruction of Pharaoh and his horsemen in the Red Sea (Exodus 14).
The sea, the heap of many waters, is not a figurative expression for the
army of the enemy, but is to be taken literally. This is required by
דּרכתּ ביּם, since דּרך with ב, to tread upon a place, or enter into it
(cf. [Mic 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004); [Isa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008); [Deu
11:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024)), does not suit the
figurative interpretation; and it is required still more by the parallel
passages, viz., [Psa 77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020) (בּיּם
דּרכּך), which floated before the prophet's mind, and [Zac
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011). Just as God went through the
Red Sea in the olden time to lead Israel through, and to destroy the
Egyptian army, so will He in the future go through the sea and do the
same, when He goes forth to rescue His people out of the power of the
Chaldaean. The prophet does not express the latter indeed, but it is
implied in what he says. סוּסיך is an accusative, not instrumenti,
however, but of more precise definition: thou, namely, according to thy
horses; for "with thy horses," as in Ps. 83:19; [Psa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003) (אתּה ידך); cf. Ewald, 281, c,
and 293, c. The horses are to be taken, as in [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008), as harnessed to the chariots; and
they are mentioned here with reference to the horses and chariots of
Pharaoh, which were destroyed by Jehovah in the sea. Chōmer, in the
sense of heap, as in [Exo 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#010), is not
an accusative, but is still dependent upon the ב of the parallel clause.
The expression "heap of many waters" serves simply to fill up the
picture, as in [Psa 77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020).

[Habakkuk 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hab 3:16</span></span>

[Hab 3:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016) form the second part of
the psalm, in which the prophet describes the feelings that are produced
within himself by the coming of the Lord to judge the nations, and to
rescue His own people; viz., first of all, fear and trembling at the
tribulation ([Hab 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016), [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017)); then exulting joy, in his
confident trust in the God of salvation ([Hab
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018), [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019)). [Hab
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016). "I heard it, then my belly
trembled, at the sound my lips yelled; rottenness forces itself into my
bones, and I tremble under myself, that I am to wait quietly for the day
of tribulation, when he that attacketh it approacheth the nation. [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017). For the fig-tree will not
blossom, and there is no yield on the vines; the produce of the
olive-tree disappoints, and the corn-fields bear no food; the flock is
away from the fold, and no ox in the stalls." שׁמעתּי is not connected
with the theophany depicted in [Hab
3:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003), since this was not an audible
phenomenon, but was an object of inward vision, "a spectacle which
presented itself to the eye." "I heard" corresponds to "I have heard" in
[Hab 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002), and, like the latter, refers
to the report heard from God of the approaching judgment. This address
goes back to its starting-point, to explain the impression which it made
upon the prophet, and to develop still how he "was afraid." The alarm
pervades his whole body, belly, and bones, i.e., the softer and firmer
component parts of the body; lips and feet, i.e., the upper and lower
organs of the body. The lips cried leqōl, at the voice, the sound of
God, which the prophet heard. Tsâlal is used elsewhere only of the
ringing of the ears ([Sa1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#011); [Kg2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012); [Jer
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#003)); but here it is applied to the
chattering sound produced by the lips, when they smite one another
before crying out, not to the chattering of the teeth. Into the bones
there penetrates râqâbh, rottenness, inward consumption of the bones, as
an effect of alarm or pain, which paralyzes all the powers, and takes
away all firmness from the body (cf. [Pro
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004); [Pro
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030)). Tachtai, under me, i.e., in my
lower members, knees, feet: not as in [Exo
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#029); [Sa2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023), on the spot where I stand (cf.
Ewald, 217, k). אשׁר אנוּח might mean, "I who was to rest;" but it is
more appropriate to take 'ăsher as a relative conjunction, "that I,"
since the clause explains the great fear that had fallen upon him. אשׁר
is used in a similar way viz., as a conjunction with the verb in the
first person, in Ezek. 29:29. Nūăch, to rest, not to rest in the grave
(Luther and others), nor to bear quietly or endure (Ges., Maurer), but
to wait quietly or silently. For it could hardly occasion such consuming
pain to a God-fearing man as that which the prophet experienced, to bear
misfortune quietly, when it has already come, and cannot be averted; but
it might be to wait quietly and silently, in constant anticipation.
Tsârâh, the trouble which the Chaldaeans bring upon Judah. לעלות is not
subordinate to ליום צרה, but co-ordinate with it, and is still dependent
upon אנוּח; and יגוּדנּוּ, as a relative clause (who oppresses it), is
the subject to לעלות: "that I am to wait quietly for him that attacketh
to approach my nation." For if לעלוי were dependent upon ליום, it would
be necessary to supply יום as the subject: "when it (the day) comes."
But this is precluded by the fact that עלה is not used for the approach
or breaking of day. לעם, to the people, dativ. incomm., is practically
equivalent to על עם, against the people. עם, used absolutely, as in [Isa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011); [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006), is the nation of Israel. Gūd, as
in [Gen 49:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019), i.e., gâdad, to
press upon a person, to attack him, or crowd together against him (cf.
[Psa 94:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#021)). In [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017) the trouble of this day is
described; and the sensation of pain, in the anticipation of the period
of calamity, is thereby still further accounted for. The plantations and
fields yield no produce. Folds and stalls are empty in consequence of
the devastation of the land by the hostile troops and their
depredations: "a prophetic picture of the devastation of the holy land
by the Chaldaean war" (Delitzsch). Fig-tree and vine are mentioned as
the noblest fruit-trees of the land, as is frequently the case (see [Joe
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007); [Hos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014); [Mic
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004)). To this there is added the
olive-tree, as in [Mic 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#015); [Deu
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011); [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008), etc. Ma‛asēh zayith is not the
shoot, but the produce or fruit of the olive-tree, after the phrase עשׂה
פרי, to bear fruit. Kichēsh, to disappoint, namely the expectation of
produce, as in [Hos 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#002). Shedēmôth,
which only occurs in the plural, corn-fields, is construed here as in
[Isa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008), with the verb in the
singular, because, so far as the sense was concerned, it had become
almost equivalent to sâdeh, the field (see Ewald, 318, a). Gâzar, to cut
off, used here in a neuter sense: to be cut off or absent. מכלה,
contracted from מכלאה: fold, pen, an enclosed place for sheep. Repheth,
ἁπ. λεγ., the rack, then the stable or stall.

[Habakkuk 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">hab 3:18</span></span>

Although trembling on account of the approaching trouble, the prophet
will nevertheless exult in the prospect of the salvation that he
foresees. [Hab 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018). "But I, in
Jehovah will I rejoice, will shout in the God of my salvation. [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019). Jehovah the Lord is my strength,
and makes my feet like the hinds, and causes me to walk along upon my
high places." The turning-point is introduced with ואני ht, as is
frequently the case in the Psalms. For this exaltation out of the
sufferings of this life to believing joy in God, compare [Psa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008); [Psa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006); [Psa
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#015), etc. עלז, a softened form of
עלץ, to rejoice in God (cf. [Psa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012)), i.e., so that God is the
inexhaustible source and infinite sphere of the joy, because He is the
God of salvation, and rises up to judgment upon the nations, to procure
the salvation of His people ([Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)). Elōhē yish‛ı̄ (the God of my
salvation), as in [Psa 18:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#047); [Psa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005) (see at [Mic
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007)). The thoughts of the 19th verse
are also formed from reminiscences of Psalm 18: the first clause, "the
Lord is my strength," from [Psa 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033).
"God, who girdeth me with strength," i.e., the Lord gives me strength to
overcome all tribulation (cf. [Psa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001) and [Co2
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)). The next two clauses are from
[Psa 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034), "He maketh my feet like
hinds'," according to the contracted simile common in Hebrew for "hinds'
feet;" and the reference is to the swiftness of foot, which was one of
the qualifications of a thorough man of war ([Sa2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#023); [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008)), so as to enable him to make a
sudden attack upon the enemy, and pursue him vigorously. Here it is a
figurative expression for the fresh and joyous strength acquired in God,
which Isaiah calls rising up with eagles' wings ([Isa
40:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029)). Causing to walk upon the
high places of the land, was originally a figure denoting the victorious
possession and government of a land. It is so in [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013) and [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029), from which David has taken the
figure in Psalm 18, though he has altered the high places of the earth
into "my high places" (bâmōthai). They were the high places upon which
the Lord had placed him, by giving him the victory over his enemies. And
Habakkuk uses the figurative expression in the same sense, with the
simple change of יעמידני into ידרכני after [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029), to substitute for the
bestowment of victory the maintenance of victory corresponding to the
blessing of Moses. We have therefore to understand bâmōthai neither as
signifying the high places of the enemy, nor the high places at home,
nor high places generally. The figure must be taken as a whole; and
according to this, it simply denotes the ultimate triumph of the people
of God over all oppression on the part of the power of the world,
altogether apart from the local standing which the kingdom of God will
have upon the earth, either by the side of or in antagonism to the
kingdom of the world. The prophet prays and speaks throughout the entire
ode in the name of the believing congregation. His pain is their pain;
his joy their joy. Accordingly he closes his ode by appropriating to
himself and all believers the promise which the Lord has given to His
people and to David His anointed servant, to express the confident
assurance that the God of salvation will keep it, and fulfil it in the
approaching attack on the part of the power of the world upon the nation
which has been refined by the judgment.

The last words, למנצּח בּנגינותי, do not form part of the contents of
the supplicatory ode, but are a subscription answering to the heading in
[Hab 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001), and refer to the use of the
ode in the worship of God, and simply differ from the headings למנצּח
בּנגינות in [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001); [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001); 54:1-55:23; [Psa
67:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001), and [Psa
76:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001), through the use of the suffix
in בּנגינותי. Through the words, "to the president (of the temple-music,
or the conductor) in accompaniment of my stringed playing," the prophet
appoints his psalm for use in the public worship of God accompanied by
his stringed playing. Hitzig's rendering is grammatically false, "to the
conductor of my pieces of music;" for ב cannot be used as a periphrasis
for the genitive, but when connected with a musical expression, only
means with or in the accompaniment of (ה instrumenti or concomitantiae).
Moreover, נגינות does not mean pieces of music, but simply a song, and
the playing upon stringed instruments, or the stringed instrument itself
(see at [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001)). The first of
these renderings gives no suitable sense here, so that there only
remains the second, viz., "playing upon stringed instruments." But if
the prophet, by using this formula, stipulates that the ode is to be
used in the temple, accompanied by stringed instruments, the expression
bingı̄nōthai, with my stringed playing, affirms that he himself will
accompany it with his own playing, from which it has been justly
inferred that he was qualified, according to the arrangements of the
Israelitish worship, to take part in the public performance of such
pieces of music as were suited for public worship, and therefore
belonged to the Levites who were entrusted with the conduct of the
musical performance of the temple.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Introduction](zep000)

</div>
