<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](nah003)  [Next](hab001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

[Habakkuk](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hab 0:0</span></span>

Habakkuk

Introduction

Person of the Prophet. - Nothing certain is known as to the
circumstances of Habakkuk's life. The name חבקּוּק, formed from חבק, to
fold the hands, piel to embrace, by a repetition of the last radical
with the vowel u, like נעצוּץ from נעץ, שׁערוּרה from שׁער, etc., and a
reduplication of the penultimate (cf. Ewald, 157, a), signifies
embracing; and as the name of a person, either one who embraces, or one
who is embraced. Luther took the name in the first sense. "Habakkuk," he
says, "signifies an embracer, or one who embraces another, or takes him
to his arms," and interpreted it thus in a clever although not perfectly
appropriate manner: "He embraces his people, and takes them to his arms,
i.e., he comforts them and holds (lifts) them up, as one embraces a
weeping child or person, to quiet it with the assurance that if God will
it shall be better soon." The lxx wrote the name ̓αμβακούμ, taking the
word as pronounced הבּקוּק, and compensating for the doubling of the ב
by the liquid μ, and changing the closing ק into μ. Jerome in his
translation writes the name Habacuc. In the headings to his book ([Hab
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001) and [Hab
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)) Habakkuk is simply described by
the epithet הוּביא, as a man who held the office of a prophet. From the
conclusion to the psalm in ch. 3, "To the leader in the accompaniment to
my playing upon stringed instruments" ([Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019)), we learn that he was officially
qualified to take part in the liturgical singing of the temple, and
therefore belonged to one of the Levitical families, who were charged
with the maintenance of the temple music, and, like the prophets
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, who sprang from priestly households, belonged to
the tribe of Levi. This is supported by the superscription of the
apocryphon of Bel and the dragon at Babel, ἑκ προφητείας Ἀμβακοὺμ υἱοῦ
Ἰησοῦ ἐκ τῆς φυλῆς Λευΐ́, which has been preserved in the Cod. Chisian.
of the lxx from Origen's tetrapla, and has passed into the
Syrio-hexaplar. version; even if this statement should not be founded
upon tradition, but simply inferred from the subscription to [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019). For even in that case it would
prove that בּנגינותי was understood in ancient times as signifying that
the prophet took part in the liturgical singing of the temple.

(Note: There is not much probability in this conjecture, however, since
the lxx have not understood the subscription in this sense, but have
rendered it incorrectly τοῦ νικῆσαι ἐν τῆ ὠδῆ αὐτοῦ, which has led the
fathers to take the words as belonging to the psalm itself, and to
understand it as relating to the songs of praise which the church would
raise to God for the deliverance which it had received. Theod. Mops.
explains it in this way: "He sets us higher than all the rest, so that
nothing else becomes us than to continue in the songs and hymns which
are due to God, because, against all human hope, He has given us the
victory over our enemies." Cyril of Alex. and Theodoret give similar
explanations. Even Jerome, in his rendering "et super excelsa mea
deducet me victori in psalmis canentem," connects the words with the
preceding sentence, and interprets them as referring to the songs of
praise which "every righteous man who is worthy of the election of God"
will raise at the end of the world to the great conqueror "Jesus, who
was the first to conquer in the fight." With such an explanation of the
words as these, it was impossible to see any intimation of the Levitical
descent of the prophet in the expression בּנגינותי)

On the other hand, the rest of the legends relating to our prophet are
quite worthless: viz., the circumstantial account in the apocryphal book
of Bel and the Dragon of the miraculous way in which Habakkuk was
transported to Daniel, who had been cast into the lions' den, which is
also found in a MS of the Midrash Bereshit rabba; and also the
statements contained in the writings of Ps. Doroth. and Ps. Epiph. de
vitis prophet., that Habakkuk sprang from the tribe of Simeon; that he
was born at Βηθζοχήρ (Sozomenus, Χαφἀρ Ζαχαρία, the talmudic כּפר
דכרין), a hamlet to the north of Lydda, near to Maresha on the
mountains; that when Nebuchadnezzar came to Jerusalem, he fled to
Ostrakine (on the promontory now called Ras Straki, situated in the
neighbourhood of Arabia Petraea); and that he died on his native soil
two years after the return of the people from Babylon, and was buried at
the spot between Keila and Gabatha, where his grave was still shown in
the time of Eusebius and Jerome (cf. Onomast. ed. Lars. et Parthey, pp.
128-9). For further particulars as to the apocryphal legends, see
Delitzsch, De Habacuci proph. vita atque aetate commentat., ed. ii.,
Lps. 1842.

These legends do not even help us to fix the date of Habakkuk's life.
All that can be gathered with any certainty from his own writings is
that he prophesied before the arrival of the Chaldaeans in Palestine,
i.e., before the victory gained by Nebuchadnezzar over Pharaoh Necho at
Carchemish in the fourth year of Jehoiakim ([Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)), since he announces the bringing
up of this people to execute judgment upon Judah as something still in
the future ([Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005).). Opinions are
divided as to the precise date at which he lived. Leaving out of sight
the opinions of those who deny the supernatural character of prophecy,
and therefore maintain that the prophet did not prophesy till the
Chaldaeans were coming against Jerusalem after the defeat of Necho, or
had already arrived there, the only question that can arise is, whether
Habakkuk lived and laboured in the reign of Josiah or in the closing
years of Manasseh. Many have found a decisive proof that he lived in the
reign of Josiah in [Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005), viz., in
the fact that the prophet there foretells the Chaldaean judgment as a
work which God will perform during the lifetime of the persons to whom
his words are addressed ("in your days"); and they have inferred from
this that we must not at any rate go beyond Josiah's reign, because the
prophet is not speaking to the children, but to the adults, i.e., to
those who have reached the age of manhood. But the measure of time by
which to interpret בּימיכם cannot be obtained either from [Joe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#002), where the days of the persons
addressed are distinguished from the days of the fathers and
grandchildren, or from [Jer 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#009) and
[Eze 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025); but this expression is
quite a relative one, especially in prophetic addresses, and may embrace
either a few years only, or a complete lifetime, and even more. Now, as
there were only thirty-eight years between the death of Manasseh and the
first invasion of the Chaldaeans, the Chaldaean judgment might very well
be announced during the last years of that king to the then existing
generation as one that would happen in their days. We are precluded from
placing the announcement in the time immediately preceding the
appearance of the Chaldaeans in Hither Asia, say in the first years of
Jehoiakim or the closing years of Josiah's reign, by the fact that
Habakkuk represents this work of God as an incredible one: "Ye would not
believe it, if it were told you" ([Hab
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)). Moreover, it is expressly
related in [Kg2 21:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#010) and [Ch2
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#010), that in the time of Manasseh
Jehovah caused His prophets to announce the coming of such a calamity,
"that both ears of all who heard it would tingle" - namely, the
destruction of Jerusalem and rejection of Judah. In all probability, one
of these prophets was Habakkuk, who was the first of all the prophets
known to us to announce this horrible judgment. Zephaniah and Jeremiah
both appeared with the announcement of the same judgment in the reign of
Josiah, and both took notice of Habakkuk in their threatenings. Thus
Zephaniah quite as certainly borrowed the words הס מפּני אדני יהוה in
[Zep 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007) from [Hab
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020), as Zechariah did the words הס
כּל־בּשׂר מפּני יהוה in [Zac 2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)
:17; and Jeremiah formed the expressions קלּוּ מנּשׁרים סוּסיו in [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013) and זאב ערבות in [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006) on the basis of קלּוּ מנּמרים
סוּסיו וחדּוּ מזּאבי ערב in [Hab 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008),
not to mention other passages of Jeremiah that have the ring of our
prophet, which Delitzsch has collected in his Der Proph. Hab. ausgelegt
(p. xii.). This decidedly upsets the theory that Habakkuk did not begin
to prophesy till the reign of Jehoiakim; although, as such resemblances
and allusions do not preclude the contemporaneous ministry of the
prophets, there still remains the possibility that Habakkuk may not have
prophesied till the time of Josiah, and indeed not before the twelfth
year of Josiah's reign, when he commenced the extermination of idolatry
and the restoration of the worship of Jehovah, since Habakkuk's prayer,
which was intended according to the subscription for use in the temple,
presupposes the restoration of the Jehovah-worship with the liturgical
service of song.

But the possibility is not yet raised into a certainty by these
circumstances. Manasseh also caused the idols to be cleared away from
the temple after his return from imprisonment in Babylon, and not only
restored the altar of Jehovah, and ordered praise-offerings and
thank-offerings to be presented upon it, but commanded the people to
serve Jehovah the God of Israel ([Ch2
33:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015)). Consequently Habakkuk might
have composed his psalm at that time for use in the temple service. And
this conjecture as to its age acquires extreme probability when we look
carefully at the contents and form of the prophecy. Apart from the
rather more distinct and special description of the wild, warlike, and
predatory nature of the Chaldaeans, the contents retain throughout an
ideal character, without any allusion to particular historical
relations, such as we find for example in great abundance in Jeremiah,
who prophesied in the thirteenth year of Josiah, and which are not
altogether wanting in Zephaniah, notwithstanding the comprehensive
character of his prophecy. If we look at the form, Habakkuk's prophecy
still bears completely the antique stamp of the earlier prophetic
literature. "His language," to use the words of Delitzsch, "is classical
throughout, full of rare and select words and turns, which are to some
extent exclusively his own, whilst his view and mode of presentation
bear the seal of independent force and finished beauty. Notwithstanding
the violent rush and lofty soaring of the thoughts, his prophecy forms a
finely organized and artistically rounded whole. Like Isaiah, he is,
comparatively speaking, much more independent of his predecessors, both
in contents and form, than any other of the prophets. Everything
reflects the time when prophecy was in its greatest glory, when the
place of the sacred lyrics, in which the religious life of the church
had hitherto expressed itself, was occupied, through a still mightier
interposition on the part of God, by prophetic poetry with its trumpet
voice, to reawaken in the church, now spiritually dead, the
consciousness of God which had so utterly disappeared." On the other
hand, the turning-point came as early as Zechariah, and from that time
forwards the poetic swing of the prophetic addresses declines and
gradually disappears, the dependence upon the earlier predecessors
becomes more predominant; and even with such thoroughly original natures
as Ezekiel and Zechariah, their style of composition cannot rise very
far above simple prose.

2\. The Book of Habakkuk contains neither a collection of oracles, nor
the condensation into one discourse of the essential contents of several
prophetic addresses, but one single prophecy arranged in two parts. In
the first part (ch. 1 and 2), under the form of a conversation between
God and the prophet, we have first of all an announcement of the
judgment which God is about to bring upon the degenerate covenant nation
through the medium of the Chaldaeans; and secondly, an announcement of
the overthrow of the Chaldaean, who has lifted himself up even to the
deification of his own power. To this there is appended in ch. 3, as a
second part, the prophet's prayer for the fulfilment of the judgment;
and an exalted lyric psalm, in which Habakkuk depicts the coming of the
Lord in the terrible glory of the Almighty, at whose wrath the universe
is terrified, to destroy the wicked and save His people and His
anointed, and gives utterance to the feelings which the judgment of God
will awaken in the hearts of the righteous. The whole of the prophecy
has an ideal and universal stamp. Not even Judah and Jerusalem are
mentioned, and the Chaldaeans who are mentioned by name are simply
introduced as the existing possessors of the imperial power of the
world, which was bent upon the destruction of the kingdom of God, or as
the sinners who swallow up the righteous man. The announcement of
judgment is simply a detailed expansion of the thought that the unjust
man and the sinner perish, whilst the just will live through his faith
([Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)). This prophecy hastens on
towards its fulfilment, and even though it should tarry, will assuredly
take place at the appointed time ([Hab
2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002)). Through the judgment upon the
godless ones in Judah and upon the Chaldaeans, the righteousness of the
holy God will be manifested, and the earth will be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord ([Hab
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#014)). Although the fact that the
Chaldaeans are mentioned by name leaves no doubt whatever that the
judgment will burst upon Judah through this wild conquering people, the
prophecy rises immediately from this particular judgment to a view of
the universal judgment upon all nations, yea, upon the whole of the
ungodly world, to proclaim their destruction and the dawning of
salvation for the people of the Lord and the Lord's anointed; so that
the trembling at the terrors of judgment is resolved at the close into
joy and exultation in the God of salvation. There can be no doubt as to
the unity of the book; and the attempt to interpret the threat of
judgment in ch. 2 by applying it to particular historical persons and
facts, has utterly failed.

For the exegetical works on Habakkuk, see my Einleitung in das alte
Testament, 302-3.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 1](hab001)

</div>
