<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](hab000)  [Next](hab002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

Judgment upon the Wicked - Habakkuk 1 and 2

Chastisement of Judah through the Chaldaeans - Habakkuk 1

The lamentation of the prophet over the dominion of wickedness and
violence ([Hab 1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002)) is answered thus
by the Lord: He will raise up the Chaldaeans, who are to execute the
judgment, as a terrible, world-conquering people, but who will offend by
making their might into their god ([Hab
1:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)); whereupon the prophet,
trusting in the Lord, who has proved Himself to His people from time
immemorial to be a holy and righteous God, expresses the hope that this
chastisement will not lead to death, and addresses the question to God,
whether with His holiness He can look calmly upon the wickedness of this
people, in gathering men into their net like fishes, and continuing in
the most unsparing manner to slay the nations ([Hab
1:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)).

[Habakkuk 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hab 1:1</span></span>

[Hab 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001) contains the heading not only
to ch. 1 and 2, but to the whole book, of which ch. 3 forms an integral
part. On the special heading in [Hab
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001), see the comm. on that verse. The
prophet calls his writing a massâ', or burden (see at [Nah
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)), because it announces heavy
judgments upon the covenant nation and the imperial power.

[Habakkuk 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hab 1:2</span></span>

The prophet's lamentation. [Hab 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002).
"How long, Jehovah, have I cried, and Thou hearest not? I cry to Thee,
Violence; and Thou helpest not! [Hab
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003). Why dost Thou let me see
mischief, and Thou lookest upon distress? devastation and violence are
before me: there arises strife, and contention lifts itself up. [Hab
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#004). Therefore the law is benumbed,
and justice comes not forth for ever: for sinners encircle the righteous
man; therefore justice goes forth perverted." This complaint, which
involves a petition for help, is not merely an expression of the
prophet's personal desire for the removal of the prevailing
unrighteousness; but the prophet laments, in the name of the righteous,
i.e., the believers in the nation, who had to suffer under the
oppression of the wicked; not, however, as Rosenmller and Ewald, with
many of the Rabbins, suppose, over the acts of wickedness and violence
which the Chaldaeans performed in the land, but over the wicked conduct
of the ungodly of his own nation. For it is obvious that these verses
refer to the moral depravity of Judah, from the fact that God announced
His purpose to raise up the Chaldaeans to punish it ([Hab
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005).). It is true that, in [Hab
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#009) and [Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013), wickedness and violence are
attributed to the Chaldaeans also; but all that can be inferred from
this is, that "in the punishment of the Jewish people a divine talio
prevails, which will eventually fall upon the Chaldaeans also"
(Delitzsch). The calling for help (שׁוּע is described, in the second
clause, as crying over wickedness. חמס is an accusative, denoting what
he cries, as in [Job 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007) and [Jer
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#008), viz., the evil that is done. Not
hearing is equivalent to not helping. The question עד־אנה indicates that
the wicked conduct has continued a long time, without God having put a
stop to it. This appears irreconcilable with the holiness of God. Hence
the question in [Hab 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003) : Wherefore
dost Thou cause me to see mischief, and lookest upon it Thyself? which
points to [Num 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021), viz., to the
words of Balaam, "God hath not beheld iniquity ('âven) in Jacob, neither
hath He seen perverseness (‛âmâl) in Israel." This word of God, in which
Balaam expresses the holiness of Israel, which remains true to the idea
of its divine election, is put before the Lord in the form of a
question, not only to give prominence to the falling away of the people
from their divine calling, and their degeneracy into the very opposite
of what they ought to be, but chiefly to point to the contradiction
involved in the fact, that God the Holy One does now behold the evil in
Israel and leave it unpunished. God not only lets the prophet see
iniquity, but even looks at Himself. This is at variance with His
holiness. און, nothingness, then worthlessness, wickedness (cf. [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)). עמל, labour, then distress
which a man experiences or causes to others (cf. [Isa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001)). הבּיט, to see, not to cause to
see. Ewald has revoked the opinion, that we have here a fresh hiphil,
derived from a hiphil. With שׁד וגו the address is continued in the form
of a simple picture. Shōd vechâmâs are often connected (e.g., [Amo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010); [Jer
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#007); [Jer
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#008); [Eze
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#009)). Shōd is violent treatment
causing desolation. Châmâs is malicious conduct intended to injure
another. ווהי, it comes to pass, there arises strife (rı̄bh) in
consequence of the violent and wicked conduct. ישּׂא, to rise up, as in
[Hos 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001); [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010). The consequences of this are
relaxation of the law, etc. על־כּן, therefore, because God does not
interpose to stop the wicked conduct. פּוּג, to relax, to stiffen, i.e.,
to lose one's vital strength, or energy. Tōrâh is "the revealed law in
all its substance, which was meant to be the soul, the heart of
political, religious, and domestic life" (Delitzsch). Right does not
come forth, i.e., does not manifest itself, lânetsach, lit., for a
permanence, i.e., for ever, as in many other passages, e.g., [Psa
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002); [Isa
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020). לנצח belongs to לא, not for
ever, i.e., never more. Mishpât is not merely a righteous verdict,
however; in which case the meaning would be: There is no more any
righteous verdict given, but a righteous state of things, objective
right in the civil and political life. For godless men (רשׁע, without an
article, is used with indefinite generality or in a collective sense)
encircle the righteous man, so that the righteous cannot cause right to
prevail. Therefore right comes forth perverted. The second clause,
commencing with על־כּן, completes the first, adding a positive assertion
to the negative. The right, which does still come to the light, is
מעקּל, twisted, perverted, the opposite of right. To this complaint
Jehovah answers in [Hab 1:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005) that He
will do a marvellous work, inflict a judgment corresponding in magnitude
to the prevailing injustice.

[Habakkuk 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hab 1:5</span></span>

"Look ye among the nations, and see, and be amazed, amazed! for I work a
work in your days: ye would not believe it if it were told you." The
appeal to see and be amazed is addressed to the prophet and the people
of Judah together. It is very evident from [Hab
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006) that Jehovah Himself is speaking
here, and points by anticipation to the terrible nature of the
approaching work of His punitive righteousness, although פּעל is written
indefinitely, without any pronoun attached. Moreover, as Delitzsch and
Hitzig observe, the meaning of the appeal is not, "Look round among the
nations, whether any such judgment has ever occurred;" but, "Look about
among the nations, for it is thence that the terrible storm will burst
that is about to come upon you" (cf. [Jer
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#032); [Jer
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020)). The first and ordinary view,
in support of which [Lam 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#012); [Jer
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010) and [Jer
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#013), are generally adduced, is
precluded by the fact, (1) that it is not stated for what they are to
look round, namely, whether anything of the kind has occurred here or
there ([Jer 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)); (2) that the
unparalleled occurrence has not been mentioned at all yet; and (3) that
what they are to be astonished or terrified at is not their failure to
discover an analogy, but the approaching judgment itself. The
combination of the kal, tâmâh, with the hiphil of the same verb serves
to strengthen it, so as to express the highest degree of amazement (cf.
[Zep 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001); [Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011), and Ewald, 313, c). כּי, for,
introduces the reason not only for the amazement, but also for the
summons to look round. The two clauses of the second hemistich
correspond to the two clauses of the first half of the verse. They are
to look round, because Jehovah is about to perform a work; they are to
be amazed, or terrified, because this work is an amazing or a terrible
one. The participle פּעל denotes that which is immediately at hand, and
is used absolutely, without a pronoun. According to [Hab
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006), אני is the pronoun we have to
supply. For it is not practicable to supply הוּא, or to take the
participle in the sense of the third person, since God, when speaking to
the people, cannot speak of Himself in the third person, and even in
that case יהוה could not be omitted. Hitzig's idea is still more
untenable, namely, that pō‛al is the subject, and that pō‛ēl is used in
an intransitive sense: the work produces its effect. We must assume, as
Delitzsch does, that there is a proleptical elipsis, i.e., one in which
the word immediately following is omitted (as in [Isa
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#011); [Zac
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017)). The admissibility of this
assumption is justified by the fact that there are other cases in which
the participle is used and the pronoun omitted; and that not merely the
pronoun of the third person (e.g., [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011); [Jer
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#023)), but that of the second person
also ([Sa1 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#024); [Sa1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#003), and [Psa
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010)). On the expression בּימיכם (in
your days), see the Introduction. לא תאמינוּ, ye would not believe it if
it were told you, namely, as having occurred in another place of at
another time, if ye did not see it yourselves (Delitzsch and Hitzig).
Compare [Act 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041), where the Apostle
Paul threatens the despisers of the gospel with judgment in the words of
our verse.

[Habakkuk 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hab 1:6</span></span>

Announcement of this work. - [Hab 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006).
"For, behold, I cause the Chaldaeans to rise up, the fierce and vehement
nation, which marches along the breadths of the earth, to take
possession of dwelling-places that are not its own. [Hab
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#007). It is alarming and fearful: its
right and its eminence go forth from it. [Hab
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008). And its horses are swifter than
leopards, and more sudden than evening wolves: and its horsemen spring
along; and its horsemen, they come from afar; they fly hither, hastening
like an eagle to devour. [Hab 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#009). It
comes all at once for wickedness; the endeavour of their faces is
directed forwards, and it gathers prisoners together like sand. [Hab
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#010). And it, kings it scoffs at, and
princes are laughter to it; it laughs at every stronghold, and heaps up
sand, and takes it. [Hab 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011). Then it
passes along, a wind, and comes hither and offends: this its strength is
its god." הנני מקים, ecce suscitaturus sum. הנּה before the participle
always refers to the future. הקים, to cause to stand up or appear, does
not apply to the elevation of the Chaldaeans into a nation or a
conquering people, - for the picture which follows and is defined by the
article הגּויו וגו presupposes that it already exists as a conquering
people, - but to its being raised up against Judah, so that it is
equivalent to מקים עליכם in [Amo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014)
(cf. [Mic 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004); [Sa2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011), etc.). Hakkasdı̄m, the
Chaldaeans, sprang, according to [Gen
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#022), from Kesed the son of Nahor,
the brother of Abraham; so that they were a Semitic race. They dwelt
from time immemorial in Babylonia or Mesopotamia, and are called a
primeval people, gōI mē‛ōlâm, in [Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015). Abram migrated to Canaan from Ur
of the Chaldees, from the other side of the river (Euphrates: [Gen
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028), [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031), compared with [Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)); and the Kasdı̄m in Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel are inhabitants of Babel or Babylonia ([Isa
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#014); [Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001); [Isa
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#014), [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020); [Jer
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#009); [Jer
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#004), [Jer
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024), etc.; [Eze
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023)). Babylonia is called 'erets
Kasdı̄m ([Jer 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#005); [Jer
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012); [Eze
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013)), or simply Kasdı̄m ([Jer
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#010); [Jer
51:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#024), [Jer
51:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035); Ezekiel 26:29; [Eze
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#016)). The modern hypothesis, that
the Chaldaeans were first of all transplanted by the Assyrians from the
northern border mountains of Armenia, Media, and Assyria to Babylonia,
and that having settled there, they afterwards grew into a cultivated
people, and as a conquering nation exerted great influence in the
history of the world, simply rests upon a most precarious interpretation
of an obscure passage in Isaiah ([Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018)), and has no higher value than
the opinion of the latest Assyriologists that the Chaldaeans are a
people of Tatar origin, who mingled with the Shemites of the countries
bordering upon the Euphrates and Tigris (see Delitzsch on [Isa
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013)). Habakkuk describes this people
as mar, bitter, or rough, and, when used to denote a disposition, fierce
(mar nephesh, [Jdg 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#025); [Sa2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#008)); and nimhâr, heedless or rash
([Isa 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#004)), here violent, and as
moving along the breadths of the earth (ἑπὶ τὰ πλάτη τῆς γῆς, lxx: cf.
[Rev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009)), i.e., marching through the
whole extent of the earth ([Isa 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008)):
terram quam late patet (Ros.). ל is not used here to denote the
direction or the goal, but the space, as in [Gen
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#017) (Hitzig, Delitzsch). To take
possession of dwelling-laces that are not his own (לא־לו = אשׁר לא־לו),
i.e., to take possession of foreign lands that do not belong to him. In
[Hab 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#007) the fierce disposition of
this people is still further depicted, and in [Hab
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008) the violence with which it
advances. אים, formidabilis, exciting terror; נורא, metuendus, creating
alarm. ממּנּוּ וגו, from it, not from God (cf. [Psa
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002)), does its right proceed, i.e.,
it determines right, and the rule of its conduct, according to its own
standard; and שׂאתו, its eminence ([Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003); [Hos
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)), "its δόξα ([Co1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)) above all other nations"
(Hitzig), making itself lord through the might of its arms. Its horses
are lighter, i.e., swifter of foot, than panthers, which spring with the
greatest rapidity upon their prey (for proofs of the swiftness of the
panther, see Bochart, Hieroz. ii. p. 104, ed. Ros.), and חדּוּ, lit.,
sharper, i.e., shooting sharply upon it. As qâlal represents swiftness
as a light rapid movement, which hardly touches the ground, so châda,
ὀξὺν εἶναι, describes it as a hasty precipitate dash upon a certain
object (Delitzsch). The first clause of this verse has been repeated by
Jeremiah ([Jer 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013)), with the
alteration of one letter (viz., מנּשׁרים for מנּמרים). Wolves of the
evening (cf. [Zep 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#003)) are wolves
which go out in the evening in search of prey, after having fasted
through the day, not "wolves of Arabia (ערב = ערב, lxx) or of the
desert" (ערבה Kimchi).

Pâshū from pūsh, after the Arabic fâš, med. Ye, to strut proudly; when
used of a horse and its rider, to spring along, to gallop; or of a calf,
to hop or jump ([Jer 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011); [Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)). The connection between this and
pūsh ([Nah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018)), niphal to disperse
or scatter one's self, is questionable. Delitzsch (on [Job
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#015)) derives pūsh in this verse and
the passage cited from Arab. fâš, med. Vav, in the sense of swimming
upon the top, and apparently traces pūsh in Nahum 3, as well as pash in
[Job 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#015), to Arab. fšš (when used of
water: to overflow its dam); whilst Freytag (in the Lexicon) gives, as
the meaning of Arab. fšš II, dissolvit, dissipavit. Pârâshı̄m are
horsemen, not riding-horses. The repetition of פּרשׁיו does not warrant
our erasing the words וּפשׁוּ פּרשׁיו as a gloss, as Hitzig proposes. It
can be explained very simply from the fact, that in the second hemistich
Habakkuk passes from the general description of the Chaldaeans to a
picture of their invasion of Judah. מרחוק , from afar, i.e., from
Babylonia (cf. [Isa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#003)). Their
coming from afar, and the comparison of the rushing along of the
Chaldaean horsemen to the flight of an eagle, points to the threat in
[Deu 28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049), "Jehovah shall bring
against thee a nation from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as
the eagle flieth," which is now about to be fulfilled. Jeremiah
frequently uses the same comparison when speaking of the Chaldaeans,
viz., in [Jer 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013); [Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040); [Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022), and [Lam
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#019) (cf. [Sa2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#023)). The ἁπ. λεγ. מגמּה may mean a
horde or crowd, after the Hebrew גם werbeH , and the Arabic jammah, or
snorting, endeavouring, striving, after Arab. jmm and jâm, appetivit, in
which case גמם would be connected with גמא, to swallow. But the first
meaning does not suit פּניהם קדימה, whereas the second does. קדימה, not
eastwards, but according to the primary meaning of קדם, to the front,
forwards. Ewald renders it incorrectly: "the striving of their face is
to storm, i.e., to mischief;" for qâdı̄m, the east wind, when used in the
sense of storm, is a figurative expression for that which is vain and
worthless ([Hos 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#002); cf. [Job
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#002)), but not for mischief. For
ויּאסף, compare [Gen 41:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#049) and [Zac
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#003); and for כּחול, like sand of the
sea, [Hos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001). In [Hab
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#010) והוּא and הוּא are introduced,
that the words בּמּלכים and לכל־מבצר, upon which the emphasis lies, may
be placed first. It, the Chaldaean nation, scoffs at kings and princes,
and every stronghold, i.e., it ridicules all the resistance that kings
and princes offer to its advance, by putting forth their strength, as a
perfectly fruitless attempt. Mischâq, the object of laughter. The words,
it heaps up dust and takes it (the fortress), express the facility with
which every fortress is conquered by it. To heap up dust: denoting the
casting up an embankment for attack ([Sa2
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#015), etc.). The feminine suffix
attached to ילכּדהּ refers ad sensum to the idea of a city (עיר),
implied in מבצר, the latter being equivalent to עיר מבצר in [Sa1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018); [Kg2
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019), etc. Thus will the Chaldaean
continue incessantly to overthrow kings and conquer kingdoms with
tempestuous rapidity, till he offends, by deifying his own power. With
this gentle hint at the termination of his tyranny, the announcement of
the judgment closes in [Hab 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011). אז,
there, i.e., in this appearance of his, as depicted in [Hab
1:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006) : not "then," in which case
[Hab 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011) would affirm to what further
enterprises the Chaldaeans would proceed after their rapidly and easily
effected conquests. The perfects חלף and ויּעבור are used prophetically,
representing the future as occurring already. חלף and עבר are used
synonymously: to pass along and go further, used of the wind or tempest,
as in [Isa 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001); here, as in [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008), of the hostile army overflowing
the land; with this difference, however, that in Isaiah it is thought of
as a stream of water, whereas here it is thought of as a tempest
sweeping over the land. The subject to châlaph is not rūăch, but the
Chaldaean (הוּא, [Hab 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#010)); and rūăch
is used appositionally, to denote the manner in which it passes along,
viz., "like a tempestuous wind" (rūăch as in [Job
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015); [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002)). ואשׁם is not a participle, but a
perfect with Vav rel., expressing the consequence, "and so he offends."
In what way is stated in the last clause, in which זוּ does not answer
to the relative אשׁר, in the sense of "he whose power," but is placed
demonstratively before the noun כּחו, like זה in [Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001); [Jos
9:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#012), and [Isa
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013) (cf. Ewald, 293, b), pointing
back to the strength of the Chaldaean, which has been previously
depicted in its intensive and extensive greatness (Delitzsch). This its
power is god to it, i.e., it makes it into its god (for the thought,
compare [Job 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006), and the words of
the Assyrian in [Isa 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#013)). The
ordinary explanation of the first hemistich is, on the other hand,
untenable (then its courage becomes young again, or grows), since רוּח
cannot stand for רוּחו, and עבר without an object given in the context
cannot mean to overstep, i.e., to go beyond the proper measure.

[Habakkuk 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hab 1:12</span></span>

On this threatening announcement of the judgment by God, the prophet
turns to the Lord in the name of believing Israel, and expresses the
confident hope that He as the Holy One will not suffer His people to
perish. [Hab 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012). "Art Thou not from
olden time, O Jehovah, my God, my Holy One? We shall not die. Jehovah,
for judgment hast Thou appointed it; and, O Rock, founded it for
chastisement." However terrible and prostrating the divine threatening
may sound, the prophet draws consolation and hope from the holiness of
the faithful covenant God, that Israel will not perish, but that the
judgment will be only a severe chastisement.

(Note: "Therefore," says Calvin, "whoever desires to fight bravely with
the ungodly, let him first settle the matter with God Himself, and, as
it were, confirm and ratify that treaty which God has set before us,
namely, that we are His people, and He will be a God to us in return.
And because God makes a covenant with us in this manner, it is necessary
that our faith should be well established, that we may go forth to the
conflict with all the ungodly.")

The supplicatory question with which he soars to this hope of faith is
closely connected with the divine and threatening prophecy in [Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011). The Chaldaean's god is his own
strength; but Israel's God is Jehovah, the Holy One. On the
interrogative form of the words ("art Thou not?"), which requires an
affirmative reply, Luther has aptly observed that "he speaks to God
interrogatively, asking whether He will do this and only punish; not
that he has any doubt on the subject, but that he shows how faith is
sustained in the midst of conflicts, - namely, that it appears as weak
as if it did not believe, and would sink at once, and fall into despair
on account of the great calamity which crushes it. For although faith
stands firm, yet it cracks, and speaks in a very different tone when in
the midst of the conflict from what it does when the victory is gained."
But as the question is sure to receive an affirmative reply, the prophet
draws this inference from it: "we shall not die," we Thy people shall
not perish. This hope rests upon two foundations: viz., (1) from time
immemorial Jehovah is Israel's God; and (2) He is the Holy One of
Israel, who cannot leave wickedness unpunished either in Israel or in
the foe. This leads to the further conclusion, that Jehovah has simply
appointed the Chaldaean nation to execute the judgment, to chastise
Israel, and not to destroy His people. The three predicates applied to
God have equal weight in the question. The God to whom the prophet prays
is Jehovah, the absolutely constant One, who is always the same in word
and work (see at [Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)); He is also
Elohai, my, i.e., Israel's, God, who from time immemorial has proved to
the people whom He had chosen as His possession that He is their God;
and קדשׁי, the Holy One of Israel, the absolutely Pure One, who cannot
look upon evil, and therefore cannot endure that the wicked should
devour the righteous ([Hab 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)). לא
נמוּת is not a supplicatory wish: Let us not die therefore; but a
confident assertion: "We shall not die."

(Note: According to the Masora, לא נמוּת stands as תקון סופרים, i.e.,
correctio scribarum for לא תמוּת, thou wilt not die. These tikkune
sophrim, however, of which the Masora reckons eighteen, are not
alterations of original readings proposed by the sophrim, but simply
traditional definitions of what the sacred writers originally intended
to write, though they afterwards avoided it or gave a different turn.
Thus the prophet intended to write here: "Thou (God) wilt not die;" but
in the consciousness that this was at variance with the divine decorum,
he gave it this turn, "We shall not die." But this rabbinical conjecture
rests upon the erroneous assumption that מקּדם is a predicate, and the
thought of the question is this: "Thou art from of old, Thou Jehovah my
God, my Holy One," according to which לא תמוּת would be an exegesis of
מקּדם, which is evidently false. For further remarks on the tikkune
sophrim, see Delitzsch's Commentary on Hab. l.c., and the Appendix. p.
206ff.)

In the second half of the verse, Yehōvâh and tsūr (rock) are vocatives.
Tsūr, as an epithet applied to God, is taken from [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018), and [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037), where God is first called the
Rock of Israel, as the unchangeable refuge of His people's trust.
Lammishpât, i.e., to accomplish the judgment: comp. [Isa
10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005), where Asshur is called the rod
of Jehovah's wrath. In the parallel clause we have להוכיח instead: "to
chastise," namely Israel, not the Chaldaeans, as Ewald supposes.

[Habakkuk 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hab 1:13</span></span>

The believing confidence expressed in this verse does not appear to be
borne out by what is actually done by God. The prophet proceeds to lay
this enigma before God in [Hab
1:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013), and to pray for his people to
be spared during the period of the Chaldaean affliction. [Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013). "Art Thou too pure of eye to
behold evil, and canst Thou not look upon distress? Wherefore lookest
Thou upon the treacherous? and art silent when the wicked devours one
more righteous than he? [Hab 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#014). And
Thou hast made men like fishes of the sea, like reptiles that have no
ruler. [Hab 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#015). All of them hath he
lifted up with the hook; he draws them into his net, and gathers them in
his fishing net; he rejoices thereat, and is glad. [Hab
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016). Therefore he sacrifices to his
net, and burns incense to his landing net; for through them is his
portion rich, and his food fat. [Hab
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017). Shall he therefore empty his
net, and always strangle nations without sparing?" In [Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013), טהור עינים, with the two clauses
dependent upon it, stands as a vocative, and טהור followed by מן as a
comparative: purer of eyes than to be able to see. This epithet is
applied to God as the pure One, whose eyes cannot bear what is morally
unclean, i.e., cannot look upon evil. The purity of God is not measured
here by His seeing evil, but is described as exalted above it, and not
coming at all into comparison with it. On the relation in which these
words stand to [Num 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021), see the
remarks on [Hab 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003). In the second
clause the infinitive construction passes over into the finite verb, as
is frequently the case; so that אשׁר must be supplied in thought: who
canst not look upon, i.e., canst not tolerate, the distress which the
wicked man prepares for others. Wherefore then lookest Thou upon
treacherous ones, namely, the Chaldaeans? They are called בּוגדים, from
their faithlessly deceptive and unscrupulously rapacious conduct, as in
[Isa 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002); [Isa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016). That the seeing is a quiet
observance, without interposing to punish, is evident from the parallel
תּחרישׁ: Thou art silent at the swallowing of the צדיק ממּנּוּ. The more
righteous than he (the ungodly one) is not the nation of Israel as such,
which, if not perfectly righteous, was relatively more righteous than
the Chaldaeans. This rabbinical view is proved to be erroneous, by the
fact that in [Hab 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002) and [Hab
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003) the prophet describes the moral
depravity of Israel in the same words as those which he here applies to
the conduct of the Chaldaeans. The persons intended are rather the godly
portion of Israel, who have to share in the expiation of the sins of the
ungodly, and suffer when they are punished (Delitzsch). This fact, that
the righteous is swallowed along with the unrighteous, appears
irreconcilable with the holiness of God, and suggests the inquiry, how
God can possibly let this be done.

This strange fact is depicted still further in [Hab
1:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#014) in figures taken from the life
of a fisherman. The men are like fishes, whom the Chaldaean collects
together in his net, and then pays divine honour to his net, by which he
has been so enriched. ותּעשׂה is not dependent upon למּה, but continues
the address in a simple picture, in which the imperfect with Vav
convers. represents the act as the natural consequence of the silence of
God: "and so Thou makest the men like fishes," etc. The point of
comparison lies in the relative clause לא־משׁל בּו, "which has no
ruler," which is indeed formally attached to כּרמשׂ alone, but in actual
fact belongs to דּגי היּם also. "No ruler," to take the defenceless
under his protection, and shelter and defend them against enemies. Then
will Judah be taken prisoner and swallowed up by the Chaldaeans. God has
given it helplessly up to the power of its foes, and has obviously
ceased to be its king. Compare the similar lamentation in [Isa
63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019) : "are even like those over whom
Thou hast never ruled." רמשׂ, the creeping thing, the smaller animals
which exist in great multitudes, and move with great swiftness, refers
here to the smaller water animals, to which the word remes is also
applied in [Psa 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025), and the verb
râmas in [Gen 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021) and [Lev
11:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#046). כּלּה, pointing back to the
collective 'âdâm, is the object, and is written first for the sake of
emphasis. The form העלה, instead of העלה, is analogous to the hophal
העלה in [Nah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#008) and [Jdg
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#028), and also to העברתּ in [Jos
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#007) : to take up out of the water (see
Ges. 63, Anm. 4). יגרהוּ from גרר, to pull, to draw together. Chakkâh is
the hook, cherem the net generally, mikhmereth the large fishing-net
(σαγήνη), the lower part of which, when sunk, touches the bottom, whilst
the upper part floats on the top of the water. These figures are not to
be interpreted with such specialty as that the net and fishing net
answer to the sword and bow; but the hook, the net, and the fishing net,
as the things used for catching fish, refer to all the means which the
Chaldaeans employ in order to subdue and destroy the nations. Luther
interprets it correctly. "These hooks, nets, and fishing nets," he says,
"are nothing more than his great and powerful armies, by which he gained
dominion over all lands and people, and brought home to Babylon the
goods, jewels, silver, and gold, interest and rent of all the world." He
rejoices over the success of his enterprises, over this capture of men,
and sacrifices and burns incense to his net, i.e., he attributes to the
means which he has employed the honour due to God. There is no allusion
in these words to the custom of the Scythians and Sauromatians, who are
said by Herodotus (iv. 59, 60) to have offered sacrifices every year to
a sabre, which was set up as a symbol of Mars. What the Chaldaean made
into his god, is expressed in [Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011), namely, his own power. "He who
boasts of a thing, and is glad and joyous on account of it, but does not
thank the true God, makes himself into an idol, gives himself the glory,
and does not rejoice in God, but in his own strength and work" (Luther).
The Chaldaean sacrifices to his net, for thereby (בּהמּה, by net and
yarn) his portion (chelqō) is fat, i.e., the portion of this booty which
falls to him, and fat is his food ( בּראה is a neuter substantive). The
meaning is, that he thereby attains to wealth and prosperity. In [Hab
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017) there is appended to this the
question embracing the thought: Shall he therefore, because he rejoices
over his rich booty, or offers sacrifice to his net, empty his net, sc.
to throw it in afresh, and proceed continually to destroy nations in so
unsparing a manner? In the last clause the figure passes over into a
literal address. The place of the imperfect is now taken by a
periphrastic construction with the infinitive: Shall he constantly be
about to slay? On this construction, see Ges. 132, 3, Anm. 1, and Ewald,
237, c. לא יחמול is a subordinate clause appended in an adverbial sense:
unsparingly, without sparing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 2](hab002)

</div>
