<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Haggai Index](hag)  
  [Previous](zep003)  [Next](hag001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Haggai Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)

[Haggai](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hag 0:0</span></span>

Haggai

Introduction

Person of the Prophet. - We have no further information concerning
Haggai (Chaggai, i.e., the festal one, formed from châg, with the
adjective termination ai: cf. Ewald, 164, c, and 273, e; lxx Ἀγγαῖος,
Vulg. Aggaeus) than that obtained from the headings to his prophetic
addresses ([Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001); [Hag
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001), [Hag
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010), [Hag
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#020)), and confirmed by [Ezr
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001), - namely, that he commenced his
prophesying in the second year of Darius Hystaspes, and by means of his
prophecies caused the work of building the temple, which had been
suspended in consequence of the machinations of the Cuthaeans
(Samaritans), to be resumed, and in common with the prophet Zechariah,
who commenced his labours two months later, ensured the continuance of
that work. The extra-biblical accounts of the circumstances of his life
have no evidence at all to support them. This is the case, for example,
with the statement of Ps. Dorotheus and Ps. Epiphanius, that Haggai came
from Babylon to Jerusalem when quite a young men, and that he survived
the rebuilding of the temple, and was buried in honour near the
burial-place of the priests, to say nothing of the strange opinion which
was tolerably general in the times of Jerome and Cyril of Alexandria,
and which arose from a misinterpretation of the word מלאך in [Hag
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013), viz., that Haggai was an angel
who appeared in human shape. And Ewald's conjecture, that Haggai had
seen the temple of Solomon, cannot be inferred from [Hag
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#003). In that case he would have been
about eighty years old when he commenced his labours as a prophet.

2\. The Book of Haggai contains four words of God uttered by the prophet
in the second year of the reign of Darius Hystaspes, which had for their
object the furtherance of the building of the temple, and in all
probability simply reproduce the leading thought of His oral addresses.
In the first prophecy, delivered on the new moon's day of the sixth
month of the year named ([Hag 1:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)),
the condemns the indifference of the people concerning the building of
the temple, and represents the failure of the crops and the curse under
which the people were suffering as a divine punishment for the neglect
of that work. In consequence of this admonition the building was
resumed. The three following prophecies in ch. 2 encourage the people to
continue the work they have begun. The second, which was delivered only
twenty-four days after the first ([Hag
2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001)), consoles those who are
desponding on account of the poverty of the new building, by promising
that the Lord will keep the covenant promise made to His people when
they came out of Egypt, and by shaking the whole world and all the
heathen, will give the new temple even greater glory than that of
Solomon had. The last two words of God were delivered to the people on
the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month of the same year. They predict
in the first place the cessation of the previous curse, and the return
of the blessings of nature promised to the church which had remained
faithful to the covenant ([Hag
2:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010)); and in the second place, the
preservation of the throne of Israel, represented in the person and
attitude of Zerubbabel, among the tempests which will burst upon the
kingdoms of this world, and destroy their might and durability ([Hag
2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#020)).

In order to understand clearly the meaning of these prophecies and
promises in relation to the development of the Old Testament kingdom of
God, we must look at the historical circumstances under which Haggai was
called by God to labour as a prophet. Haggai was the first prophet who
rose up after the exile in the midst of the congregation of Judah that
had returned from Babylon, to proclaim to it the will and saving
purposes of its God. Between him and Zephaniah there lay the seventy
years' exile, and the labours of the great prophets Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
and Daniel. What all the earlier prophets had foretold, and Jeremiah
especially, in a comprehensive and most impressive manner - namely, that
the Lord would thrust out Judah also among the heathen, on account of
its obstinate idolatry and resistance to the commandments of God, and
would cause it to be enslaved by them - had been fulfilled. As the ten
tribes had been carried away by the Assyrians long before, so had the
inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem been also carried into exile by the
Chaldaeans through Nebuchadnezzar. The Lord had now banished all His
people from before His face, and sent them away among the heathen, but
He had not cast them off entirely and for ever. He had indeed suspended
His covenant with Israel, but He had not entirely abolished it. Even to
the people pining in exile He had not only renewed the ancient promises
through the prophet Ezekiel, after the dissolution of the kingdom of
Judah and the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, viz., that He
would restore the nation to favour again, when it should come to the
knowledge of its grievous sins, and turn to Him with penitence, and that
He would redeem it from exile, lead it back to its own land, and exalt
it to great glory; but He had also caused the might and duration of the
kingdoms of the world to be proclaimed through Daniel, and their
eventual overthrow through the kingdom of God from heaven. The seventy
years, during which the land of Judah was to lie waste and the nation to
serve Babel ([Jer 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011)), had now
passed away. The Babylonian empire had fallen, and Koresh (Cyrus), the
founder of the Persian empire, had given the Jews permission to return
to their own land in the first year of his sole dominion, and had
commanded that the temple of Jehovah in Jerusalem should be rebuilt. In
consequence of this, a considerable number of the captives of Judah and
Benjamin, viz., 42,360 freemen, with 7337 men-servants and
maid-servants, led by Zerubbabel prince of Judah, a descendant of David,
who was appointed governor in Judah, and by the high priest Joshua, had
returned to their homes ([Ezr 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)
and 2). Having arrived there, they had restored Jehovah's altar of
burnt-offering in the seventh month of the year, and re-established the
sacrificial worship prescribed in the law. They had also so far made
preparations for the rebuilding of the temple, that even in the second
month of the second year after their return they were able solemnly to
lay the foundation for the new temple ([Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001)).

They had hardly commenced building, however, when the Samaritans came
with a request that they might take part in the building of the temple,
because they also sought the God of the Jews. Now, when the chiefs of
Judah refused to grant them this request, as being a mixed people,
composed of the heathen colonists who had been transplanted into the
kingdom of the ten tribes and a few Israelites who were left behind in
the land, whilst their worship of God was greatly distorted by
heathenism (see at 2 Kings 17:24-41), they endeavoured to disturb the
work already begun, and to prevent its continuation and completion. They
made the hands of the people of Judah idle, as we read in [Ezr
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004), frightening them while
building, and hiring counsellors against them to frustrate their design,
the whole of the still remaining time of Cyrus, and even till the reign
of king Darius of Persia, so that the work at the house of God at
Jerusalem ceased and was suspended till the second year of the reign of
this king ([Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)). But even if
these machinations of the adversaries of Judah furnished the outward
occasion for the interruption and suspension of the work they had begun,
we must not seek for the sole and sufficient reason for the breaking off
of the work in these alone. Nothing is recorded of any revocation of the
edict issued by Cyrus during his reign; and even if the letter to
Artachsata given in [Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007).
referred, as is generally assumed, to the building of the temple, and
the reply of this king, which prohibited the continuation of the
building, was issued by Pseudo-Smerdis, this only took place under the
second successor of Cyrus, twelve years after the laying of the
foundation-stone of the temple. What the enemies of Judah had previously
undertaken and accomplished consisted simply in the fact that they made
the hands of the Jewish people idle, frightening them while building,
and frustrating their enterprise by hiring counsellors.

(Note: So much is evident from the account in the book of Ezra,
concerning the machinations of the Samaritans to frustrate the building.
The more precise determination of what they did - namely, whether they
obtained a command from the king to suspend the building - depends upon
the explanation given to the section in Ezra (Ezra 4:6-23), into which
we need not enter more minutely till we come to our exposition of the
book itself, inasmuch as it is not important to decide this question in
order to understand our prophet.)

The latter they would hardly have succeeded in, if the Jews themselves
had taken real pleasure in the continuation of the work, and had had
firm confidence in the assistance of God. These were wanting. Even at
the ceremony of laying the foundation-stone, many of the old priests,
Levites and heads of tribes, who had seen the first temple, spoiled the
people's pleasure by loud weeping. This weeping can hardly be explained
merely from the recollection of the trials and sufferings of the last
fifty years, which came involuntarily into their mind at that moment of
solemn rejoicing, but was no doubt occasioned chiefly by the sight of
the miserable circumstances under which the congregation took this work
in hand, and in which they could not help saying to themselves, that the
execution of the work would not correspond to the hopes which might have
been cherished from the restoration of the house of God. But such
thoughts as these would of necessity greatly detract from their pleasure
in building, and as soon as outward difficulties were also placed in
their way, would supply food to the doubt whether the time for carrying
on this work had really come. Thus the zeal for building the house of
God so cooled down, that they gave it up altogether, and simply began to
provide for their own necessities, and to establish themselves
comfortably in the land of their fathers, so far as the circumstances
permitted ([Hag 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004)). This becomes
perfectly intelligible, if we add that, judging from the natural
character of sinful men, there were no doubt a considerable number of
men among those who had returned, who had been actuated to return less
by living faith in the Lord and His word, than by earthly hopes of
prosperity and comfort in the land of their fathers. As soon as they
found themselves disappointed in their expectations, they became idle
and indifferent with regard to the house of the Lord. And the addresses
of our prophet show clearly enough, that one principal reason for the
suspension of the work is to be sought for in the lukewarmness and
indifference of the people.

The contents and object of these addresses, viz., the circumstance that
they are chiefly occupied with the command to build the temple, and
attach great promises to the performance of this work, can only be
explained in part, however, from the fact that the fidelity of the
nation towards its God showed itself in zeal for the house of God. The
deeper and truer explanation is to be found in the significance which
the temple possessed in relation to the kingdom of God in its Old
Testament form. The covenant of grace, made by the God of heaven and
earth with the nation of Israel which He had chosen for His own peculiar
possession, required, as a visible pledge of the real fellowship into
which Jehovah had entered with Israel, a place where this fellowship
could be sustained. For this reason, directly after the conclusion of
the covenant at Sinai, God commanded the tabernacle to be erected, for a
sanctuary in which, as covenant God, He would dwell among His people in
a visible symbol; and, as the sign of the fulfilment of this divine
promise, at the dedication of the tabernacle, and also of the temple of
Solomon which took its place, the glory of Jehovah in the form of a
cloud filled the sanctuary that had been built for His name. Hence the
continuance of the ancient covenant, or of the kingdom of God in Israel,
was bound up with the temple. When this was destroyed the covenant was
broken, and the continuance of the kingdom of God suspended. If,
therefore, the covenant which had been dissolved during the exile was to
be renewed, if the kingdom of God was to be re-established in its Old
Testament form, the rebuilding of the temple was the first and most
important prerequisite for this; and the people were bound to pursue the
work of building it with all possible zeal, that they might thereby
practically attest their desire and readiness to resume the covenant
fellowship which had been interrupted for a time. After the people had
thus fulfilled the duty that devolved upon them, they might expect from
the faithfulness of the Lord, their covenant God, that He would also
restore the former gracious connection in all its completeness, and
fulfil all His covenant promises. It is in this that the significance of
Haggai's prophecies consists, so far as they have regard to the
furthering of the work of building the temple. And this object was
attained. The building of the temple was resumed in consequence of his
admonition, and at the end of four years and a half - namely, in the
sixth year of the reign of Darius - the work was finished ([Ezr
6:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014)). But at its dedication the
new temple was not filled with the cloud of the glory of Jehovah; yea,
the most essential feature in the covenant made at Sinai was wanting,
viz., the ark with the testimony, i.e., the tables of the law, which no
man could restore, inasmuch as the ten words of the covenant had been
written upon the tables by God Himself. The old covenant was not to be
restored in its Sinaitic form; but according to the promise made through
Jeremiah ([Jer 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031).), the Lord would
make a new covenant with the house of Israel and Judah; He would put His
law into their heart, and write it in their minds. The people, however,
were not sufficiently prepared for this. Therefore those who had
returned from Babylon were still to continue under the rule of the
heathen powers of the world, until the time had arrived for the
conclusion of the new covenant, when the Lord would come to His temple,
and the angel of the covenant would fill it with the glory of the
heathen. Thus the period of Zerubbabel's temple was a time of waiting
for Judah, and a period of preparation for the coming of the promised
Saviour. To give the people a pledge during that period of the certainty
of the fulfilment of the covenant grace of God, was the object of
Haggai's two promises of salvation.

So far as the form is concerned, the prophecies of Haggai have not the
poetical swing of the earlier prophetical diction. They were written in
the simplest rhetorical style, and never rise very far above the level
of good prose, although vivacity is given to the delivery by the
frequent use of interrogatives (cf. [Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004), [Hag
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009); [Hag
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#003), [Hag
2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#012), [Hag
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019)), and it by no means infrequently
opens into full oratorical rhythm (cf. [Hag
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006), [Hag
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009); [Hag
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006), [Hag
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#022)). One characteristic of Haggai's
mode of description is the peculiar habit to which Naegelsbach has
called attention - namely, of uttering the main thought with concise and
nervous brevity, after a long and verbose introduction (cf. [Hag
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002), [Hag
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012), [Hag
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#005), [Hag
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019)); so that it might be said that
he is accustomed "to conceal a small and most intensive kernel under a
broad and thick shell." His language is tolerably free from Chaldaeisms.

For the exegetical literature, see my Lehrbuch der Einleitung, p. 308;
to which add Aug. Koehler's die WeissagunGenesis Haggai's erklrt,
ErlanGenesis 1860.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Chapter 1](hag001)

</div>
