<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa060)  [Next](isa062) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 61](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)

[Isaiah 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 61:1</span></span>

The words of Jehovah Himself pass over here into the words of another,
whom He has appointed as the Mediator of His gracious counsel. "The
Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is over me, because Jehovah hath anointed me,
to bring glad tidings to sufferers, hath sent me to bind up
broken-hearted ones, to proclaim liberty to those led captive, and
emancipation to the fettered; to proclaim a year of grace from Jehovah,
and a day of vengeance from our God; to comfort all that mourn; to put
upon the mourners of Zion, to give them a head-dress for ashes, oil of
joy for mourning, a wrapper of renown for an expiring spirit, that they
may be called terebinths of righteousness, a planting of Jehovah for
glorification." Who is the person speaking here? The Targum introduces
the passage with נביּא אמר. Nearly all the modern commentators support
this view. Even the closing remarks to Drechsler (iii. 381) express the
opinion, that the prophet who exhibited to the church the summit of its
glory in chapter 60, an evangelist of the rising from on high, an
apocalyptist who sketches the painting which the New Testament
apocalyptist is to carry out in detail, is here looking up to Jehovah
with a grateful eye, and praising Him with joyful heart for his exalted
commission. But this view, when looked at more closely, cannot possibly
be sustained. It is open to the following objections: (1.) The prophet
never speaks of himself as a prophet at any such length as this; on the
contrary, with the exception of the closing words of [Isa
57:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021), "saith my God," he has always
most studiously let his own person fall back into the shade. (2.)
Wherever any other than Jehovah is represented as speaking, and as
referring to his own calling, or his experience in connection with that
calling, as in [Isa 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001)., [Isa
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)., it is the very same "servant of
Jehovah" of whom and to whom Jehovah speaks in [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)., Isaiah 52:13-53:12, and
therefore not the prophet himself, but He who had been appointed to be
the Mediator of a new covenant, the light of the Gentiles, the salvation
of Jehovah for the whole world, and who would reach this glorious
height, to which He had been called, through self-abasement even to
death. (3.) All that the person speaking here says of himself is to be
found in the picture of the unequalled "Servant of Jehovah," who is
highly exalted above the prophet. He is endowed with the Spirit of
Jehovah ([Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)); Jehovah has sent
Him, and with Him His Spirit ([Isa
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016)); He has a tongue taught of God,
to help the exhausted with words ([Isa
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)); He spares and rescues those who
are almost despairing and destroyed, the bruised reed and expiring wick
([Isa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007)). "To open blind eyes, to
bring out prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out
of the prison-house:" this is what He has chiefly to do for His people,
both in word and deed ([Isa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007); [Isa
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009)). (4.) We can hardly expect that,
after the prophet has described the Servant of Jehovah, of whom He
prophesied, as coming forward to speak with such dramatic directness as
in [Isa 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001)., [Isa
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004). (and even [Isa
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016)), he will now proceed to put
himself in the foreground, and ascribe to himself those very same
official attributes which he has already set forth as characteristic
features in his portrait of the predicted One. For these reasons we have
no doubt that we have here the words of the Servant of Jehovah. The
glory of Jerusalem is depicted in chapter 60 in the direct words of
Jehovah Himself, which are well sustained throughout. And now, just as
in [Isa 48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016), though still more
elaborately, we have by their side the words of His servant, who is the
mediator of this glory, and who above all others is the pioneer thereof
in his evangelical predictions. Just as Jehovah says of him in [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), "I have put my Spirit upon him;"
so here he says of himself, "The Spirit of Jehovah is upon me." And when
he continues to explain this still further by saying, "because" (יען
from ענה, intention, purpose; here equivalent to אשׁר יען) "Jehovah hath
anointed me" (mâs 'ōthı̄, more emphatic than meshâchanı̄), notwithstanding
the fact that mâshach is used here in the sense of prophetic and not
regal anointing ([Kg1 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016)), we may
find in the choice of this particular word a hint at the fact, that the
Servant of Jehovah and the Messiah are one and the same person. So also
the account given in [Luk 4:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016) viz.
that when Jesus was in the synagogue at Nazareth, after reading the
opening words of this address, He closed the book with these words,
"This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears" - cannot be
interpreted more simply in any other way, than on the supposition that
Jesus here declares Himself to be the predicted and divinely anointed
Servant of Jehovah, who brings the gospel of redemption to His people.
Moreover, though it is not decisive in favour of our explanation, yet
this explanation is favoured by the fact that the speaker not only
appears as the herald of the new and great gifts of God, but also as the
dispenser of them ("non praeco tantum, sed et dispensator," Vitringa).

The combination of the names of God ('Adonai Yehovâh) is the same as in
[Isa 50:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004). On bissēr, εὐαγγελίζειν
(-εσθαι). He comes to put a bandage on the hearts' wounds of those who
are broken-hearted: ל חבשׁ (חבּשׁ) as in [Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004); [Psa
147:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#003); cf., ל רפא (רפּא); ל הצדיק.
דרור קרא is the phrase used in the law for the proclamation of the
freedom brought by the year of jubilee, which occurred every fiftieth
year after seven sabbatical periods, and was called shenath hadderōr
([Eze 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#017)); deror from dârar, a
verbal stem, denoting the straight, swift flight of a swallow (see at
[Psa 84:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)), and free motion in
general, such as that of a flash of lightning, a liberal self-diffusion,
like that of a superabundant fulness. Peqach-qōăch is written like two
words (see at [Isa 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)). The Targum
translates it as if peqach were an imperative: "Come to the light,"
probably meaning undo the bands. But qōăch is not a Hebrew word; for the
qı̄chōth of the Mishna (the loops through which the strings of a purse
are drawn, for the purpose of lacing it up) cannot be adduced as a
comparison. Parchon, AE, and A, take peqachqōăch as one word (of the
form פּתלתּל, שׁחרחר), in the sense of throwing open, viz., the prison.
But as pâqach is never used like pâthach ([Isa
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017); [Isa
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014)), to signify the opening of a
room, but is always applied to the opening of the eyes ([Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005); [Isa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007), etc.), except in [Isa
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#020), where it is used for the
opening of the ears, we adhere to the strict usage of the language, if
we understand by peqachqōăch the opening up of the eyes (as contrasted
with the dense darkness of the prison); and this is how it has been
taken even by the lxx, who have rendered it καὶ τυφλοῖς ἀνάβλεψιν, as if
the reading had been ולעורים ([Psa
146:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008)). Again, he is sent to promise
with a loud proclamation a year of good pleasure (râtsōn: syn. yeshū‛âh)
and a day of vengeance, which Jehovah has appointed; a promise which
assigns the length of a year for the thorough accomplishment of the work
of grace, and only the length of a day for the work of vengeance. The
vengeance applies to those who hold the people of God in fetters, and
oppress them; the grace to all those whom the infliction of punishment
has inwardly humbled, though they have been strongly agitated by its
long continuance ([Isa 57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)). The
'ăbhēlı̄m, whom the Servant of Jehovah has to comfort, are the "mourners
of Zion," those who take to heart the fall of Zion. In [Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003), לשׂוּם ... לתת, he corrects
himself, because what he brings is not merely a diadem, to which the
word sūm (to set) would apply, but an abundant supply of manifold gifts,
to which only a general word like nâthan (to give) is appropriate.
Instead of אפר, the ashes of mourning or repentance laid upon the head,
he brings פּאר, a diadem to adorn the head (a transposition even so far
as the letters are concerned, and therefore the counterpart of אפר;
the"oil of joy" (from [Psa 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008);
compare also משׁחך there with אתי משׁח here) instead of mourning; "a
wrapper (cloak) of renown" instead of a faint and almost extinguished
spirit. The oil with which they henceforth anoint themselves is to be
joy or gladness, and renown the cloak in which they wrap themselves (a
genitive connection, as in [Isa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017)). And whence is all this? The
gifts of God, though represented in outward figures, are really
spiritual, and take effect within, rejuvenating and sanctifying the
inward man; they are the sap and strength, the marrow and impulse of a
new life. The church thereby becomes "terebinths of righteousness"
(אילי: Targ., Symm., Jer., render this, strong ones, mighty ones; Syr.
dechre, rams; but though both of these are possible, so far as the
letters are concerned, they are unsuitable here), i.e., possessors of
righteousness, produced by God and acceptable with God, having all the
firmness and fulness of terebinths, with their strong trunks, their
luxuriant verdure, and their perennial foliage - a planting of Jehovah,
to the end that He may get glory out of it (a repetition of [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021)).

[Isaiah 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 61:4</span></span>

Even in [Isa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003) with להם וקרא a
perfect was introduced in the place of the infinitives of the object,
and affirmed what was to be accomplished through the mediation of the
Servant of Jehovah. The second turn in the address, which follows in
[Isa 61:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004), continues the use of such
perfects, which afterwards pass into futures. But the whole is still
governed by the commencement in [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). The Servant of Jehovah
celebrates the glorious office committed to him, and expounds the
substance of the gospel given him to proclaim. It points to the
restoration of the promised land, and to the elevation of Israel, after
its purification in the furnace of judgment, to great honour and dignity
in the midst of the world of nations. "And they will build up wastes of
the olden time, raise up desolations of the forefathers, and renew
desolate cities, desolations of former generations. And strangers stand
and feed your flocks, and foreigners become your ploughmen and
vinedressers. But ye will be called priests of Jehovah; Servants of our
God, will men say to you: ye will eat the riches of the nations, and
pride yourselves in their glory." The desolations and wastes of ‛ōlâm
and dōr vâdōr, i.e., of ages remote and near ([Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)), are not confined to what had
lain in ruins during the seventy years of the captivity. The land will
be so thickly populated, that the former places of abode will not
suffice ([Isa 49:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#019)); so that
places must be referred to which are lying waste beyond the present
bounds of the promised land ([Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003)), and which will be rebuilt,
raised up, and renewed by those who return from exile, and indeed by the
latest generations ([Isa 58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012), מםּ;
cf., [Isa 60:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014)). Chōrebh, in the
sense of desolation, is a word belonging to the alter period of the
language (Zeph., Jer., and Ezek.). The rebuilding naturally suggests the
thought of assistance on the part of the heathen ([Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010)). But the prophet expresses the
fact that they will enter into the service of Israel ([Isa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#005)), in a new and different form.
They "stand there" (viz., at their posts ready for service,
‛al-mish-martâm, [Ch2 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006)), "and feed
your flocks" (צאן singularetantum, cf., [Gen
30:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#043)), and foreigners are your
ploughmen and vinedressers. Israel is now, in the midst of the heathen
who have entered into the congregation of Jehovah and become the people
of God (ch [Isa 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025)), what the
Aaronites formerly were in the midst of Israel itself. It stands upon
the height of its primary destination to be a kingdom of priests ([Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)). They are called "priests of
Jehovah," and the heathen call them "servants of our God;" for even the
heathen speak with believing reverence of the God, to whom Israel
renders priestly service, as "our God." This reads as if the restored
Israelites were to stand in the same relation to the converted heathen
as the clergy to the laity; but it is evident, from [Isa
66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021), that the prophet has no such
hierarchical separation as this in his mind. All that we can safely
infer from his prophecy is, that the nationality of Israel will not be
swallowed up by the entrance of the heathen into the community of the
God of revelation. The people created by Jehovah, to serve as the
vehicle of the promise of salvation and the instrument in preparing the
way for salvation, will also render Him special service, even after that
salvation has been really effected. At the same time, we cannot take the
attitude, which is here assigned to the people of sacred history after
it has become the teacher of the nations, viz., as the leader of its
worship also, and shape it into any clear and definite form that shall
be reconcilable with the New Testament spirit of liberty and the
abolition of all national party-walls. The Old Testament prophet utters
New Testament prophecies in an Old Testament form. Even when he
continues to say, "Ye will eat the riches of the Gentiles, and pride
yourselves in their glory," i.e., be proud of the glorious things which
have passed from their possession into yours, this is merely colouring
intended to strike the eye, which admits of explanation on the ground
that he saw the future in the mirror of the present, as a complete
inversion of the relation in which the two had stood before. The figures
present themselves to him in the form of contrasts. The New Testament
apostle, on the other hand, says in [Rom
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012) that the conversion of all
Israel to Christ will be "the riches of the Gentiles." But if even then
the Gentile church should act according to the words of the same apostle
in [Rom 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027), and show her gratitude
to the people whose spiritual debtor she is, by ministering to them in
carnal things, all that the prophet has promised here will be amply
fulfilled. We cannot adopt the explanation proposed by Hitzig, Stier,
etc., "and changing with them, ye enter into their glory" (hithyammēr
from yâmar = mūr, Hiph.: hēmı̄r, [Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011); lit., to exchange with one
another, to enter into one another's places); for yâmar = ‛âmar (cf.,
yâchad = 'âchad; yâsham = 'âsham; yâlaph = 'âlaph), to press upwards, to
rise up (related to tâmar, see at [Isa
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009); sâmar, Symm. ὀρθοτριχεῖν,
possibly also ‛âmar with the hithpael hith‛ammēr, lxx καταδυναστεύειν),
yields a much simpler and more appropriate meaning. From this verb we
have hith'ammēr in [Psa 94:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#004), "to lift
one's self up (proudly)," and here hithyammēr; and it is in this way
that the word has been explained by Jerome (superbietis), and possibly
by the lxx (θαυμασθήσεσθε, in the sense of spectabiles eritis), by the
Targum, and the Syriac, as well as by most of the ancient and modern
expositors.

[Isaiah 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 61:7</span></span>

The shame of banishment will then be changed into an excess of joy, and
honourable distinction. "Instead of shame ye will have double, and
(instead) of insult they rejoice at their portion: thus in their land
they will possess double; everlasting joy will they have. For I Jehovah
love right, hate robbery in wickedness; and give them their reward in
faithfulness, and conclude an everlasting covenant with them. And their
family will be known among the nations, and their offspring in the midst
of the nations: all who see them will recognise them, for they are a
family that Jehovah hath blessed." The enigmatical first half of [Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007) is explained in [Isa
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002), where mishneh is shown to
consist of double possession in the land of their inheritance, which has
not only been restored to them, but extended far beyond the borders of
their former possession; and yârōnnū chelqâm (cf., [Isa
65:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#014)) denotes excessive rejoicing in
the ground and soil belonging to them (according to the appointment of
Jehovah): chelqâm as in [Mic 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004); and
mishneh as equivalent not to כבוד משׁנה, but to ירשּׁה משׁנה. Taking
this to be the relation between [Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007) and [Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007), the meaning of lâkhēn is not,
"therefore, because they have hitherto suffered shame and reproach;" but
what is promised in [Isa 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007) is
unfolded according to its practical results, the effects consequent upon
its fulfilment being placed in the foreground; so that there is less to
astonish us in the elliptically brief form of [Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007) which needed explanation. The
transition from the form of address to that of declaration is the same
as in [Isa 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029); [Isa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006); [Isa
52:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014). וּכלמּה is a concise
expression for כלמה ותחת, just as וּתהלּתי in [Isa
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#009) is for תהלתי וּלמען. Chelqâm is
either the accusative of the object, according to the construction of
רנּן, which occurs in [Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016); or
what I prefer, looking at חמה in [Isa
42:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#025), and וּזבחיך in [Isa
43:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#023), an adverbial accusative =
בחלקם. The lxx, Jerome, and Saad. render the clause, in opposition to
the accents, "instead of your double shame and reproach;" but in that
case the principal words of the clause would read הלקכם תּרנּוּ. The
explanation adopted by the Targum, Saad., and Jerome, "shame on the part
of those who rejoice in their portion," is absolutely impossible. The
great majority of the modern commentators adopt essentially the same
explanation of [Isa 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007) as we have
done, and even A. E. Kimchi does the same. Hahn's modification, "instead
of your shame is the double their portion, and (instead) of the insult
this, that they will rejoice," forces a meaning upon the syntax which is
absolutely impossible. The reason for the gracious recompense for the
wrong endured is given in [Isa 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008),
"Jehovah loves the right," which the enemies of Israel have so
shamefully abused. "He hates בּעולה גזל, i.e., not rapinam in holocausto
(as Jerome, Talmud b. Succa 30a, Luther, and others render it; Eng. ver.
"robbery for burnt-offering") - for what object would there be in
mentioning sacrifices here, seeing that only heathen sacrifices could be
intended, and there would be something worse than gâzēl to condemn in
them? - but robbery, or, strictly speaking, "something robbed in or with
knavery" (lxx, Targ., Syr., Saad.), which calls to mind at once the
cruel robbery or spoiling that Israel had sustained from the Chaldeans,
its bōzezı̄m ([Isa 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024)) - a robbery
which passed all bounds. עולה is softened from עולה (from עול, עול),
like עלתה in [Job 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016), and עולת in
[Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003) and [Psa
64:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007); though it is doubtful whether
the punctuation assumes the latter, as the Targum does, and not rather
the meaning holocaustum supported by the Talmud. For the very reason,
therefore, that Israel had been so grievously ill-treated by the
instruments of punishment employed by Jehovah, He would give those who
had been ill-treated their due reward, after He had made the evil, which
He had not approved, subservient to His own salutary purposes. פּעלּה is
the reward of work in [Lev 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013), of
hardship in [Eze 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#020); here it is the
reward of suffering. This reward He would give בּאמת, exactly as He had
promised, without the slightest deduction. The posterity of those who
have been ill-treated and insulted will be honourably known (נודע as in
[Pro 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#023)) in the world of nations,
and men will need only to catch sight of them to recognise them (by
prominent marks of blessing), for they are a family blessed of God. כּי,
not quod (because), although it might have this meaning, but nam (for),
as in [Gen 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#023), since hikkı̄r
includes the meaning agnoscere (to recognise).

[Isaiah 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 61:10</span></span>

This is the joyful calling of the Servant of Jehovah to be the messenger
of such promises of God to His people. "Joyfully I rejoice in Jehovah;
my soul shall be joyful in my God, that He hath given me garments of
salvation to put on, hath wrapped me in the robe of righteousness, as a
bridegroom who wears the turban like a priest, and as a bride who puts
on her jewellery. For like the land which brings forth its sprouts, and
as a garde which causes the things sown in it to sprout up; so the Lord
Jehovah bringeth righteousness to sprouting, and renown before all
nations." The Targum precedes this last turn with "Thus saith
Jerusalem." But as [Isa 61:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004) are a
development of the glorious prospects, the realization of which has to
be effected through the instrumentality of the person speaking in [Isa
61:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001) both in word and deed, the
speaker here is certainly the same as there. Nor is it even the fact
that he is here supposed to commence speaking again; but he is simply
continuing his address by expressing at the close, as he did at the
beginning, the relation in which he stands in his own person to the
approaching elevation of His people. Exalted joy, which impels him to
exult, is what he experiences in Jehovah his God (בּ denoting the ground
and orbit of his experience): for the future, which so abounds in grace,
and which he has to proclaim as a prophet and as the evangelist of
Israel, and of which he has to lay the foundation as the mediator of
Israel, and in which he is destined to participate as being himself an
Israelite, consists entirely of salvation and righteousness; so that he,
the bearer and messenger of the divine counsels of grace, appears to
himself as one to whom Jehovah has given clothes of salvation to put on,
and whom He has wrapped in the robe of righteousness. Tsedâqâh
(righteousness), looked at from the evangelical side of the idea which
it expresses, is here the parallel word to yeshū‛âh (salvation). The
figurative representation of both by different articles of dress is
similar to [Isa 59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017) : yâ‛at, which
only occurs here, is synonymous with ‛âtâh, from which comes ma‛ăteh, a
wrapper or cloak ([Isa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)). He
appears to himself, as he stands there hoping such things for his
people, and preaching such things to his people, to resemble a
bridegroom, who makes his turban in priestly style, i.e., who winds it
round his head after the fashion of the priestly migbâ‛ōth ([Exo
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#009)), which are called פּארים in [Exo
39:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#028) (cf., [Eze
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#018)). Rashi and others think of the
mitsnepheth of the high priest, which was of purple-blue; but יכהן does
not imply anything beyond the migba‛âh, a tall mitra, which was formed
by twisting a long linen band round the head so as to make it stand up
in a point. כּהן is by no means equivalent to kōnēn, or hēkhı̄n, as
Hitzig and Hahn suppose, since the verb kâhan = kūn only survives in
kōhēn. Kı̄hēn is a denom., and signifies to act or play the priest; it is
construed here with the accusative פּאר, which is either the accusative
of more precise definition ("who play the priest in a turban;" A. ὡς
νύμφιον ἱερατευόμενον στεφάνῳ), or what would answer better to the
parallel member, "who makes the turban like a priest." As often as he
receives the word of promise into his heart and takes it into his mouth,
it is to him like the turban of a bridegroom, or like the jewellery
which a bride puts on (ta‛deh, kal, as in [Hos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015)). For the substance of the
promise is nothing but salvation and renown, which Jehovah causes to
sprout up before all nations, just as the earth causes its vegetation to
sprout, or a garden its seed (כ as a preposition in both instances,
instar followed by attributive clauses; see [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022)). The word in the mouth of the
servant of Jehovah is the seed, out of which great things are developed
before all the world. The ground and soil ('erets) of this development
is mankind; the enclosed garden therein (gannâh) is the church; and the
great things themselves are tsedâqâh, as the true inward nature of His
church, and tehillâh as its outward manifestation. The force which
causes the seed to germinate is Jehovah; but the bearer of the seed is
the servant of Jehovah, and the ground of his festive rejoicing is the
fact that he is able to scatter the seed of so gracious and glorious a
future.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 62](isa062)

</div>
