<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa013)  [Next](isa015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001)

[Isaiah 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 14:1</span></span>

But it is love to His own people which impels the God of Israel to
suspend such a judgment of eternal destruction over Babylon. "For
Jehovah will have mercy on Jacob, and will once more choose Israel, and
will settle them in their own land: and the foreigner will associate
with them, and they will cleave to the house of Jacob. And nations take
them, and accompany them to their place; and the house of Israel takes
them to itself in the land of Jehovah for servants and maid-servants:
and they hold in captivity those who led them away captive; and become
lords over their oppressors." We have here in nuce the comforting
substance of chapters 46-66. Babylon falls that Israel may rise. This is
effected by the compassion of God. He chooses Israel once more (iterum,
as in [Job 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007) for example), and
therefore makes a new covenant with it. Then follows their return to
Canaan, their own land, Jehovah's land (as in [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003)). Proselytes from among the
heathen, who have acknowledged the God of the exiles, go along with
them, as Ruth did with Naomi. Heathen accompany the exiles to their own
place. And now their relative positions are reversed. Those who
accompany Israel are now taken possession of by the latter (hithnachēl,
κληρονομεῖν ἑαυτῷ, like hithpattēach, [Isa
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#002), λύεσθαι; cf., p. 62, note, and
Ewald, 124, b), as servants and maid-servants; and they (the Israelites)
become leaders into captivity of those who led them into captivity
(Lamed with the participle, as in [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009)), and they will oppress (râdâh
b', as in [Psa 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015)) their
oppressors. This retribution of life for like is to all appearance quite
out of harmony with the New Testament love. But in reality it is no
retribution of like for like. For, according to the prophet's meaning,
to be ruled by the people of God is the true happiness of the nations,
and to allow themselves to be so ruled is their true liberty. At the
same time, the form in which the promise is expressed is certainly not
that of the New Testament; and it would not possibly have been so, for
the simple reason that in Old Testament times, and from an Old Testament
point of view, there was no other visible manifestation of the church
(ecclesia) than in the form of a nation. This national form of the
church has been broken up under the New Testament, and will never be
restored. Israel, indeed, will be restored as a nation; but the true
essence of the church, which is raised above all national distinctions,
will never return to those worldly limits which it has broken through.
And the fact that the prophecy moves within those limits here may be
easily explained, on the ground that it is primarily the deliverance
from the Babylonian captivity to which the promise refers. And the
prophet himself was unconscious that this captivity would be followed by
another.

[Isaiah 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 14:3</span></span>

The song of the redeemed is a song concerning the fall of the king of
Babel. [Isa 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#003), [Isa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004). Instead of the hiphil hinniach
(to let down) of [Isa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001), we have
here, as in the original passage, [Deu
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#019), the form hēniach, which is
commonly used in the sense of quieting, or procuring rest. עצב is
trouble which plagues (as עמל is trouble which oppresses), and rōgez
restlessness which wears out with anxious care ([Job
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#026), cf., [Eze
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#018)). The assimilated min before the
two words is pronounced mĭ, with a weak reduplication, instead of mē, as
elsewhere, before ח, ה, and even before ר ([Sa1
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#028); [Sa2
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#016)). In the relative clause עבּד־בך
אשר, אשר is not the Hebrew casus adverb. answering to the Latin ablative
qu servo te usi sunt; not do בך ... אשר belong to one another in the
sense of quo, as in [Deu 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#003), qu
(vitul); but it is regarded as an acc. obj. according to [Exo
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014) and [Lev
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039), qu'on t'a fait servir, as in
[Num 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#005), qu'on donne la terre
(Luzzatto). When delivered from such a yoke of bondage, Israel would
raise a mâshâl. According to its primary and general meaning, mâshâl
signifies figurative language, and hence poetry generally, more
especially that kind of proverbial poetry which loves the emblematical,
and, in fact, any artistic composition that is piquant in its character;
so that the idea of what is satirical or defiant may easily be
associated with it, as in the passage before us.

The words are addressed to the Israel of the future in the Israel of the
present, as in [Isa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001). The former
would then sing, and say as follows. "How hath the oppressor ceased! The
place of torture ceased! Jehovah hath broken the rod of the wicked, the
ruler's staff, which cmote nations in wrath with strokes without ceasing
subjugated nations wrathfully with hunting than nevers stays." Not one
of the early translators ever thought of deriving the hap. leg. madhebâh
from the Aramaean dehab (gold), as Vitringa, Aurivillius, and Rosenmller
have done. The former have all translated the word as if it were
marhēbâh (haughty, violent treatment), as corrected by J. D. Michaelis,
Doederlein, Knobel, and others. But we may arrive at the same result
without altering a single letter, if we take דּאב as equivalent to דּהב,
דּוּב, to melt or pine away, whether we go back to the kal or to the
hiphil of the verb, and regard the Mem as used in a material or local
sense. We understand it, according to madmenah (dunghill) in [Isa
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#010), as denoting the place where
they were reduced to pining away, i.e., as applied to Babylon as the
house of servitude where Israel had been wearied to death. The tyrant's
sceptre, mentioned in [Isa 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#005), is
the Chaldean world-power regarded as concentrated in the king of Babel
(cf., shēbet in [Num 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)). This
tyrant's sceptre smote nations with incessant blows and hunting: maccath
is construed with macceh, the derivative of the same verb; and murdâph,
a hophal noun (as in [Isa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001); [Isa
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#003)), with rodeh, which is kindred in
meaning. Doederlein's conjecture (mirdath), which has been adopted by
most modern commentators, is quite unnecessary. Unceasing continuance is
expressed first of all with bilti, which is used as a preposition, and
followed by sârâh, a participial noun like câlâh, and then with b'li,
which is construed with the finite verb as in [Gen
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#020); [Job
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#018); for b'li châsâk is an
attributive clause: with a hunting which did not restrain itself, did
not stop, and therefore did not spare. Nor is it only Israel and other
subjugated nations that now breathe again.

[Isaiah 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 14:7</span></span>

"The whole earth rests, is quiet: they break forth into singing. Even
the cypresses rejoice at thee, the cedars of Lebanon: 'Since thou hast
gone to sleep, no one will come up to lay the axe upon us.'" The
preterites indicate inchoatively the circumstances into which the whole
earth has now entered. The omission of the subject in the case of
pâtz'chu (they break forth) gives the greatest generality to the
jubilant utterances: pâtzach rinnâh (erumpere gaudio) is an expression
that is characteristic of Isaiah alone (e.g., [Isa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023); [Isa
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#013)); and it is a distinctive
peculiarity of the prophet to bring in the trees of the forest, as
living and speaking beings, to share in the universal joy (cf., [Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012)). Jerome supposes the trees to
be figuratively employed here for the "chiefs of the nations" (principes
gentium). But this disposition to allegorize not only destroys the
reality of the contents, but the spirit of the poetry also. Cypresses
and cedars rejoice because of the treatment which they received from the
Chaldean, who made use of the almost imperishable wood of both of them
for ornamental buildings, for his siege apparatus, and for his fleets,
and even for ordinary ships - as Alexander, for example, built himself a
fleet of cypress-wood, and the Syrian vessels had masts of cedar. Of the
old cedars of Lebanon, there are hardly thirty left in the principle
spot where they formerly grew. Gardner Wilkinson (1843) and Hooker the
botanist (1860) estimated the whole number at about four hundred; and
according to the conclusion which the latter drew from the number of
concentric rings and other signs, not one of them is more than about
five hundred years old.

(Note: See Wilkinson's paper in the Athenaeum (London, Noverse 1862).)

[Isaiah 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 14:9</span></span>

But whilst it has become so quiet on earth, there is the most violent
agitation in the regions below. "The kingdom of the dead below is all in
uproar on account of thee, to meet thy coming; it stirreth up the shades
for thee, all the he-goats of the earth; it raiseth up from their
throne-seats all the kings of the nations." The notion of Hades,
notwithstanding the mythological character which it had assumed, was
based upon the double truth, that what a man has been, and the manner in
which he has lived on this side the grave, are not obliterated on the
other side, but are then really brought to light, and that there is an
immaterial self-formation of the soul, in which all that a man has
become under certain divinely appointed circumstances, by his own
self-determination, is, as it were, reflected in a mirror, and that in a
permanent form. This psychical image, to which the dead body bears the
same relation as the shattered mould to a cast, is the shade-like
corporeality of the inhabitants of Hades, in which they appear
essentially though spiritually just as they were on this side the grave.
This is the deep root of what the prophet has here expressed in a
poetical form; for it is really a mâshâl that he has interwoven with his
prophecy here. All Hades is overwhelmed with excitement and wonder, now
that the king of Babel, that invincible ruler of the world, who, if not
unexpected altogether, was not expected so soon, as actually
approaching. From עורר onwards, Sheol, although a feminine, might be the
subject; in which case the verb would simply have reverted from the
feminine to the radical masculine form. But it is better to regard the
subject as neuter; a nescio quid, a nameless power. The shades are
suddenly seized with astonishment, more especially the former leaders
(leading goats or bell-wethers) of the herds of nations, so that, from
sheer amazement, they spring up from their seats.

[Isaiah 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 14:10</span></span>

And how do they greet this lofty new-comer? "They all rise up and say to
thee, Art thou also made weak like us? art thou become like us?" This is
all that the shades say; what follows does not belong to them. The pual
chullâh (only used here), "to be made sickly, or powerless," signifies
to be transposed into the condition of the latter, viz., the Repahim (a
word which also occurs in the Phoenician inscriptions, from רפא = רפה,
to be relaxed or weary), since the life of the shades is only a shadow
of life (cf., εἴδωλα ἄκικυς, and possibly also καμόντες in Homer, when
used in the sense of those who are dying, exhausted and prostrate with
weakness). And in Hades we could not expect anything more than this
expression of extreme amazement. For why should they receive their new
comrade with contempt or scorn? From [Isa
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011) onwards, the singers of the
mashal take up the song again.

[Isaiah 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 14:11</span></span>

"Thy pomp is cast down to the region of the dead, the noise of thy
harps: maggots are spread under thee, and they that cover thee are
worms." From the book of Daniel we learn the character of the Babylonian
music; it abounded in instruments, some of which were foreign. Maggots
and worms (a bitter sarcasm) now take the place of the costly artistic
Babylonian rugs, which once formed the pillow and counterpane of the
distinguished corpse. יצּע might be a third pers. hophal (Ges. 71); but
here, between perfects, it is a third pers. pual, like yullad in [Isa
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005). Rimmâh, which is preceded by the
verb in a masculine and to a certain extent an indifferent form (Ges.
147, a), is a collective name for small worms, in any mass of which the
individual is lost in the swarm. The passage is continued with איך (on
which, as a catchword of the mashal, see at [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)).

[Isaiah 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 14:12</span></span>

"How art thou fallen from the sky, thou star of light, sun of the dawn,
hurled down to the earth, thou that didst throw down nations from
above?" הילל is here the morning star (from hâlal, to shine, resolved
from hillel, after the form מאן, [Jer
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#010), סעף, [Psa
119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113), or rather attaching itself as
a third class to the forms היכל, עירם: compare the Arabic sairaf,
exchanger; saikal, sword-cleaner). It derives its name in other ancient
languages also from its striking brilliancy, and is here called
ben-shachar (sun of the dawn), just as in the classical mythology it is
called son of Eos, from the fact that it rises before the sun, and swims
in the morning light as if that were the source of its birth.

(Note: It is singular, however, that among the Semitic nations the
morning star is not personified as a male (Heōsphoros or Phōsphoros),
but as a female (Astarte, see at [Isa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008)), and that it is called Nâghâh,
Ashtoreth, Zuhara, but never by a name derived from hâlal; whilst the
moon is regarded as a male deity (Sin), and in Arabic hilâl signifies
the new moon, which might be called ben- shacar (son of the dawn), from
the fact that, from the time when it passes out of the invisibility of
its first phase, it is seen at sunrise, and is as it were born out of
the dawn.)

Lucifer, as a name given to the devil, was derived from this passage,
which the fathers (and lately Stier) interpreted, without any warrant
whatever, as relating to the apostasy and punishment of the angelic
leaders. The appellation is a perfectly appropriate one for the king of
Babel, on account of the early date of the Babylonian culture, which
reached back as far as the grey twilight of primeval times, and also
because of its predominant astrological character. The additional
epithet chōlēsh ‛al-gōyim is founded upon the idea of the influxus
siderum:

(Note: In a similar manner, the sun-god (San) is called the "conqueror
of the king's enemies," "breaker of opposition," etc., on the early
Babylonian monuments (see G. Rawlinson, The Five Great Monarchies, i.
160).)

cholesh signifies "overthrowing" or laying down ([Exo
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#013)), and with ‛al, "bringing defeat
upon;" whilst the Talmud (b. Sabbath 149b) uses it in the sense of
projiciens sortem, and thus throws light upon the cholesh (= purah, lot)
of the Mishnah. A retrospective glance is now cast at the
self-deification of the king of Babylon, in which he was the antitype of
the devil and the type of antichrist ([Dan
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036); [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)), and which had met with its
reward.

[Isaiah 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 14:13</span></span>

"And thou, thou hast said in thy heart, I will ascend into heaven, I
will exalt my throne above the stars of God, and sit down on the mount
of the assembly of gods in the corner of the north. I will ascend to the
heights of the clouds, I will make myself like the Most High.
Nevertheless, thou wilt be cast down into the region of the dead, into
the corner of the pit." An antithetical circumstantial clause commences
with veattah, just as in [Isa 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019),
"whilst thou," or "whereas thou." The har hammōēd (mount of assembly)
cannot be Zion, as is assumed by Schegg and others, who are led astray
by the parallel in [Psa 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003), which
has been entirely misunderstood, and has no bearing upon this passage at
all. Zion was neither a northern point of the earth, nor was it situated
on the north of Jerusalem. The prophet makes the king of Babylon speak
according to the general notion of his people, who had not the seat of
the Deity in the midst of them, as the Israelites had, but who placed it
on the summit of the northern mountains, which were lost in the clouds,
just as the Hindus place it on the fabulous mountains of Kailâsa, which
lie towards the north beyond the Himalayas (Lassen, i. 34ff.). ירכתים
(with an aspirated כ in a loosely closed syllable) are the two sides
into which a thing parts, the two legs of an angle, and then the apex at
which the legs separate. And so here, צפון ירכּתי (with an unaspirated
Caph in a triply closed syllable) is the uttermost extremity of the
north, from which the northern mountains stretch fork-like into the
land, and yarcethe-bor the interior of the pit into which its two walls
slope, and from which it unfolds or widens. All the foolhardy purposes
of the Chaldean are finally comprehended in this, "I will make myself
like the Most High;" just as the Assyrians, according to Ctesias, and
the Persians, according to the Persae of Aeschylus, really called their
king God, and the Sassanidae call themselves bag, Theos, upon coins and
inscriptions ('eddammeh is hithpael, equivalent to 'ethdammeh, which the
usual assimilation of the preformative Tav: Ges. 34, 2, b). By the אך in
[Psa 48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014), the high-flying pride of
the Chaldean is contrasted with his punishment, which hurls him down
into the lowest depths. אך, which was originally affirmative, and then
restrictive (as rak was originally restrictive and then affirmative),
passes over here into an adversative, just as in [Psa
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016); [Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015) (a change seen still more
frequently in אכן); nevertheless thou wilt be hurled down; nothing but
that will occur, and not what you propose. The prophetic tūrad is
language that neither befits the inhabitants of Hades, who greet his
advent, nor the Israel singing the mashal; but the words of Israel have
imperceptibly passed into words of the prophet, who still sees in the
distance, and as something future, what the mashal commemorates as
already past.

[Isaiah 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 14:16</span></span>

The prophet then continues in the language of prediction. "They that see
thee look, considering thee, look at thee thoughtfully: Is this the man
that set the earth trembling, and kingdoms shaking? that made the world
a wilderness, and destroyed its cities, and did not release its
prisoners (to their) home?" The scene is no longer in Hades (Knobel,
Umbreit). Those who are speaking thus have no longer the Chaldean before
them as a mere shade, but as an unburied corpse that has fallen into
corruption. As tēbēl is feminine, the suffixes in [Isa
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017) must refer, according to a
constructio ad sensum, to the world as changed into a wilderness
(midbâr). Pâthach, to open, namely locks and fetters; here, with
baithâh, it is equivalent to releasing or letting go (syn. shillēach,
[Jer 50:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#033)). By the "prisoners" the
Jewish exiles are principally intended; and it was their release that
had never entered the mind of the king of Babylon.

[Isaiah 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 14:18</span></span>

The prophet, whose own words now follow the words of the spectators,
proceeds to describe the state in which the tyrant lies, and which calls
for such serious reflections. "All the kings of the nations, they are
all interred in honour, every one in his house: but thou art cast away
far from thy sepulchre like a shoot hurled away, clothed with slain,
with those pierced through with the sword, those that go down to the
stones of the pit; like a carcase trodden under feet." Every other king
was laid out after his death "in his house" (b'bēthō), i.e. within the
limits of his own palace; but the Chaldean lay far away from the
sepulchre that was apparently intended for him. The מן in מקברך
signifies procul ab, as in [Num 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024);
[Pro 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#003). He lies there like nētzer
nith‛âb, i.e., like a branch torn off from the tree, that has withered
and become offensive, or rather (as neetzer does not mean a branch, but
a shoot) like a side-shoot that has been cut off the tree and thrown
away with disgust as ugly, useless, and only a hindrance to the regular
growth of the tree (possibly also an excrescence); nith‛âb (cast away)
is a pregnant expression, signifying "cast away with disgust." The place
where he lies is the field of battle. A vaticinium post eventum would be
expressed differently from this, as Luzzatto has correctly observed. For
what Seder 'Olam says - namely, that Nebuchadnezzar's corpse was taken
out of the grave by Evilmerodach, or as Abravanel relates it, by the
Medo-Persian conquerors - is merely a conclusion drawn from the passage
before us, and would lead us to expect הוצת rather than השלכת. It is a
matter of indifference, so far as the truth of the prophecy is
concerned, whether it was fulfilled in the person of Nebuchadnezzar I,
or of that second Nebuchadnezzar who gave himself out as a son of
Nabonet, and tried to restore the freedom of Babylon. The scene which
passes before the mind of the prophet is the field of battle. To clear
this they made a hole and throw stones (abnē-bor, stones of the pit) on
the top, without taking the trouble to shovel in the earth; but the king
of Babylon is left lying there, like a carcase that is trampled under
foot, and deserves nothing better than to be trampled under foot (mūbâs,
part. hoph. of būs, conculcare). They do not even think him worth
throwing into a hole along with the rest of the corpses.

[Isaiah 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 14:20</span></span>

"Thou art not united with them in burial, for thou hast destroyed thy
land, murdered thy people: the seed of evil-doers will not be named for
ever." In this way is vengeance taken for the tyrannical manner in which
he has oppressed and exhausted his land, making his people the
involuntary instruments of his thirst for conquest, and sacrificing them
as victims to that thirst. For this reason he does not meet with the
same compassion as those who have been compelled to sacrifice their
lives in his service. And it is not only all over for ever with him, but
it is so with his dynasty also. The prophet, the messenger of the penal
justice of God, and the mouthpiece of that Omnipotence which regulates
the course of history, commands this.

[Isaiah 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 14:21</span></span>

"Prepare a slaughter-house for his sons, because of the iniquity of
their fathers! They shall not rise and conquer lands, and fill the face
of the earth with cities." They exhortation is addressed to the Medes,
if the prophet had any particular persons in his mind at all. After the
nocturnal storming of Babylon by the Medes, the new Babylonian kingdom
and royal house which had been established by Nabopolassar vanished
entirely from history. The last shoot of the royal family of
Nabopolassar was slain as a child of conspirators. The second
Nebuchadnezzar deceived the people (as Darius says in the great
inscription of Behistan), declaring, "I am Nabukudrac ara the son of
Nabunita." בּל (used poetically for אל, like בּלי in [Isa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#006) for לא) expresses a negative wish
(as pen does a negative intention): Let no Babylonian kingdom ever arise
again! Hitzig corrects ערים into עיּים (heaps of ruins), Ewald into
עריצים (tyrants), Knobel into רעים, and Meier into עדים, which are said
to signify conflicts, whilst Maurer will not take ערים in the sense of
cities, but of enemies. But there is no necessity for this at all.
Nimrod, the first founder of a Babylonio-Assyrian kingdom, built cities
to strengthen his monarchy. The king of Asshur built cities for the
Medes, for the purpose of keeping them better in check. And it is to
this building of cities, as a support to despotism, that the prophet
here refers.

[Isaiah 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 14:22</span></span>

Thus far the prophet has spoken in the name of God. But the prophecy
closes with a word of God Himself, spoken through the prophet. "And I
will rise up against them, saith Jehovah of hosts, and root out in Babel
name and remnant, sprout and shoot, saith Jehovah. And make it the
possession of hedgehogs and marshes of water, and sweep it away with the
bosom of destruction, saith Jehovah of hosts." שם ושאר and נין ונכד are
two pairs of alliterative proverbial words, and are used to signify "the
whole, without exception" (compare the Arabic expression "Kiesel und
Kies," "flint and pebble," in the sense of "altogether:" Nldecke, Poesie
der alten Araber, p. 162). Jehovah rises against the descendants of the
king of Babylon, and exterminates Babylon utterly, root and branch. The
destructive forces, which Babylon has hitherto been able to control by
raising artificial defences, are now let loose; and the Euphrates, left
without a dam, lays the whole region under water. Hedgehogs now take the
place of men, and marshes the place of palaces. The kippod occurs in
[Isa 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011) and [Zep
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014), in the company of birds; but
according to the derivation of the word and the dialects, it denotes the
hedgehog, which possesses the power of rolling itself up (lxx ἔρημον
ὥστε κατοικεῖν ἐχίνους), and which, although it can neither fly, nor
climb with any peculiar facility, on account of its mode of walking,
could easily get upon the knob of a pillar that had been thrown down
([Zep 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014)). The concluding threat
makes the mode of Babel's origin the omen of its end: the city of טיט,
i.e., Babylon, which had been built for the most part of clay or
brick-earth, would be strangely swept away. The pilpel טאטא (or טאטא, as
Kimchi conjugates it in Michlol 150ab, and in accordance with which some
codices and early editions read וטאטאתיה with double zere) belongs to
the cognate root which is mentioned at [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005), with an opening ד, ט, ס (cf.,
[Isa 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#008)), and which signifies to
drive or thrust away. מטאטא is that with which anything is driven out or
swept away, viz., a broom. Jehovah treats Babylon as rubbish, and sweeps
it away, destruction (hashmēd: an inf. absol. used as a substantive)
serving Him as a broom.

[Isaiah 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 14:24</span></span>

There now follows, apparently out of all connection, another prophecy
against Asshur. It is introduced here quite abruptly, like a fragment;
and it is an enigma how it got here, and what it means here, though not
an enigma without solution. This short Assyrian passage reads as
follows. "Jehovah of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought,
so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, that takes place; to
break Asshur to pieces in my land, and upon my mountain will I tread him
under foot: then his yoke departs from them, and his burden will depart
from their neck. This is the purpose that is purposed over the whole
earth; and this the hand that is stretched out over all nations. For
Jehovah of hosts hath purposed, and who could bring it to nought? And
His hand that is stretched out, who can turn it back?" It is evidently a
totally different judicial catastrophe which is predicted here, inasmuch
as the world-power upon which it falls is not called Babel or Chasdim,
but Asshur, which cannot possibly be taken as a name for Babylon
(Abravanel, Lowth, etc.). Babylon is destroyed by the Medes, whereas
Asshur falls to ruin in the mountain-land of Jehovah, which it is
seeking to subjugate - a prediction which was literally fulfilled. And
only when this had taken place did a fitting occasion present itself for
a prophecy against Babel, the heiress of the ruined Assyrian power.
Consequently the two prophecies against Babel and Asshur form a
hysteron-proteron as they stand here. The thought which occasioned this
arrangement, and which it is intended to set forth, is expressed by
Jeremiah in [Jer 50:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#018), "Behold, I
will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the
king of Assyria." The one event was a pledge of the other. At a time
when the prophecy against Assyria had actually been fulfilled, the
prophet attached it to the still unfulfilled prophecy against Babylon,
to give a pledge of the fulfilment of the latter. This was the pedestal
upon which the Massâh Bâbel was raised. And it was doubly suited for
this, on account of its purely epilogical tone from [Isa
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#026) onwards.

[Isaiah 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 14:28</span></span>

This is one of the prophecies the date of which is fixed in [Isa
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028). "In the year of the death of
king Ahaz the following oracle was uttered." "The year of the death of
king Aha"Z was (as in [Isa 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)) the
year in which the death of Ahaz was to take place. In that year the
Philistines still remained in those possessions, their hold of which was
so shameful to Judah, and had not yet met with any humiliating
retribution. But this year was the turning-point; for Hezekiah, the
successor of Ahaz, not only recovered the cities that they had taken,
but thoroughly defeated them in their own land ([Kg2
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008)).

[Isaiah 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 14:29</span></span>

It was therefore in a most eventful and decisive year that Isaiah began
to prophesy as follows. "Rejoice not so fully, O Philistia, that the rod
which smote thee is broken to pieces; for out of the serpent's root
comes forth a basilisk, and its fruit is a flying dragon." Shēbet
maccēk, "the rod which smote thee" (not "of him that smote thee," which
is not so appropriate), is the Davidic sceptre, which had formerly kept
the Philistines in subjection under David and Solomon, and again in more
recent times since the reign of Uzziah. This sceptre was now broken to
pieces, for the Davidic kingdom had been brought down by the
Syro-Ephraimitish war, and had not been able to recover itself; and so
far as its power over the surrounding nations was concerned, it had
completely fallen to pieces. Philistia was thoroughly filled with joy in
consequence, but this joy was all over now. The power from which
Philistia had escaped was a common snake (nâchâsh), which had been
either cut to pieces, or had died out down to the very roots. But out of
this root, i.e., out of the house of David, which had been reduced to
the humble condition of its tribal house, there was coming forth a
zepha‛, a basilisk (regulus, as Jerome and other early translators
render it: see at [Isa 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008)); and this
basilisk, which is dangerous and even fatal in itself, as soon as it had
reached maturity, would bring forth a winged dragon as its fruit. The
basilisk is Hezekiah, and the flying dragon is the Messiah (this is the
explanation given by the Targum); or, what is the same thing, the former
is the Davidic government of the immediate future, the latter the
Davidic government of the ultimate future. The figure may appear an
inappropriate one, because the serpent is a symbol of evil; but it is
not a symbol of evil only, but of a curse also, and a curse is the
energetic expression of the penal justice of God. And it is as the
executor of such a curse in the form of a judgment of God upon Philistia
that the Davidic king is here described in a threefold climax as a snake
or serpent. The selection of this figure may possibly have also been
suggested by [Gen 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017); for the
saying of Jacob concerning Dan was fulfilled in Samson, the sworn foe of
the Philistines.

[Isaiah 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 14:30</span></span>

The coming Davidic king is peace for Israel, but for Philistia death.
"And the poorest of the poor will feed, and needy ones lie down in
peace; and I kill thy root through hunger, and he slays thy remnant."
"The poorest of the poor:" becōrē dallim is an intensified expression
for benē dallim, the latter signifying such as belong to the family of
the poor, the former (cf., [Job 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013),
mors dirissima) such as hold the foremost rank in such a family - a
description of Israel, which, although at present deeply, very deeply,
repressed and threatened on every side, would then enjoy its land in
quietness and peace ([Zep 3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012)). In
this sense ורעוּ is used absolutely; and there is no necessity for
Hupfeld's conjecture (Ps. ii. 258), that we should read בכרי (in my
pastures). Israel rises again, but Philistia perishes even to a root and
remnant; and the latter again falls a victim on the one hand to the
judgment of God (famine), and on the other to the punishment inflicted
by the house of David. The change of persons in [Isa
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#030) is no synallage; but the subject
to yaharōg (slays) is the basilisk, the father of the flying dragon. The
first strophe of the massah terminates here. It consists of eight lines,
each of the two Masoretic [Isa 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#029),
[Isa 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#030) containing four clauses.

[Isaiah 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 14:31</span></span>

The massah consists of two strophes. The first threatens judgment from
Judah, and the second - of seven lines - threatens judgment from Asshur.
"Howl, O gate! cry, O city! O Philistia, thou must melt entirely away;
for from the north cometh smoke, and there is no isolated one among his
hosts." שׁער, which is a masculine everywhere else, is construed here as
a feminine, possibly in order that the two imperfects may harmonize; for
there is nothing to recommend Luzzatto's suggestion, that שׁער should be
taken as an accusative. The strong gates of the Philistian cities
(Ashdod and Gaza), of world-wide renown, and the cities themselves,
shall lift up a cry of anguish; and Philistia, which has hitherto been
full of joy, shall melt away in the heat of alarm ([Isa
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#007), nâmōg, inf. abs. niph.; on the
form itself, compare [Isa 59:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#013)): for
from the north there comes a singing and burning fire, which proclaims
its coming afar off by the smoke which it produces; in other words, an
all-destroying army, out of whose ranks not one falls away from
weariness or self-will (cf., [Isa
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#027)), that is to say, an army without
a gap, animated throughout with one common desire. (מועד, after the form
מושב, the mass of people assembled at an appointed place, or mō'ed, [Jos
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#014); [Sa1
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#035), and for an appointed end.)

[Isaiah 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">isa 14:32</span></span>

To understand [Isa 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032), which
follows here, nothing more is needed than a few simple parenthetical
thoughts, which naturally suggest themselves. This one desire was the
thirst for conquest, and such a desire could not possibly have only the
small strip of Philistian coast for its object; but the conquest of this
was intended as the means of securing possession of other countries on
the right hand and on the left. The question arose, therefore, How would
Judah fare with the fire which was rolling towards it from the north?
For the very fact that the prophet of Judah was threatening Philistia
with this fire, presupposed that Judah itself would not be consumed by
it.

And this is just what is expressed in [Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032) : "And what answer do the
messengers of the nations bring? That Jehovah hath founded Zion, and
that the afflicted of His people are hidden therein." "The messengers of
the nations" (maleacē goi): goi is to be taken in a distributive sense,
and the messengers to be regarded either as individuals who have escaped
from the Assyrian army, which was formed of contingents from many
nations, or else (as we should expect pelitē in that case, instead of
mal'acē) messengers from the neighbouring nations, who were sent to
Jerusalem after the Assyrian army had perished in front of the city, to
ascertain how the latter had fared. And they all reply as if with one
mouth (yaaneh): Zion has stood unshaken, protected by its God; and the
people of this God, the poor and despised congregation of Jehovah (cf.,
[Zac 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)), are, and know that they
are, concealed in Zion. The prophecy is intentionally oracular. Prophecy
does not adopt the same tone to the nations as to Israel. Its language
to the former is dictatorially brief, elevated with strong
self-consciousness, expressed in lofty poetic strains, and variously
coloured, according to the peculiarity of the nation to which the oracle
refers. The following prophecy relating to Moab shows us very clearly,
that in the prophet's view the judgment executed by Asshur upon
Philistia would prepare the way for the subjugation of Philistia by the
sceptre of David. By the wreck of the Assyrian world-power upon
Jerusalem, the house of David would recover its old supremacy over the
nations round about. And this really was the case. But the fulfilment
was not exhaustive. Jeremiah therefore took up the prophecy of his
predecessor again at the time of the Chaldean judgment upon the nations
([Jer 47:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)), but only the second
strophe. The Messianic element of the first was continued by Zechariah
(Zech 9).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 15](isa015)

</div>
