<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa000)  [Next](isa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

In passing to our exposition of the book, the first thing which strikes
us is its traditional title - Yeshaiah (Isaiah). In the book itself, and
throughout the Old Testament Scriptures, the prophet is called
Yeshayahu; and the shorter form is found in the latest books as the name
of other persons. It was a common thing in the very earliest times for
the shorter forms of such names to be used interchangeably with the
longer; but in later times the shorter was the only form employed, and
for this reason it was the one adopted in the traditional title. The
name is a compound one, and signifies "Jehovah's salvation." The prophet
was conscious that it was not merely by accident that he bore this name;
for ישׁע (he shall save) and ישׁוּעה (salvation) are among his favourite
words. It may be said, in fact, that he lived and moved altogether in
the coming salvation, which was to proceed from Jehovah, and would be
realized hereafter, when Jehovah should come at last to His people as He
had never come before. This salvation was the goal of the sacred history
(Heilsgeschichte, literally, history of salvation); and Jehovah was the
peculiar name of God in relation to that history. It denotes "the
existing one," not however "the always existing," i.e., eternal, as
Bunsen and the Jewish translators render it, but "existing evermore,"
i.e., filling all history, and displaying His glory therein in grace and
truth. The ultimate goal of this historical process, in which God was
ever ruling as the absolutely free One, according to His own
self-assertion in [Exo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014), was true
and essential salvation, proceeding outwards from Israel, and eventually
embracing all mankind. In the name of the prophet the tetragrammaton
יהוה is contracted into יהו (יה) by the dropping of the second ה. We may
easily see from this contraction that the name of God was pronounced
with an a sound, so that it was either called Yahveh, or rather Yahaveh,
or else Yahvâh, or rather Yahavâh. According to Theodoret, it was
pronounced ̓Ιαβε (Yahaveh) by the Samaritans; and it is written in the
same way in the list of the names of the Deity given in Epiphanius. That
the ah sound was also a customary pronunciation, may not only be
gathered from such names as Jimnah, Jimrah, Jishvah, Jishpah (compare
Jithlah, the name of a place), but is also expressly attested by the
ancient variations, Jao, Jeuo, Jo ([Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006), lxx), on the one hand, and on
the other hand by the mode of spelling adopted by Origen (Jaoia) and
Theodoret (Aia, not only in quaest, in Ex. 15, but also in Fab. haeret.
"Aia signifies the existing one; it was pronounced thus by Hebrews, but
the Samaritans call it Jabai, overlooking the force of the word"). The
dull-sounding long a could be expressed by omega quite as well as by
alpha. Isidor follows these and similar testimonies, and says (Orig.
vii. 7), "The tetragrammaton consisted of ia written twice (iaia), and
with this reduplication it constituted the unutterable and glorious name
of God." The Arabic form adopted by the Samaritans leaves it uncertain
whether it is to be pronounced Yahve or Yahva. They wrote to Job Ludolf
(in the Epistola Samaritana Sichemitarum tertia, published by Bruns,
1781), in opposition to the statement of Theodoret, that they pronounced
the last syllable with damma; that is to say, they pronounced the name
Yahavoh (Yahvoh), which was the form in which it was written in the last
century by Velthusen, and also by Muffi in his Disegno di lezioni e di
ricerche sulla lingua Ebraica (Pavia, 1792). The pronunciation Jehovah
(Yehovah) arose out of a combination of the Keri and the chethib, and
has only become current since the time of the Reformation. Genebrard
denounces it in his Commentary upon the Psalms with the utmost
vehemence, in opposition to Beza, as an intolerable innovation. "Ungodly
violators of what is most ancient," he says, "profaning and transforming
the unutterable name of God, would read Jova or Jehova - a new,
barbarous, fictitious, and irreligious word, that savours strongly of
the Jove of the heathen." Nevertheless his Jehova (Jova) forced its way
into general adoption, and we shall therefore retain it, notwithstanding
the fact that the o sound is decidedly wrong. To return, then: the
prophet's name signifies "Jehovah's salvation." In the Septuagint it is
always written ̔Ησαΐ̀ας, with a strong aspirate; in the Vulgate it is
written Isaias, and sometimes Esaias.

In turning from the outward to the inward title, which is contained in
the book itself, there are two things to be observed at the outset: (1.)
The division of the vv. indicated by soph pasuk is an arrangement for
which the way was prepared as early as the time of the Talmud, and which
was firmly established in the Masoretic schools; and consequently it
reaches as far back as the extreme limits of the middle ages - differing
in this respect from the division of vv. in the New Testament. The
arrangement of the chapters, however, with the indications of the
separate sections of the prophetic collection, is of no worth to us,
simply because it is not older than the thirteenth century. According to
some authorities, it originated with Stephen Langton, Archbishop of
Canterbury († 1227); whilst others attribute it to Cardinal Hugo of St.
Caro († 1262). It is only since the fifteenth century that it has been
actually adopted in the text. (2.) The small ring or star at the
commencement points to the footnote, which affirms that Isaiah 1:1-28
(where we find the same sign again) was the haphtarah, or concluding
pericope, taken from the prophets, which was read on the same Sabbath as
the parashah from the Pentateuch, in [Deu
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001). It was, as we shall afterwards
see, a very thoughtful principle of selection which led to the
combination of precisely these two lessons.

[Isaiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 1:1</span></span>

Title of the collection, as given in [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001) : "Seeing of Jesha'-yahu, son of
Amoz, which he saw over Judah and Jerusalem in the days of 'Uzziyahu,
Jotham, Ahaz, and Yehizkiyahu, the kings of Judah." Isaiah is called the
"son of Amoz." There is no force in the old Jewish doctrine (b. Megilla
15a), which was known to the fathers, that whenever the name of a
prophet's father is given, it is a proof that the father was also a
prophet. And we are just as incredulous about another old tradition, to
the effect that Amoz was the brother of Amaziah, the father and
predecessor of Uzziah (b. Sota 10b). There is some significance in this
tradition, however, even if it is not true. There is something royal in
the nature and bearing of Isaiah throughout. He speaks to kings as if he
himself were a king. He confronts with majesty the magnates of the
nation and of the imperial power. In his peculiar style, he occupies the
same place among the prophets as Solomon among the kings. Under all
circumstances, and in whatever state of mind, he is completely master of
his materials - simple, yet majestic in his style - elevated, yet
without affectation - and beautiful, though unadorned. But this regal
character had its roots somewhere else than in the blood. All that can
be affirmed with certainty is, that Isaiah was a native of Jerusalem;
for notwithstanding his manifold prophetic missions, we never find him
outside Jerusalem. There he lived with his wife and children, and, as we
may infer from [Isa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#001), and the mode
of his intercourse with king Hezekiah, down in the lower city. And there
he laboured under the four kings named in [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001), viz., Uzziah (who reigned 52
years, 811-759), Jotham (16 years, 759-743), Ahaz (16 years, 743-728),
and Hezekiah (29 years, 728-699). The four kings are enumerated without
a Vav cop.; there is the same asyndeton enumerativum as in the titles to
the books of Hosea and Micah. Hezekiah is there called Yehizkiyah, the
form being almost the same as ours, with the simple elision of the
concluding sound. The chronicler evidently preferred the fullest form,
at the commencement as well as the termination. Roorda imagines that the
chronicler derived this ill-shaped form from the three titles, were it
is a copyist's error for וחזקיּהוּ or וחזקיּה; but the estimable
grammarian has overlooked the fact that the same form is found in [Jer
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004) and [Kg2
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#010), where no such error of the pen
can have occurred. Moreover, it is not an ill-shaped form, if, instead
of deriving it from the piel, as Roorda does, we derive it from the kal
of the verb "strong is Jehovah," an imperfect noun with a connecting i,
which is frequently met with in proper names from verbal roots, such as
Jesimil from sim, [Ch1 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#036) : vid.,
Olshausen, 277, p. 621). Under these four kings Isaiah laboured, or, as
it is expressed in [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001), saw the
sight which is committed to writing in the book before us.

Of all the many Hebrew synonyms for seeing, חזה (cf., Cernere, κρίνειν,
and the Sanscrit and Persian kar, which is founded upon the radical
notion of cutting and separating) is the standing general expression
used to denote prophetic perception, whether the form in which the
divine revelation was made to the prophet was in vision or by word. In
either case he saw it, because he distinguished this divine revelation
from his own conceptions and thoughts by means of that inner sense,
which is designated by the name of the noblest of all the five external
senses. From this verb Chazah there came both the abstract Chazon,
seeing, and the more concrete Chizzayon, a sight (visum), which is a
stronger from of Chizyon (from Chazi = Chazah). The noun Chazon is
indeed used to denote a particular sight (comp. [Isa
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#007) with [Job
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#008); [Job
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015)), inasmuch as it consists in
seeing (visio); but here in the title of the book of Isaiah the abstract
meaning passes over into the collective idea of the sight or vision in
all its extent, i.e., the sum and substance of all that was seen. It is
a great mistake, therefore, for any one to argue from the use of the
word Chazon (vision), that [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)
was originally nothing more than the heading to the first prophecy, and
that it was only by the addition of [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001) that it received the stamp of a
general title to the whole book. There is no force in the argument.
Moreover, the chronicler knew the book of Isaiah by this title ([Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032)); and the titles of other books
of prophecy, such as Hosea, Amos, Micah, and Zephaniah, are very
similar. A more plausible argument in favour of the twofold origin of
[Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001) has been lately repeated by
Schegg and Meier, namely, that whilst "Judah and Jerusalem" are
appropriate enough as defining the object of the first prophecy, the
range is too limited to apply to all the prophecies that follow; since
their object is not merely Judah, including Jerusalem, but they are also
directed against foreign nations, and at chapter 7 the king of Israel,
including Samaria, also comes within the horizon of the prophet's
vision. And in the title to the book of Micah, both kingdoms are
distinctly named. But it was necessary there, inasmuch as Micah
commences at once with the approaching overthrow of Samaria. Here the
designation is a central one. Even, according to the well-known maxims a
potiori, and a proximo, fit denominatio, it would not be unsuitable; but
Judah and Jerusalem are really and essentially the sole object of the
prophet's vision. For within the largest circle of the imperial powers
there lies the smaller one of the neighbouring nations; and in this
again, the still more limited one of all Israel, including Samaria; and
within this the still smaller one of the kingdom of Judah. And all these
circles together form the circumference of Jerusalem, since the entire
history of the world, so far as its inmost pragmatism and its ultimate
goal were concerned, was the history of the church of God, which had for
its peculiar site the city of the temple of Jehovah, and of the kingdom
of promise. The expression "concerning Judah and Jerusalem" is therefore
perfectly applicable to the whole book, in which all that the prophet
sees is seen from Judah - Jerusalem as a centre, and seen for the sake
and in the interests of both. The title in [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001) may pass without hesitation as the
heading written by the prophet's own hand. This is admitted not only by
Caspari (Micah, pp. 90-93), but also by Hitzig and Knobel. But if [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001) contains the title to the whole
book, where is the heading to the first prophecy? Are we to take אשׁר as
a nominative instead of an accusative (qui instead of quam, sc.
visionem), as Luzzatto does? This is a very easy way of escaping from
the difficulty, and stamping [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)
as the heading to the first prophetic words in Chapter 1; but it is
unnatural, as חזון אשׁר חזה, according to Ges. (138, note 1), is the
customary form in Hebrew of connecting the verb with its own
substantive. The real answer is simple enough. The first prophetic
address is left intentionally without a heading, just because it is the
prologue to all the rest; and the second prophetic address has a heading
in [Isa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001), although it really does
not need one, for the purpose of bringing out more sharply the true
character of the first as the prologue to the whole.

[Isaiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 1:2</span></span>

The difficult question as to the historical and chronological standpoint
of this overture to all the following addresses, can only be brought
fully out when the exposition is concluded. But there is one thing which
we may learn even from a cursory inspection: namely, that the prophet
was standing at the eventful boundary line between two distinct halves
in the history of Israel. The people had not been brought to reflection
and repentance either by the riches of the divine goodness, which they
had enjoyed in the time of Uzziah-Jotham, the copy of the times of David
and Solomon, or by the chastisements of divine wrath, by which wound
after wound was inflicted. The divine methods of education were
exhausted, and all that now remained for Jehovah to do was to let the
nation in its existing state be dissolved in fire, and to create a new
one from the remnant of gold that stood the fiery test. At this time, so
pregnant with storms, the prophets were more active than at any other
period. Amos appeared about the tenth year of Uzziah's reign, the
twenty-fifth of Jeroboam II; Micah prophesied from the time of Jotham
till the fall of Samaria, in the sixth year of Hezekiah's reign; but
most prominent of all was Isaiah, the prophet par excellence, standing
as he did midway between Moses and Christ.

In the consciousness of his exalted position in relation to the history
of salvation, he commences his opening address in Deuteronomic style.
Modern critics are of opinion, indeed, that Deuteronomy was not composed
till the time of Josiah, or at any rate not earlier than Manasseh; and
even Kahnis adduces this as a firmly established fact (see his Dogmatik,
i. 277). But if this be the case, how comes it to pass, not only that
Micah ([Mic 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008)) points back to a
saying in [Deu 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012), but that all the
post-Mosaic prophecy, even the very earliest of all, is tinged with a
Deuteronomic colouring. This surely confirms the self-attestation of the
authorship of Moses, which is declared most distinctly in [Isa
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009). Deuteronomy was most peculiarly
Moses' own law-book - his last will, as it were: it was also the oldest
national book of Israel, and therefore the basis of all intercourse
between the prophets and the nation. There is one portion of this
peculiarly Mosaic thorah, however, which stands not only in a more truly
primary relation to the prophecy of succeeding ages than any of the
rest, but in a normative relation also. We refer to Moses' dying song,
which has recently been expounded by Volck and Camphausen, and is called
shirath hâzinu (song of "Give ear"), from the opening words in chapter
32. This song is a compendious outline or draft, and also the common key
to all prophecy, and bears the same fundamental relation to it as the
Decalogue to all other laws, and the Lord's Prayer to all other prayers.
The lawgiver summed up the whole of the prophetic contents of his last
words (Deut. 27-28, 29-30), and threw them into the form of a song, that
they might be perpetuated in the memories and mouths of the people. This
song sets before the nation its entire history to the end of time. That
history divides itself into four great periods: the creation and rise of
Israel; the ingratitude and apostasy of Israel; the consequent surrender
of Israel to the power of the heathen; and finally, the restoration of
Israel, sifted, but not destroyed, and the unanimity of all nations in
the praise of Jehovah, who reveals Himself both in judgment and in
mercy. This fourfold character is not only verified in every part of the
history of Israel, but is also the seal of that history as a whole, even
to its remotest end in New Testament times. In every age, therefore,
this song has presented to Israel a mirror of its existing condition and
future fate. And it was the task of the prophets to hold up this mirror
to the people of their own times. This is what Isaiah does. He begins
his prophetic address in the same form in which Moses begins his song.
The opening words of Moses are: "Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will
speak; and let the earth hear the words of my mouth" ([Deu
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)). In what sense he invoked the
heaven and the earth, he tells us himself in [Deu
31:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#028). He foresaw in spirit the
future apostasy of Israel, and called heaven and earth, which would
outlive his earthly life, that was now drawing to a close, as witnesses
of what he had to say to his people, with such a prospect before them.
Isaiah commences in the same way ([Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)), simply transposing the two
parallel verbs "hear" and "give ear:" "Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O
earth; for Jehovah speaketh!" The reason for the appeal is couched in
very general terms: they were to hear, because Jehovah was speaking.
What Jehovah said coincided essentially with the words of Jehovah, which
are introduced in [Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020) with the
expression "And He said." What it was stated there that Jehovah would
one day have to say in His wrath, He now said through the prophet, whose
existing present corresponded to the coming future of the Mosaic ode.
The time had now arrived for heaven and earth, which are always
existing, and always the same, and which had accompanied Israel's
history thus far in all places and at all times, to fulfil their duty as
witnesses, according to the word of the lawgiver. And this was just the
special, true, and ultimate sense in which they were called upon by the
prophet, as they had previously been by Moses, to "hear." They had been
present, and had taken part, when Jehovah gave the thorah to His people:
the heavens, according to [Deu 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#036),
as the place from which the voice of God came forth; and the earth, as
the scene of His great fire. They were solemnly invoked when Jehovah
gave His people the choice between blessing and cursing, life and death
([Deu 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019); [Deu
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026)).

And so now they are called upon to hear and join in bearing witness to
all that Jehovah, their Creator, and the God of Israel, had to say, and
the complaints that He had to make: "I have brought up children, and
raised them high, and they have fallen away from me" ([Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)). Israel is referred to; but
Israel is not specially named. On the contrary, the historical facts are
generalized almost into a parable, in order that the appalling condition
of things which is crying to heaven may be made all the more apparent.
Israel was Jehovah's son ([Exo
4:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)). All the members of the
nation were His children ([Deu 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001);
[Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020)). Jehovah was Israel's
father, by whom it had been begotten ([Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018)). The existence of Israel as a
nation was secured indeed, like that of all other nations, by natural
reproduction, and not by spiritual regeneration. But the primary ground
of Israel's origin was the supernatural and mighty word of promise given
to Abraham, in [Gen 17:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015); and it
was by a series of manifestations of miraculous power and displays of
divine grace, that the development of Israel, which dated from that
starting-point, was brought up to the position it had reached at the
time of the exodus from Egypt. It was in this sense that Israel had been
begotten by Jehovah. And this relation between Jehovah and Israel, as
His children, had now, at the time when Jehovah was speaking through the
mouth of Isaiah, a long and gracious past behind it, viz., the period of
Israel's childhood in Egypt; the period of its youth in the desert; and
a period of growing manhood from Joshua to Samuel: so that Jehovah could
say, "I have brought up children, and raised them high." The piel
(giddel) used here signifies "to make great;" and when applied to
children, as it is here and in other passages, such as [Kg2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#006), it means to bring up, to make
great, so far as natural growth is concerned. The pilel (romem), which
corresponds to the piel in the so-called verbis cavis, and which is also
used in [Isa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004) and [Eze
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#004) as the parallel to giddel,
signifies to lift up, and is used in a "dignified (dignitative) sense,"
with reference to the position of eminence, to which, step by step, a
wise and loving father advances a child. The two vv. depict the state of
Israel in the times of David and Solomon, as one of mature manhood and
proud exaltation, which had to a certain extent returned under Uzziah
and Jotham. But how base had been the return which it had made for all
that it had received from God: "And they have fallen away from me." We
should have expected an adversative particle here; but instead of that,
we have merely a Vav cop., which is used energetically, as in [Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007) (cf., [Hos
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#013)). Two things which ought never to
be coupled - Israel's filial relation to Jehovah, and Israel's base
rebellion against Jehovah - had been realized in their most
contradictory forms. The radical meaning of the verb is to break away,
or break loose; and the object against which the act is directed is
construed with Beth. The idea is that of dissolving connection with a
person with violence and self-will; here it relates to that inward
severance from God, and renunciation of Him, which preceded all outward
acts of sin, and which not only had idolatry for its full and outward
manifestation, but was truly idolatry in all its forms. From the time
that Solomon gave himself up to the worship of idols, at the close of
his reign, down to the days of Isaiah, idolatry had never entirely or
permanently ceased to exist, even in public. In two different
reformations the attempt had been made to suppress it, viz., in the one
commenced by Asa and concluded by Jehoshaphat; and in the one carried
out by Joash, during the lifetime of the high priest Jehoiada, his tutor
and deliverer. But the first was not successful in suppressing it
altogether; and what Joash removed, returned with double abominations as
soon as Jehoiada was dead. Consequently the words, "They have rebelled
against me," which sum up all the ingratitude of Israel in one word, and
trace it to its root, apply to the whole history of Israel, from its
culminating point under David and Solomon, down to the prophet's own
time.

[Isaiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 1:3</span></span>

Jehovah then complains that the rebellion with which His children have
rewarded Him is not only inhuman, but even worse than that of the
brutes: "An ox knoweth its owner, and an ass its master's crib: Israel
doth not know, my people doth not consider." An ox has a certain
knowledge of its buyer and owner, to whom it willingly submits; and an
ass has at least a knowledge of the crib of its master (the noun for
"master" is in the plural: this is not to be understood in a numerical,
but in an amplifying sense, "the authority over it," as in [Exo
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#029) : vid., Ges. 108, 2, b, and
Dietrich's Heb. Gram. p. 45), i.e., it knows that it is its master who
fills its crib or manger with fodder (evus, the crib, from avas, to
feed, is radically associated with φάτνη, vulgar πάτνη, Dor. and Lac.
πάτνη, and is applied in the Talmud to the large common porringer used
by labourers).

(Note: Nedarim iv 4 jer. Demai viii. The stable is called repheth Even
in jer. Shebuoth viii. 1, where cattle are spoken of as standing b'evus,
the word signifies a crib or manger, not a stable. Luzzatto tries to
prove that evus signifies a threshing-floor, and indeed an enclosed
place, in distinction from geren; but he is mistaken.)

Israel had no such knowledge, neither instinctive and direct, nor
acquired by reflection (hithbonan, the reflective conjugation, with a
pausal change of the e4 into a long a, according to Ges. 54, note). The
expressions "doth not know" and "doth not consider" must not be taken
here in an objectless sense - as, for example, in [Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010) and [Psa
82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005) -viz. as signifying they were
destitute of all knowledge and reflection; but the object is to be
supplied from what goes before: they knew not, and did not consider what
answered in their case to the owner and to the crib which the master
fills," - namely, that they were the children and possession of Jehovah,
and that their existence and prosperity were dependent upon the grace of
Jehovah alone. The parallel, with its striking contrasts, is self-drawn,
like that in [Jer 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007), where animals
are referred to again, and is clearly indicated in the words "Israel"
and "my people." Those who were so far surpassed in knowledge and
perception even by animals, and so thoroughly put to shame by them, were
not merely a nation, like any other nation on the earth, but were
"Israel," descendants of Jacob, the wrestler with God, who wrestled down
the wrath of God, and wrestled out a blessing for himself and his
descendants; and "my people," the nation which Jehovah had chosen out of
all other nations to be the nation of His possession, and His own
peculiar government. This nation, bearing as it did the God-given title
of a hero of faith and prayer, this favourite nation of Jehovah, had let
itself down far below the level of the brutes. This is the complaint
which the exalted speaker pours out in [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002) and [Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003) before heaven and earth. The words
of God, together with the introduction, consist of two tetrastichs, the
measure and rhythm of which are determined by the meaning of the words
and the emotion of the speaker. There is nothing strained in it at all.
Prophecy lives and moves amidst the thoughts of God, which prevail above
the evil reality: and for that very reason, as a reflection of the glory
of God, which is the ideal of beauty ([Psa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)), it is through and through
poetical. That of Isaiah is especially so. There was no art of oratory
practised in Israel, which Isaiah did not master, and which did not
serve as the vehicle of the word of God, after it had taken shape in the
prophet's mind.

With [Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004) there commences a
totally different rhythm. The words of Jehovah are ended. The piercing
lamentation of the deeply grieved Father is also the severest
accusation. The cause of God, however, is to the prophet the cause of a
friend, who feels an injury done to his friend quite as much as if it
were done to himself ([Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)). The
lamentation of God, therefore, is changed now into violent scolding and
threatening on the part of the prophet; and in accordance with the deep
wrathful pain with which he is moved, his words pour out with violent
rapidity, like flash after flash, in climactic clauses having no outward
connection, and each consisting of only two or three words.

[Isaiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 1:4</span></span>

"Woe upon the sinful nation, the guilt-laden people, the miscreant race,
the children acting corruptly! They have forsaken Jehovah, blasphemed
Israel's Holy One, turned away backwards." The distinction sometimes
drawn between hoi (with He) and oi (with Aleph) - as equivalent to oh!
and woe! - cannot be sustained. Hoi is an exclamation of pain, with
certain doubtful exceptions; and in the case before us it is not so much
a denunciation of woe (vae genti, as the Vulgate renders it), as a
lamentation (vae gentem) filled with wrath. The epithets which follow
point indirectly to that which Israel ought to have been, according to
the choice and determination of God, and plainly declare what it had
become through its own choice and ungodly self-determination. (1.)
According to the choice and determination of God, Israel was to be a
holy nation (goi kadosh, [Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006));
but it was a sinful nation - gens peccatrix, as it is correctly rendered
by the Vulgate. חטא is not a participle here, but rather a participial
adjective in the sense of what was habitual. It is the singular in
common use for the plural חטאי, sinners, the singular of which was not
used. Holy and Sinful are glaring contrasts: for kadosh, so far as its
radical notion is concerned (assuming, that is to say, that this is to
be found in kad and not in dosh: see Psalter, i. 588, 9), signifies that
which is separated from what is common, unclean, or sinful, and raised
above it. The alliteration in hoi goi implies that the nation, as
sinful, was a nation of woe. (2.) In the thorah Israel was called not
only "a holy nation," but also "the people of Jehovah" ([Num
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#006), Eng. ver. [Num
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)), the people chosen and blessed
of Jehovah; but now it had become "a people heavy with iniquity."
Instead of the most natural expression, a people bearing heavy sins; the
sin, or iniquity, i.e., the weight carried, is attributed to the people
themselves upon whom the weight rested, according to the common
figurative idea, that whoever carries a heavy burden is so much heavier
himself (cf., gravis oneribus, Cicero). עון (sin regarded as crookedness
and perversity, whereas חטא suggests the idea of going astray and
missing the way) is the word commonly used wherever the writer intends
to describe sin in the mass (e.g., [Isa
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#024); [Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016); [Gen
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#015)), including the guilt occasioned
by it. The people of Jehovah had grown into a people heavily laden with
guilt. So crushed, so altered into the very opposite, had Israel's true
nature become. It is with deliberate intention that we have rendered
גּוי a nation (Nation), and עם(am a people (Volk): for, according to
Malbim's correct definition of the distinction between the two, the
former is used to denote the mass, as linked together by common descent,
language, and country; the latter the people as bound together by unity
of government (see, for example, [Psa
105:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#013)). Consequently we always read
of the people of the Lord, not the nation of the Lord; and there are
only two instances in which goi is attached to a suffix relating to the
ruler, and then it relates to Jehovah alone ([Zep
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009); [Psa
106:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005)).

(3.) Israel bore elsewhere the honourable title of the seed of the
patriarch ([Isa 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008); [Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019); cf., [Gen
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)); but in reality it was a seed
of evil-doers (miscreants). This does not mean that it was descended
from evil-doers; but the genitive is used in the sense of a direct
apposition to zera (seed), as in [Isa
65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023) (cf., [Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009); [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013), and Ges. 116, 5), and the
meaning is a seed which consists of evil-doers, and therefore is
apparently descended from evil-doers instead of from patriarchs. This
last thought is not implied in the genitive, but in the idea of "seed;"
which is always a compact unit, having one origin, and bearing the
character of its origin in itself. The rendering brood of evil-doers,
however it may accord with the sense, would be inaccurate; for "seed of
evil-doers" is just the same as "house of evil-doers" in [Isa
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002). The singular of the noun מרעים
is מרע , with the usual sharpening in the case of gutturals in the verbs
(' '(, מרע with patach, מרע with kametz in pause ([Isa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016), which see) - a noun derived from
the hiphil participle. (4.) Those who were of Israel were "children of
Jehovah" through the act of God ([Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)); but in their own acts they were
"children acting destructively (bânim mashchithim), so that what the
thorah feared and predicted had now occurred ([Deu
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016), [Deu
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#025); [Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029)). In all these passages we find
the hiphil, and in the parallel passage of the great song ([Deu
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005)) the piel - both of them
conjugations which contain within themselves the object of the action
indicated (Ges. 53, 2): to do what is destructive, i.e., so to act as to
become destructive to one's self and to others. It is evident from [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002), that the term children is to be
understood as indicating their relation to Jehovah (cf., [Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001), [Isa
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#009)). The four interjectional clauses
are followed by three declaratory clauses, which describe Israel's
apostasy as total in every respect, and complete the mournful seven.
There was apostasy in heart: "They have forsaken Jehovah." There was
apostasy in words: "They blaspheme the Holy One of Israel." The verb
literally means to sting, then to mock or treat scornfully; the use of
it to denote blasphemy is antiquated Mosaic ([Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020); [Num
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011), [Num
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#023); [Num
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#030)). It is with intention that God
is designated here as "the Holy One of Israel,"a name which constitutes
the keynote of all Isaiah's prophecy (see at [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)). It was sin to mock at anything
holy; it was a double sin to mock at God, the Holy One; but it was a
threefold sin for Israel to mock at God the Holy One, who had set
Himself to be the sanctifier of Israel, and required that as He was
Israel's sanctification, He should also be sanctified by Israel
according to His holiness ([Lev 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002),
etc.). And lastly, there was also apostasy in action: "they have turned
away backwards;" or, as the Vulgate renders it, abalienati sunt. נזור is
the reflective of זוּר, related to נור and סוּר, for which it is the
word commonly used in the Targum. The niphal, which is only met with
here, indicates the deliberate character of their estrangement from God;
and the expression is rendered still more emphatic by the introduction
of the word "backwards" (achor, which is used emphatically in the place
of מאחריו). In all their actions they ought to have followed Jehovah;
but they had turned their backs upon Him, and taken the way selected by
themselves.

[Isaiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 1:5</span></span>

In this v. a disputed question arises as to the words על־מה (מה, the
shorter, sharper form of מה, which is common even before non-gutturals,
Ges. 32, 1): viz., whether they mean "wherefore," as the lxx, Targums,
Vulgate, and most of the early versions render them, or "upon what,"
i.e., upon which part of the body, as others, including Schrring,
suppose. Luzzatto maintains that the latter rendering is spiritless,
more especially because there is nothing in the fact that a limb has
been struck already to prevent its being struck again; but such
objections as these can only arise in connection with a purely literal
interpretation of the passage. If we adopted this rendering, the real
meaning would be, that there was no judgment whatever that had not
already fallen upon Israel on account of its apostasy, so that it was
not far from utter destruction. We agree, however, with Caspari in
deciding in favour of the meaning "to what" (to what end). For in all
the other passage in which the expression occurs (fourteen times in
all), it is used in this sense, and once even with the verb hiccâh, to
smite ([Num 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#032)), whilst it is only
in [Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006) that the idea of the
people as one body is introduced; whereas the question "upon what" would
require that the reader or hearer should presuppose it here. But in
adopting the rendering "whereto," or to what end, we do not understand
it, as Malbim does, in the sense of Cui bono, with the underlying
thought, "It would be ineffectual, as all the previous smiting has
proved;" for this thought never comes out in a direct expression, as we
should expect, but rather - according to the analogy of the questions
with lamah in [Eze 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#031); [Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007) -in the sense of qua de causa,
with the underlying thought, "There would be only an infatuated pleasure
in your own destruction."

[Isa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005) we therefore render thus:
"Why would ye be perpetually smitten, multiplying rebellion?" עוד (with
tiphchah, a stronger disjunctive than tebir) belongs to תּכּוּ; see the
same form of accentuation in [Eze
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#009). They are not two distinct
interrogative clauses ("why would ye be smitten afresh? why do ye add
revolt?" (Luzzatto), but the second clause is subordinate to the first
(without there being any necessity to supply Chi, "because," as Gesenius
supposes), an adverbial minor clause defining the main clause more
precisely; at all events this is the logical connection, as in [Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011) (cf., [Psa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004), "delighting in lies," and [Psa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003), "loving vanity"): lxx "adding
iniquity." Sârâh (rebellion) is a deviation from truth and rectitude;
and here, as in many other instances, it denotes apostasy from Jehovah,
who is the absolutely Good, and absolute goodness. There is a still
further dispute whether the next words should be rendered "every head"
and "every heart," or "the whole head" and "the whole heart." In prose
the latter would be impossible, as the two nouns are written without the
article; but in the poetic style of the prophets the article may be
omitted after Col, when used in the sense of "the whole" (e.g., [Isa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012) : with whole mouth, i.e., with
full mouth). Nevertheless Col, without the article following, never
signifies "the whole" when it occurs several times in succession, as in
[Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002) and [Eze
7:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#017). We must therefore render [Isa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005), "Every head is diseased, and
every heart is sick." The Lamed in locholi indicates the state into
which a thing has come: every head in a state of disease (Ewald, 217, d:
locholi without the article, as in [Ch2
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#018)). The prophet asks his
fellow-countrymen why they are so foolish as to heap apostasy upon
apostasy, and so continue to call down the judgments of God, which have
already fallen upon them blow after blow. Has it reached such a height
with them, that among all the many heads and hearts there is not one
head which is not in a diseased state, not one heart which is not
thoroughly ill? (davvai an emphatic form of daveh). Head and heart are
mentioned as the noblest parts of the outer and inner man. Outwardly and
inwardly every individual in the nation had already been smitten by the
wrath of God, so that they had had enough, and might have been brought
to reflection.

[Isaiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 1:6</span></span>

This description of the total misery of every individual in the nation
is followed by a representation of the whole nation as one miserably
diseased body. "From the some of the foot even to the head there is
nothing sound in it: cuts, and stripes, and festering wounds; they have
not been pressed out, nor bound up, nor has there been any soothing with
oil." The body of the nation, to which the expression "in it" applies
(i.e., the nation as a whole), was covered with wounds of different
kinds; and no means whatever had been applied to heal these many,
various wounds, which lay all together, close to one another, and one
upon the other, covering the whole body. Cuts (from פּצע to cut) are
wounds that have cut into the flesh - sword-cuts, for example. These
need binding up, in order that the gaping wound may close again. Stripes
(Chabburâh, from Châbar, to stripe), swollen stripes, or weals, as if
from a cut with a whip, or a blow with a fist: these require softening
with oil, that the coagulated blood of swelling may disperse. Festering
wounds, maccâh teriyâh, from târâh, to be fresh (a different word from
the talmudic word t're, Chullin 45b, to thrust violently, so as to
shake): these need pressing, for the purpose of cleansing them, so as to
facilitate their healing. Thus the three predicates manifest an
approximation to a chiasm (the crossing of the members); but this
retrospective relation is not thoroughly carried out. The predicates are
written in the plural, on account of the collective subject. The clause
ולא רּכּכה בּשּׁמן, which refers to חבורה (stripes), so far as the sense
is concerned (olive-oil, like all oleosa, being a dispersing medium), is
to be taken as neuter, since this is the only way of explaining the
change in the number: "And no softening has been effected with oil."
Zoru we might suppose to be a pual, especially on account of the other
puals near: it is not so, however, for the simple reason that, according
to the accentuation (viz., with two pashtahs, the first of which gives
the tone, as in tohu, [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002), so
that it must be pronounced zóru), it has the tone upon the penultimate,
for which it would be impossible to discover any reason, if it were
derived from zârâh. For the assumption that the tone is drawn back to
prepare the way for the strong tone of the next verb (Chubbâshu) is
arbitrary, as the influence of the pause, though it sometimes reaches
the last word but one, never extends to the last but two. Moreover,
according to the usage of speech, zorâh signifies to be dispersed, not
to be pressed out; whereas zur and zârar are commonly used in the sense
of pressing together and squeezing out. Consequently zoru is either the
kal of an intransitive zor in the middle voice (like boshu), or, what is
more probable - as zoru, the middle voice in [Psa
58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004), has a different meaning
(abalienati sunt: cf., [Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)) - the
kal of zârar (= Arab. Constringere), which is here conjugated as an
intransitive (cf., [Job 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024), rommu,
and [Gen 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023), where robbu is used in
an active sense). The surgical treatment so needed by the nation was a
figurative representation of the pastoral addresses of the prophets,
which had been delivered indeed, but, inasmuch as their salutary effects
were dependent upon the penitential sorrow of the people, might as well
have never been delivered at all. The people had despised the merciful,
compassionate kindness of their God. They had no liking for the radical
cure which the prophets had offered to effect. All the more pitiable,
therefore, was the condition of the body, which was sick within, and
diseased from head to foot. The prophet is speaking here of the existing
state of things. He affirms that it is all over with the nation; and
this is the ground and object of his reproachful lamentations.
Consequently, when he passes in the next v. from figurative language to
literal, we may presume that he is still speaking of his own times. It
is Isaiah's custom to act in this manner as his own expositor (compare
[Isa 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022) with [Isa
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)). The body thus inwardly and
outwardly diseased, was, strictly speaking, the people and the land in
their fearful condition at that time.

[Isaiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 1:7</span></span>

This is described more particularly in [Isa
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007), which commences with the most
general view, and returns to it again at the close."Your land ... a
desert; your cities ... burned with fire; your field ... foreigners
consuming it before your eyes, and a desert like overthrowing by
strangers." Caspari has pointed out, in his Introduction to the Book of
Isaiah, how nearly every word corresponds to the curses threatened in
Lev 26 and Deut 28 (29); [Mic 6:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#013)
and [Jer 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015). stand in the very same
relation to these sections of the Pentateuch. From the time of Isaiah
downwards, the state of Israel was a perfect realization of the curses
of the law. The prophet intentionally employs the words of the law to
describe his own times; he designates the enemy, who devastated the
land, reduced its towers to ashes, and took possession of its crops, by
the simple term zarim, foreigners or barbarians (a word which would have
the very same meaning if it were really the reduplication of the
Aramaean bar; compare the Syriac barōye, a foreigner), without
mentioning their particular nationality. He abstracts himself from the
definite historical present, in order that he may point out all the more
emphatically how thoroughly it bears the character of the fore-ordained
curse. The most emphatic indication of this was to be found in the fact,
which the clause at the close of [Isa
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007) palindromically affirms, that a
desolation had been brought about "like the overthrow of foreigners."
The repetition of a catchword like zarim (foreigners) at the close of
the v. in this emphatic manner, is a figure of speech, called
epanaphora, peculiar to the two halves of our collection. The question
arises, however, whether zarim is to be regarded as the genitive of the
subject, as Caspari, Knobel, and others suppose, "such an overthrow as
is commonly produced by barbarians" (cf., [Sa2
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#003), where the verb occurs), or as
the genitive of the object, "such an overthrow as comes upon
barbarians." As mahpechâh (overthrow) is used in other places in which
it occurs to denote the destruction of Sodom, Gomorrah, etc., according
to the primary passage, [Deu 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022),
and Isaiah had evidently also this catastrophe in his mind, as [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008) clearly shows; we decide in favour
of the conclusion that zârim is the genitive of the object (cf., [Amo
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#011)). The force of the comparison is
also more obvious, if we understand the words in this sense. The
desolation which had fallen upon the land of the people of God resembled
that thorough desolation (subversio) with which God visited the nations
outside the covenant, who, like the people of the Pentapolis, were swept
from off the earth without leaving a trace behind. But although there
was similarity, there was not sameness, as [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008), [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009) distinctly affirm. Jerusalem
itself was still preserved; but in how pitiable a condition! There can
be no doubt that bath-Zion ("daughter of Zion," Eng. ver.) in [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008) signifies Jerusalem. The genitive
in this case is a genitive of apposition: "daughter Zion," not "daughter
of Zion" (cf., [Isa 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022) : see Ges.
116, 5). Zion itself is represented as a daughter, i.e., as a woman. The
expression applied primarily to the community dwelling around the
fortress of Zion, to which the individual inhabitants stood in the same
relation as children to a mother, inasmuch as the community sees its
members for the time being come into existence and grow: they are born
within her, and, as it were, born and brought up by her. It was then
applied secondarily to the city itself, with or without the inhabitants
(cf., [Jer 46:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#019); [Jer
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018); [Zac
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011)). In this instance the latter are
included, as [Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009) clearly shows.
This is precisely the point in the first two comparisons.

[Isaiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 1:8</span></span>

"And the daughter of Zion remains lie a hut in a vineyard; like a
hammock in a cucumber field." The vineyard and cucumber field (mikshah,
from kisshu, a cucumber, Cucumis, not a gourd, Cucurbita; at least not
the true round gourd, whose Hebrew name, dalâth, does not occur in the
Old Testament) are pictured by the prophet in their condition before the
harvest (not after, as the Targums render it), when it is necessary that
they should be watched. The point of comparison therefore is, that in
the vineyard and cucumber field not a human being is to be seen in any
direction; and there is nothing but the cottage and the night barrack or
hammock (cf., [Job 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#018)) to show that
there are any human beings there at all. So did Jerusalem stand in the
midst of desolation, reaching far and wide - a sign, however, that the
land was not entirely depopulated. But what is the meaning of the third
point of comparison? Hitzig renders it, "like a watch-tower;" Knobel,
"like a guard-city." But the noun neither means a tower nor a castle
(although the latter would be quite possible, according to the primary
meaning, Cingere); and nezurâh does not mean "watch" or "guard." On the
other hand, the comparison indicated (like, or as) does not suit what
would seem the most natural rendering, viz., "like a guarded city,"
i.e., a city shielded from danger. Moreover, it is inadmissible to take
the first two Caphs in the sense of sicut (as) and the third in the
sense of sic (so); since, although this correlative is common in clauses
indicating identity, it is not so in sentences which institute a simple
comparison. We therefore adopt the rendering, [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008), "As a besieged city," deriving
nezurâh not from zur, niphal nâzor (never used), as Luzzatto does, but
from nâzar, which signifies to observe with keen eye, either with a good
intention, or, as in [Job 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020), for a
hostile purpose. It may therefore be employed, like the synonyms in [Sa2
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#016) and [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006), to denote the reconnoitring of a
city. Jerusalem was not actually blockaded at the time when the prophet
uttered his predictions; but it was like a blockaded city. In the case
of such a city there is a desolate space, completely cleared of human
beings, left between it and the blockading army, in the centre of which
the city itself stands solitary and still, shut up to itself. The
citizens do not venture out; the enemy does not come within the circle
that immediately surrounds the city, for fear of the shots of the
citizens; and everything within this circle is destroyed, either by the
citizens themselves, to prevent the enemy from finding anything useful,
or else by the enemy, who cut down the trees. Thus, with all the joy
that might be felt at the preservation of Jerusalem, it presented but a
gloomy appearance. It was, as it were, in a state of siege. A proof that
this is the way in which the passage is to be explained, may be found in
[Jer 4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#016), where the actual
storming of Jerusalem is foretold, and the enemy is called nozerim,
probably with reference to the simile before us.

[Isaiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 1:9</span></span>

For the present, however, Jerusalem was saved from this extremity. The
omnipotence of God had mercifully preserved it: "Unless Jehovah of hosts
had left us a little of what had escaped, we had become like Sodom, we
were like Gomorrah." Sarid (which is rendered inaccurately σπέρμα in the
Sept.; cf., [Rom 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)) was used, even
in the early Mosaic usage of the language, to signify that which escaped
the general destruction ([Deu 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#034),
etc.); and כּמעט (which might very well be connected with the verbs
which follow: "we were very nearly within a little like Sodom," etc.) is
to be taken in connection with sarid, as the pausal form clearly shows:
"a remnant which was but a mere trifle" (on this use of the word, see
[Isa 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014); [Ch2
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#007); [Pro
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#020); [Psa
105:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#012)). Jehovah Zebaoth stands first,
for the sake of emphasis. It would have been all over with Israel long
ago, if it had not been for the compassion of God (vid., [Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008)). And because it was the
omnipotence of God, which set the will of His compassion in motion, He
is called Jehovah Zebaoth, Jehovah (the God) of the heavenly hosts - an
expression in which Zebaoth is a dependent genitive, and not, as
Luzzatto supposes, an independent name of God as the Absolute, embracing
within itself all the powers of nature. The prophet says "us" and "we."
He himself was an inhabitant of Jerusalem; and even if he had not been
so, he was nevertheless an Israelite. He therefore associates himself
with his people, like Jeremiah in [Lam
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022). He had had to experience the
anger of God along with the rest; and so, on the other hand, he also
celebrates the mighty compassion of God, which he had experienced in
common with them. But for this compassion, the people of God would have
become like Sodom, from which only four human beings escaped: it would
have resembled Gomorrah, which was absolutely annihilated. (On the
prefects in the protasis and apodosis, see Ges. 126, 5.)

[Isaiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 1:10</span></span>

The prophet's address has here reached a resting-place. The fact that it
is divided at this point into two separate sections, is indicated in the
text by the space left between [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009) and [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010). This mode of marking larger or
smaller sections, either by leaving spaces of by breaking off the line,
is older than the vowel points and accents, and rests upon a tradition
of the highest antiquity (Hupfeld, Gram. p. 86ff.). The space is called
pizka; the section indicated by such a space, a closed parashah
(sethumah); and the section indicated by breaking off the line, an open
parashah (petuchah). The prophet stops as soon as he has affirmed, that
nothing but the mercy of God has warded off from Israel the utter
destruction which it so well deserved. He catches in spirit the
remonstrances of his hearers. They would probably declare that the
accusations which the prophet had brought against them were utterly
groundless, and appeal to their scrupulous observance of the law of God.
In reply to this self-vindication which he reads in the hearts of the
accused, the prophet launches forth the accusations of God. In [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010), [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011), he commences thus: "Hear the
word of Jehovah, ye Sodom judges; give ear to the law of our God, O
Gomorrah nation! What is the multitude of your slain-offerings to me?
saith Jehovah. I am satiated with whole offerings of rams, and the fat
of stalled calves; and blood of bullocks and sheep and he-goats I do not
like." The second start in the prophet's address commences, like the
first, with "hear" and "give ear." The summons to hear is addressed in
this instances (as in the case of Isaiah's contemporary Micah, [Mic
3:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001)) to the kezinim (from kâzâh,
decidere, from which comes the Arabic el-Kadi, the judge, with the
substantive termination in: see Jeshurun, p. 212 ss.), i.e., to the men
of decisive authority, the rulers in the broadest sense, and to the
people subject to them. It was through the mercy of God that Jerusalem
was in existence still, for Jerusalem was "spiritually Sodom," as the
Revelation ([Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)) distinctly
affirms of Jerusalem, with evident allusion to this passage of Isaiah.
Pride, lust of the flesh, and unmerciful conduct, were the leading sins
of Sodom, according to [Eze 16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049); and
of these, the rulers of Jerusalem, and the crowd that was subject to
them and worthy of them, were equally guilty now. But they fancied that
they could not possibly stand in such evil repute with God, inasmuch as
they rendered outward satisfaction to the law. The prophet therefore
called upon them to hear the law of the God of Israel, which he would
announce to them: for the prophet was the appointed interpreter of the
law, and prophecy the spirit of the law, and the prophetic institution
the constant living presence of the true essence of the law bearing its
own witness in Israel. "To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me? saith Jehovah." The prophet intentionally uses the
word יאמר, not אמר: this was the incessant appeal of God in relation to
the spiritless, formal worship offered by the hypocritical, ceremonial
righteousness of Israel (the future denoting continuous actions, which
is ever at the same time both present and future). The multitude of
zebâchim, i.e., animal sacrifices, had no worth at all to Him. As the
whole worship is summed up here in one single act, zebâchim appears to
denote the shelamim, peace-offerings (or better still, communion
offerings), with which a meal was associated, after the style of a
sacrificial festival, and Jehovah gave the worshipper a share in the
sacrifice offered. It is better, however, to take zebâchim as the
general name for all the bleeding sacrifices, which are then subdivided
into 'oloth and Cheleb, as consisting partly of whole offerings, or
offerings the whole of which was placed upon the altar, though in
separate pieces, and entirely consumed, and partly of those sacrifices
in which only the fat was consumed upon the altar, namely the
sin-offerings, trespass-offerings, and pre-eminently the shelâmim
offerings. Of the sacrificial animals mentioned, the bullocks (pârim)
and fed beasts (meri'im, fattened calves) are species of oxen (bakar);
and the lambs (Cebashim) and he-goats (atturim, young he-goats, as
distinguished from se'ir, the old long-haired he-goat, the animal used
as a sin-offering), together with the ram (ayil, the customary whole
offering of the high priest, of the tribe prince, and of the nation
generally on all the high feast days), were species of the flock. The
blood of these sacrificial animals - such, for example, as the young
oxen, sheep, and he-goats - was thrown all round the altar in the case
of the whole offering, the peace-offering, and the trespass-offering; in
that of the sin-offering it was smeared upon the horns of the altar,
poured out at the foot of the altar, and in some instances sprinkled
upon the walls of the altar, or against the vessels of the inner
sanctuary. Of such offerings as these Jehovah was weary, and He wanted
no more (the two perfects denote that which long has been and still is:
Ges. 126, 3); in fact, He never had desired anything of the kind.

[Isaiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 1:12</span></span>

Jeremiah says this with regard to the sacrifices ([Isa
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022)); Isaiah also applies it to
visits to the temple: "When ye come to appear before my face, who hath
required this at your hand, to tread my courts?" לראות is a contracted
infinitive niphal for להראות (compare the hiphil forms contracted in the
same manner in [Isa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008); [Isa
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#011)). This is the standing
expression for the appearance of all male Israelites in the temple at
the three high festivals, as prescribed by the law, and then for visits
to the temple generally (cf., [Psa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003); [Psa
84:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#008)). "My face" (panai): according to
Ewald, 279, c, this is used with the passive to designate the subject
("to be seen by the face of God"); but why not rather take it as an
adverbial accusative, "in the face of," or "in front of," as it is used
interchangeably with the prepositions ל, את, and אל? It is possible that
לראות is pointed as it is here, and in [Exo
34:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#024) and in [Deu
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#011), instead of לראות - like יראוּ
for יראוּ, in [Exo 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015); [Exo
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#020), - for the purpose of avoiding
an expression which might be so easily misunderstood as denoting a sight
of God with the bodily eye. But the niphal is firmly established in [Exo
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017); [Exo
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#023), and [Sa1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#022); and in the Mishnah and Talmud
the terms ראיה and ראיון are applied without hesitation to appearance
before God at the principal feasts. They visited the temple diligently
enough indeed, but who had required this at their hand, i.e., required
them to do this? Jehovah certainly had not. "To tread my courts" is in
apposition to this, which it more clearly defines. Jehovah did not want
them to appear before His face, i.e., He did not wish for this
spiritless and undevotional tramping thither, this mere opus operatum,
which might as well have been omitted, since it only wore out the floor.

[Isaiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 1:13</span></span>

Because they had not performed what Jehovah commanded as He commanded
it, He expressly forbids them to continue it. "Continue not to bring
lying meat-offering; abomination incense is it to me." Minchah (the
meat-offering) was the vegetable offering, as distinguished from zebach,
the animal sacrifice. It is called a "lying meat-offering," as being a
hypocritical dead work, behind which there was none of the feeling which
it appeared to express. In the second clause the Sept., Vulg., Gesenius,
and others adopt the rendering "incense - an abomination is it to me,"
ketoreth being taken as the name of the daily burning of incense upon
the golden altar in the holy place ([Exo
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008)). But neither in [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002), where prayer is offered by one
who is not a priest, nor in the passage before us, where the reference
is not to the priesthood, but to the people and to their deeds, is this
continual incense to be thought of. Moreover, it is much more natural to
regard the word ketoreth not as a bold absolute case, but, according to
the conjunctive darga with which it is marked, as constructive rather;
and this is perfectly allowable. The meat-offering is called "incense"
(ketoreth) with reference to the so-called azcarah, i.e., that portion
which the priest burned upon the altar, to bring the grateful offerer
into remembrance before God (called "burning the memorial," hiktir
azcârâh, in [Lev 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002)). As a general
rule, this was accompanied with incense ([Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)), the whole of which was placed
upon the altar, and not merely a small portion of it. The meat-offering,
with its sweet-smelling savour, was merely the form, which served as an
outward expression of the thanksgiving for God's blessing, or the
longing for His blessing, which really ascended in prayer. But in their
case the form had no such meaning. It was nothing but the form, with
which they thought they had satisfied God; and therefore it was an
abomination to Him. [Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013). God was
just as little pleased with their punctilious observance of the feasts:
"New-moon and Sabbath, calling of festal meetings ... I cannot bear
ungodliness and a festal crowd." The first objective notions, which are
logically governed by "I cannot bear" (לא־אוּכל: literally, a future
hophal - I am unable, incapable, viz., to bear, which may be supplied,
according to [Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005); [Jer
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022); [Pro
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#021)), become absolute cases here, on
account of another grammatical object presenting itself in the last two
nouns: "ungodliness and a festal crowd." As for new-moon and Sabbath
(the latter always signifies the weekly Sabbath when construed with
Chodesh) - and, in fact, the calling of meetings of the whole
congregation on the weekly Sabbath and high festivals, which was a
simple duty according to Lev 23 - Jehovah could not endure festivals
associated with wickedness. עצרה (from עצר, to press, or crowd thickly
together) is synonymous with מקרא), so far as its immediate
signification is concerned, as [Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001) clearly shows, just as πανήγυρις
is synonymous with εκκλησία . און (from אוּן, to breathe) is moral
worthlessness, regarded as an utter absence of all that has true essence
and worth in the sight of God. The prophet intentionally joins these two
nouns together. A densely crowded festal meeting, combined with inward
emptiness and barrenness on the part of those who were assembled
together, was a contradiction which God could not endure.

[Isaiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 1:14</span></span>

He gives a still stronger expression to His repugnance: "Your new-moons
and your festive seasons my soul hateth; they have become a burden to
me; I am weary of bearing them." As the soul (nephesh) of a man,
regarded as the band which unites together bodily and spiritual life,
though it is not the actual principle of self-consciousness, is yet the
place in which he draws, as it were, the circle of self-consciousness,
so as to comprehend the whole essence of His being in the single thought
of "I;" so, according to a description taken from godlike man, the
"soul" (nephesh) of God, as the expression "my soul" indicates, is the
centre of His being, regarded as encircled and pervaded (personated) by
self-consciousness; and therefore, whatever the soul of God hates (vid.,
[Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)) or loves ([Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)), is hated or loved in the inmost
depths and to the utmost bounds of His being (Psychol. p. 218). Thus He
hated each and all of the festivals that were kept in Jerusalem, whether
the beginnings of the month, or the high feast-days (moadim, in which,
according to Lev 23, the Sabbath was also included) observed in the
course of the month. For a long time past they had become a burden and
annoyance to Him: His long-suffering was weary of such worship. "To
bear" (נשׂא), in Isaiah, even in [Isa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003), for שׂאת or שׂאת ro , and here
for לשׂאת: Ewald, 285, c) has for its object the seasons of worship
already mentioned.

[Isaiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 1:15</span></span>

Their self-righteousness, so far as it rested upon sacrifices and festal
observances, was now put to shame, and the last inward bulwark of the
sham holy nation was destroyed: "And if ye stretch out your hands, I
hide my eyes from you; if ye make ever so much praying, I do not hear:
your hands are full of blood." Their praying was also an abomination to
God. Prayer is something common to man: it is the interpreter of
religious feeling, which intervenes and mediates between God and man;

(Note: The primary idea of hithpallel and tephillah is not to be
obtained from [Deu 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018) and [Ezr
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#001), as Dietrich and Frst suppose,
who make hithpallel equivalent to hithnappel, to throw one's self down;
but from [Sa1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025), "If a man sin
against a man, the authorities right him" (וּפללו אלהים: it is quite a
mistake to maintain that Elohim cannot have this meaning), i.e., they
can set right the relation which he has disturbed. "But if one sin
against Jehovah, who shall mediate for him (מי יתפּלּל־לו, quis
intercedat pro eo)?" We may see from this that prayer is regarded as
mediation, which sets right and establishes fellowship; and hithpallel
signifies to make one's self a healer of divisions, or to settle for
one's self, to strive after a settlement (sibi, pro se, intercedere:
cf., [Job 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#016), hithchannen, sibi
propitium facere; [Job 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027),
hithchakkah, sibi insculpere, like the Arabic ichtatta, to bound off for
one's self).)

it is the true spiritual sacrifice. The law contains no command to pray,
and, with the exception of Deut 26, no form of prayer. Praying is so
natural to man as man, that there was no necessity for any precept to
enforce this, the fundamental expression of the true relation to God.
The prophet therefore comes to prayer last of all, so as to trace back
their sham-holiness, which was corrupt even to this the last foundation,
to its real nothingness. "Spread out," parash, or pi pērēsh, to stretch
out; used with Cappaim to denote swimming in [Isa
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#011). It is written here before a
strong suffix, as in many other passages, e.g., [Isa
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012), with the inflection i instead
of e. This was the gesture of a man in prayer, who spread out his hands,
and when spread out, stretched them towards heaven, or to the most holy
place in the temple, and indeed (as if with the feeling of emptiness and
need, and with a desire to receive divine gifts) held up the hollow or
palm of his hand (Cappaim: cf., tendere palmas, e.g., Virg. Aen. xii.
196, tenditque ad sidera palmas). However much they might stand or lie
before Him in the attitude of prayer, Jehovah hid His eyes, i.e., His
omniscience knew nothing of it; and even though they might pray loud and
long (gam chi, etiamsi: compare the simple Chi, [Jer
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#012)), He was, as it were, deaf to it
all. We should expect Chi here to introduce the explanation; but the
more excited the speaker, the shorter and more unconnected his words.
The plural damim always denotes human blood as the result of some
unnatural act, and then the bloody deed and the bloodguiltiness itself.
The plural number neither refers to the quantity nor to the separate
drops, but is the plural of production, which Dietrich has so
elaborately discussed in his Abhandlung, p. 40.

(Note: As Chittah signified corn standing in the field, and Chittim corn
threshed and brought to the market, so damim was not blood when flowing
through the veins, but when it had flowed out-in other words, when it
had been violently shed. (For the Talmudic misinterpretation of the true
state of the case, see my Genesis, p. 626.))

The terrible damim stands very emphatically before the governing verb,
pointing to many murderous acts that had been committed, and deeds of
violence akin to murder. Not, indeed, that we are to understand the
words as meaning that there was really blood upon their hands when they
stretched them out in prayer; but before God, from whom no outward show
can hide the true nature of things, however clean they might have washed
themselves, they still dripped with blood. The expostulations of the
people against the divine accusations have thus been negatively set
forth and met in [Isa 1:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011) :
Jehovah could not endure their work-righteous worship, which was thus
defiled with unrighteous works, even to murder itself. The divine
accusation is now positively established in [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016), [Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017), by the contrast drawn between
the true righteousness of which the accused were destitute, and the
false righteousness of which they boasted. The crushing charge is here
changed into an admonitory appeal; and the love which is hidden behind
the wrath, and would gladly break through, already begins to disclose
itself. There are eight admonitions. The first three point to the
removal of evil; the other five to the performance of what is good.

[Isaiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 1:16</span></span>

The first three run thus: "Wash, clean yourselves; put away the badness
of your doings from the range of my eyes; cease to do evil." This is not
only an advance from figurative language to the most literal, but there
is also an advance in what is said. The first admonition requires,
primarily and above all, purification from the sins committed, by means
of forgiveness sought for and obtained. Wash: rachatzu, from râchatz, in
the frequent middle sense of washing one's self. Clean yourselves:
hizdaccu, with the tone upon the last syllable, is not the niphal of
zâkak, as the first plur. imper. niph. of such verbs has generally and
naturally the tone upon the penultimate (see [Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011); [Num
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010)), but the hithpael of zacah for
hizdaccu, with the preformative Tav resolved into the first radical
letter, as is very common in the hithpael (Ges. 54, 2, b). According to
the difference between the two synonyms (to wash one's self, to clean
one's self), the former must be understood as referring to the one great
act of repentance on the part of a man who is turning to God, the latter
to the daily repentance of one who has so turned. The second admonition
requires them to place themselves in the light of the divine
countenance, and put away the evil of their doings, which was
intolerable to pure eyes ([Hab 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)).
They were to wrestle against the wickedness to which their actual sin
had grown, until at length it entirely disappeared. Neged, according to
its radical meaning, signifies prominence (compare the Arabic ne‛gd,
high land which is visible at a great distance), conspicuousness, so
that minneged is really equivalent to ex apparentia.

[Isaiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 1:17</span></span>

Five admonitions relating to the practice of what is good: "Learn to do
good, attend to judgment, set the oppressor right, do justice to the
orphan, conduct the cause of the widow." The first admonition lays the
foundation for the rest. They were to learn to do good - a difficult
art, in which a man does not become proficient merely by good
intentions. "Learn to do good:" hetib is the object to limdu (learn),
regarded as an accusative; the inf. abs. הרע in [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016) takes the place of the object in
just the same manner. The division of this primary admonition into four
minor ones relating to the administration of justice, may be explained
from the circumstance that no other prophet directs so keen an eye upon
the state and its judicial proceedings as Isaiah has done. He differs in
this respect from his younger contemporary Micah, whose prophecies are
generally more ethical in their nature, whilst those of Isaiah have a
political character throughout. Hence the admonitions: "Give diligent
attention to judgment" (dârash, to devote one's self to a thing with
zeal and assiduity); and "bring the oppressor to the right way." This is
the true rendering, as Châmotz (from Châmatz, to be sharp in flavour,
glaring in appearance, violent and impetuous in character) cannot well
mean "the oppressed," or the man who is deprived of his rights, as most
of the early translators have rendered it, since this form of the noun,
especially with an immutable kametz like בּגוד בּגודה (cf., נקד נקּדּה),
is not used in a passive, but in an active or attributive sense (Ewald,
152, b: vid., at [Psa 137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008)): it has
therefore the same meaning as Chomeotz in [Psa
71:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#004), and âshok in [Jer
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#003), which is similar in its form.
But if Châmotz signifies the oppressive, reckless, churlish man, אשּׁר
cannot mean to make happy, or to congratulate, or to set up, or, as in
the talmudic rendering, to strengthen (Luzzatto: rianimate chi
oppresso); but, as it is also to be rendered in [Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012); [Isa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015), to lead to the straight road, or
to cause a person to keep the straight course. In the case before us,
where the oppressor is spoken of, it means to direct him to the way of
justice, to keep him in bounds by severe punishment and discipline.

(Note: The Talmud varies in its explanation of Chamoz: in one instance
it is applied to a judge who lets his sentence be thoroughly leavened
before pronouncing it; in another the Chamuz is said to signify a person
robbed and injured, in opposition to Chomez (b. Sanhedrin 35a). It is an
instructive fact in relation to the idea suggested by the word, that,
according to Joma 39b, a man who had not only taken possession of his
own inheritance, but had seized upon another person's also, bore the
nickname of ben chimzon as long as he lived.)

In the same way we find in other passages, such as [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004) and [Psa
72:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#004), severe conduct towards
oppressors mentioned in connection with just treatment of the poor.
There follow two admonitions relating to widows and orphans. Widows and
orphans, as well as foreigners, were the protgs of God and His law,
standing under His especial guardianship and care (see, for example,
[Exo 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022) (21), cf., [Exo
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#021) (20). "Do justice to the orphan"
(Shâphat, as in [Deu 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001), is a
contracted expression for shâphat mishpat): for if there is not even a
settlement or verdict in their cause, this is the most crying injustice
of all, as neither the form nor the appearance of justice is preserved.
"Conduct the cause of the widows:" ריב with an accusative, as in [Isa
51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022), the only other passage in which
it occurs, is a contracted form for ריב ריב. Thus all the grounds of
self-defence, which existed in the hearts of the accused, are both
negatively and positively overthrown. They are thundered down and put to
shame. The law (thorah), announced in [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010), has been preached to them. The
prophet has cast away the husks of their dead works, and brought out the
moral kernel of the law in its universal application.

[Isaiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 1:18</span></span>

The first leading division of the address is brought to a close, and
[Isa 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018) contains the turning-point
between the two parts into which it is divided. Hitherto Jehovah has
spoken to His people in wrath. But His love began to move even in the
admonitions in [Isa 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016), [Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017). And now this love, which desired
not Israel's destruction, but Israel's inward and outward salvation,
breaks fully through. "O come, and let us reason together, saith
Jehovah. If your sins come forth like scarlet cloth, they shall become
white as snow; if they are red as crimson, they shall come forth like
wool!" Jehovah here challenges Israel to a formal trial: nocach is thus
used in a reciprocal sense, and with the same meaning as nishpat in [Isa
43:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026) (Ges. 51, 2). In such a trial
Israel must lose, for Israel's self-righteousness rests upon sham
righteousness; and this sham righteousness, when rightly examined, is
but unrighteousness dripping with blood. It is taken for granted that
this must be the result of the investigation. Israel is therefore worthy
of death. Yet Jehovah will not treat Israel according to His retributive
justice, but according to His free compassion. He will remit the
punishment, and not only regard the sin as not existing, but change it
into its very opposite. The reddest possible sin shall become, through
His mercy, the purest white. On the two hiphils here applied to colour,
see Ges. 53, 2; though he gives the meaning incorrectly, viz., "to take
a colour," whereas the words signify rather to emit a colour: not
Colorem accipere, but Colorem dare. Shâni, bright red (the plural
shânim, as in [Pro 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#021), signifies
materials dyed with shâni), and tolâ, warm colour, are simply different
names for the same colour, viz., the crimson obtained from the cochineal
insect, Color cocccineus. The representation of the work of grace
promised by God as a change from red to white, is founded upon the
symbolism of colours, quite as much as when the saints in the Revelation
([Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)) are described as clothed
in white raiment, whilst the clothing of Babylon is purple and scarlet
([Isa 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004)). Red is the colour of
fire, and therefore of life: the blood is red because life is a fiery
process. For this reason the heifer, from which the ashes of
purification were obtained for those who had been defiled through
contact with the dead, was to be red; and the sprinkling-brush, with
which the unclean were sprinkled, was to be tied round with a band of
scarlet wool. But red as contrasted with white, the colour of light
([Mat 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002)), is the colour of selfish,
covetous, passionate life, which is self-seeking in its nature, which
goes out of itself only to destroy, and drives about with wild
tempestuous violence: it is therefore the colour of wrath and sin. It is
generally supposed that Isaiah speaks of red as the colour of sin,
because sin ends in murder; and this is not really wrong, though it is
too restricted. Sin is called red, inasmuch as it is a burning heat
which consumes a man, and when it breaks forth consumes his fellow-man
as well. According to the biblical view, throughout, sin stands in the
same relation to what is well-pleasing to God, and wrath in the same
relation to love or grace, as fire to light; and therefore as red to
white, or black to white, for red and black are colours which border
upon one another. In the Song of Solomon ([Isa
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#005)), the black locks of Shulamith are
described as being "like purple," and Homer applies the same epithet to
the dark waves of the sea. But the ground of this relation lies deeper
still. Red is the colour of fire, which flashes out of darkness and
returns to it again; whereas white without any admixture of darkness
represents the pure, absolute triumph of light. It is a deeply
significant symbol of the act of justification. Jehovah offers to Israel
an actio forensis, out of which it shall come forth justified by grace,
although it has merited death on account of its sins. The righteousness,
white as snow and wool, with which Israel comes forth, is a gift
conferred upon it out of pure compassion, without being conditional upon
any legal performance whatever.

[Isaiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 1:19</span></span>

But after the restoration of Israel in integrum by this act of grace,
the rest would unquestionably depend upon the conduct of Israel itself.
According to Israel's own decision would Jehovah determine Israel's
future. "If ye then shall willingly hear, ye shall eat the good of the
land; if ye shall obstinately rebel, ye shall be eaten by the sword: for
the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it." After their justification, both
blessing and cursing lay once more before the justified, as they had
both been long before proclaimed by the law (compare [Isa
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019) with [Deu
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003)., [Lev
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#003)., and [Isa
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020) with the threat of vengeance with
the sword in [Lev 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#025)). The promise
of eating, i.e., of the full enjoyment of domestic blessings, and
therefore of settled, peaceful rest at home, is placed in contrast with
the curse of being eaten with the sword. Chereb (the sword) is the
accusative of the instrument, as in [Psa
17:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013); but this adverbial
construction without either genitive, adjective, or suffix, as in [Exo
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#020), is very rarely met with (Ges.
138, Anm. 3); and in the passage before us it is a bold construction
which the prophet allows himself, instead of saying, חרב תּאכלכם, for
the sake of the paronomasia (Bttcher, Collectanea, p. 161). In the
conditional clauses the two futures are followed by two preterites
(compare [Lev 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021), which is more in
conformity with our western mode of expression), inasmuch as obeying and
rebelling are both of them consequences of an act of will: if ye shall
be willing, and in consequence of this obey; if ye shall refuse, and
rebel against Jehovah. They are therefore, strictly speaking, perfecta
consecutiva. According to the ancient mode of writing, the passage [Isa
1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018) formed a separate parashah by
themselves, viz., a sethumah, or parashah indicated by spaces left
within the line. The piskah after [Isa
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020) corresponds to a long pause in
the mind of the speaker. - Will Israel tread the saving path of
forgiveness thus opened before it, and go on to renewed obedience, and
will it be possible for it to be brought back by this path? Individuals
possibly may, but not the whole. The divine appeal therefore changes now
into a mournful complaint. So peaceful a solution as this of the discord
between Jehovah and His children was not to be hoped for. Jerusalem was
far too depraved.

[Isaiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 1:21</span></span>

"How is she become a harlot, the faithful citadel! she, full of right,
lodged in righteousness, and now-murderers." It is the keynote of an
elegy (kinah) which is sounded here. איכה, and but rarely איך, which is
an abbreviated form, is expressive of complaint and amazement. This
longer form, like a long-drawn sigh, is a characteristic of the kinah.
The kinoth (Lamentations) of Jeremiah commence with it, and receive
their title from it; whereas the shorter form is indicative of scornful
complaining, and is characteristic of the mâshōl (e.g., [Isa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004), [Isa
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012); [Mic
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004)). From this word, which gives the
keynote, the rest all follows, soft, full, monotonous, long drawn out
and slow, just in the style of an elegy. We may see clearly enough that
forms like מלאתי for מלאת, softened by lengthening, were adapted to
elegiac compositions, from the first v. of the Lamentations of Jeremiah,
where three of these forms occur. Jerusalem had previously been a
faithful city, i.e., one stedfastly adhering to the covenant of Jehovah
with her (vid., [Psa 78:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037)).

(Note: We have translated the word kiryah "citadel" (Burg), instead of
"city;" but Burg also became the name of the town which sprang up around
the citadel, and the persons living in and around the Burg or citadel
were called burgenses, "burghers." Jerusalem, which was also called
Zion, might be called, with quite as much right, a citadel (Burg), as a
city.)

This covenant was a marriage covenant. And she had broken it, and had
thereby become a zonâh (harlot) - a prophetic view, the germs of which
had already been given in the Pentateuch, where the worship of idols on
the part of Israel is called whoring after them ([Deu
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016); [Exo
34:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015); in all, seven times). It was
not, however, merely gross outward idolatry which made the church of God
a "harlot," but infidelity of heart, in whatever form it might express
itself; so that Jesus described the people of His own time as an
"adulterous generation," notwithstanding the pharisaical strictness with
which the worship of Jehovah was then observed. For, as the v. before us
indicates, this marriage relation was founded upon right and
righteousness in the broadest sense: mishpat, "right," i.e., a
realization of right answering to the will of God as positively
declared; and tzedek, "righteousness," i.e., a righteous state moulded
by that will, or a righteous course of conduct regulated according to it
(somewhat different, therefore, from the more qualitative tzedâkâh).
Jerusalem was once full of such right; and righteousness was not merely
there in the form of a hastily passing guest, but had come down from
above to take up her permanent abode in Jerusalem: she tarried there day
and night as if it were her home. The prophet had in his mind the times
of David and Solomon, and also more especially the time of Jehoshaphat
(about one hundred and fifty years before Isaiah's appearance), who
restored the administration of justice, which had fallen into neglect
since the closing years of Solomon's reign and the time of Rehoboam and
Abijah, to which Asa's reformation had not extended, and re-organized it
entirely in the spirit of the law. It is possible also that Jehoiada,
the high priest in the time of Joash, may have revived the institutions
of Jehoshaphat, so far as they had fallen into disuse under his three
godless successors; but even in the second half of the reign of Joash,
the administration of justice fell into the same disgraceful state, at
least as compared with the times of David, Solomon, and Jehoshaphat, as
that in which Isaiah found it. The glaring contrast between the present
and the past is indicated by the expression "and now." In all the
correct MSS and editions, mishpat is not accented with zakeph, but with
rebia; and bâh, which ought to have zakeph, is accented with tiphchah,
on account of the brevity of the following clause. In this way the
statement as to the past condition is sufficiently distinguished from
that relating to the present.

(Note: It is well known that rebia has less force as a disjunctive than
tiphchah, and that zakeph is stronger then either. With regard to the
law, according to which bâh has rebia instead of zakeph, see Br, Thorath
Emeth, p. 70. To the copies enumerated by Luzzatto, as having the
correct accentuation (including Brescia 1494, and Venice, by J. B.
Chayim, 1526), we may add Plantin (1582), Buxtorf (1618), Nissel (1662),
and many others (cf., Dachselt's Biblia accentuata, which is not yet out
of date).)

Formerly righteousness, now "murderers" (merazzechim), and indeed, as
distinguished from rozechim, murderers by profession, who formed a band,
like king Ahab and his son ([Kg2
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#032)). The contrast was as glaring as
possible, since murder is the direct opposite, the most crying
violation, of righteousness.

[Isaiah 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 1:22</span></span>

The complaint now turns from the city generally to the authorities, and
first of all figuratively. "Thy silver has become dross, thy drink
mutilated with water." It is upon this passage that the figurative
language of [Jer 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027). and [Eze
22:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#018) is founded. Silver is here a
figurative representation of the princes and lords, with special
reference to the nobility of character naturally associated with
nobility of birth and rank; for silver - refined silver - is an image of
all that is noble and pure, light in all its purity being reflected by
it (Bhr, Symbolik, i. 284). The princes and lords had once possessed all
the virtues which the Latins called unitedly Candor animi, viz., the
virtues of magnanimity, affability, impartiality, and superiority to
bribes. This silver had now become l'sigim, dross, or base metal
separated (thrown off) from silver in the process of refining (sig, pl.
sigim, siggim from sug, recedere, refuse left in smelting, or dross:
cf., [Pro 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#004); [Pro
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#023)). A second figure compares the
leading men of the older Jerusalem to good wine, such as drinkers like.
The word employed here (sobe) must have been used in this sense by the
more cultivated classes in Isaiah's time (cf., [Nah
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#010)). This pure, strong, and costly
wine was now adulterated with water (lit. castratum, according to
Pliny's expression in the Natural History: compare the Horatian phrase,
jugulare Falernum), and therefore its strength and odour were weakened,
and its worth was diminished. The present was nothing but the dross and
shadow of the past.

[Isaiah 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 1:23</span></span>

In [Isa 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023) the prophet says this
without a figure: "Thy rulers are rebellious, and companions of thieves;
every one loveth presents, and hunteth after payment; the orphan they
right not, and the cause of the widow has no access to them." In two
words the prophet depicts the contemptible baseness of the national
rulers (sârim). He describes first of all their baseness in relation to
God, with the alliterative sorerim: rebellious, refractory; and then, in
relation to men, companions of thieves, inasmuch as they allowed
themselves to be bribed by presents of stolen goods to acts of injustice
towards those who had been robbed. They not only willingly accepted such
bribes, and that not merely a few of them, but every individual
belonging to the rank of princes (Cullo, equivalent to haccol, the
whole: every one loveth gifts); but they went eagerly in pursuit of them
(rodeph). It was not peace (shâlom) that they hunted after ([Psa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)), but shalmonimshalmonim, things
that would pacify their avarice; not what was good, but compensation for
their partiality. - This was the existing state of Jerusalem, and
therefore it would hardly be likely to take the way of mercy opened
before it in [Isa 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018); consequently
Jehovah would avail himself of other means of setting it right.

[Isaiah 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 1:24</span></span>

"Therefore, saying of the Lord, of Jehovah of hosts, of the Strong One
of Israel: Ah! I will relieve myself on mine adversaries, and will
avenge myself upon mine enemies." Salvation through judgment was the
only means of improvement and preservation left to the congregation,
which called itself by the name of Jerusalem. Jehovah would therefore
afford satisfaction to His holiness, and administer a judicial sifting
to Jerusalem. There is no other passage in Isaiah in which we meet with
such a crowding together of different names of God as we do here
(compare [Isa 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#004); [Isa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001); [Isa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016), [Isa
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033); [Isa
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#015)). With three names, descriptive
of the irresistible omnipotence of God, the irrevocable decree of a
sifting judgment is sealed. The word נאּם, which is used here instead of
אמר and points back to a verb נאם, related to נהם and המה, corresponds
to the deep, earnest pathos of the words. These verbs, which are
imitations of sounds, all denote a dull hollow groaning. The word used
here, therefore, signifies that which is spoken with significant secrecy
and solemn softness. It is never written absolutely, but is always
followed by the subject who speaks (saying of Jehovah it is, i.e.,
Jehovah says). We meet with it first of all in [Gen
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016). In the prophetic writings it
occurs in Obadiah and Joel, but most frequently in Jeremiah and Ezekiel.
It is generally written at the close of the sentence, or parenthetically
in the middle; very rarely at the commencement, as it is here and in
[Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030) and [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). The "saying" commences with hoi
(ah!), the painfulness of pity being mingled with the determined
outbreak of wrath. By the side of the niphal nikkam min (to be revenged
upon a person) we find the niphal nicham (lit. to console one's self).
The two words are derived from kindred roots. The latter is conjugated
with ĕ in the preformative syllable, the former with i, according to the
older system of vowel-pointing adopted in the East.

(Note: The so-called Assyrian mode of pointing, which was entirely
supplanted, with the exception of a few relics, by the Tiberian mode
which now lies before us, has no seghol (see DMZ. xviii. 322). According
to Luzzatto (Proleg. p. 200), they wrote ektol instead of iktol, to
avoid confounding it with יקטל, which was pronounced iktol, and not
yiktol.)

Jehovah would procure Himself relief from His enemies by letting out
upon them the wrath with which He had hitherto been burdened ([Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013)). He now calls the masses of
Jerusalem by their right name.

[Isaiah 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 1:25</span></span>

[Isa 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025) states clearly in what the
revenge consisted with which Jehovah was inwardly burdened (innakmah, a
cohortative with the ah, indicating internal oppression): "And I will
bring my hand over thee, and will smelt out thy dross as with alkali,
and will clear away all thy lead." As long as God leaves a person's
actions or sufferings alone, His hand, i.e., His acting, is at rest.
Bringing the hand over a person signifies a movement of the hand, which
has been hitherto at rest, either for the purpose of inflicting judicial
punishment upon the person named ([Amo
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#008); [Jer
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009); [Eze
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012); [Psa
81:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#015)), or else, though this is seldom
the case, for the purpose of saving him ([Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)). The reference here is to the
divine treatment of Jerusalem, in which punishment and salvation were
combined - punishment as the means, salvation as the end. The
interposition of Jehovah was, as it were, a smelting, which would sweep
away, not indeed Jerusalem itself, but the ungodly in Jerusalem. They
are compared to dross, or (as the verb seems to imply) to ore mixed with
dross, and, inasmuch as lead is thrown off in the smelting of silver, to
such ingredients of lead as Jehovah would speedily and thoroughly
remove, "like alkali," i.e., "as if with alkali" (Cabbor, Comparatio
decurtata, for C'babbor: for this mode of dropping Beth after Caph,
compare [Isa 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003); [Lev
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#013), and many other passages). By
bedilim (from bâdal, to separate) we are to understand the several
pieces of stannum or lead

(Note: Plumbum nigrum, says Pliny, n. n. xxiv. 16, is sometimes found
alone, and sometimes mixed with silver: ejus qui primus fluic in
fornacibus liquor, stannum appellatur. The reference here is to the lead
separated from the ore in the process of obtaining pure silver. In the
form of powder this dross is called bedil, and the pieces bedilim;
whereas ophereth is the name of solid lead, obtained by simply melting
down from ore which does not contain silver. The fact that bedil is also
apparently used as a name for tin, may be explained in the same way as
the homonymy of iron and basalt (Com. on [Job
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#002)), and of the oak and terebinth.
The two metals are called by the same name on account of their having a
certain outward resemblance, viz., in softness, pliability, colour, and
specific gravity.)

in which the silver is contained, and which are separated by smelting,
all the baser metals being distinguished from the purer kinds by the
fact that they are combustible (i.e., can be oxidized). Both bor, or
potash (an alkali obtained from land-plants), and nether, natron (i.e.,
soda, or natron obtained from the ashes of marine plants, which is also
met with in many mineral waters), have been employed from the very
earliest times to accelerate the process of smelting, for the purpose of
separating a metal from its ore.

[Isaiah 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 1:26</span></span>

As the threat couched in the previous figure does not point to the
destruction, but simply to the smelting of Jerusalem, there is nothing
strange in the fact that in [Isa 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026)
it should pass over into a pure promise; the meltingly soft and
yearningly mournful termination of the clauses with ayich, the keynote
of the later songs of Zion, being still continued. "And I will bring
back thy judges as in the olden time, and thy counsellors as in the
beginning; afterwards thou wilt be called city of righteousness,
faithful citadel." The threat itself was, indeed, relatively a promise,
inasmuch as whatever could stand the fire would survive the judgment;
and the distinct object of this was to bring back Jerusalem to the purer
metal of its own true nature. But when that had been accomplished, still
more would follow. The indestructible kernel that remained would be
crystallized, since Jerusalem would receive back from Jehovah the judges
and counsellors which it had had in the olden flourishing times of the
monarchy, ever since it had become the city of David and of the temple;
not, indeed, the very same persons, but persons quite equal to them in
excellence. Under such God-given leaders Jerusalem would become what it
had once been, and what it ought to be. The names applied to the city
indicate the impression produced by the manifestation of its true
nature. The second name is written without the article, as in fact the
word kiryah (city), with its massive, definite sound, always is in
Isaiah. Thus did Jehovah announce the way which it had been irrevocably
determined that He would take with Israel, as the only way to salvation.
Moreover, this was the fundamental principle of the government of God,
the law of Israel's history.

[Isaiah 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 1:27</span></span>

[Isa 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027) presents it in a brief and
concise form: "Sion will be redeemed through judgment, and her returning
ones through righteousness." Mishpat and tzedâkâh are used elsewhere for
divine gifts ([Isa 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#005); [Isa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#006)), for such conduct as is pleasing
to God ([Isa 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021); [Isa
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#016)), and for royal Messianic
virtues ([Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); [Isa
11:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003); [Isa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005); [Isa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001)). Here, however, where we are
helped by the context, they are to be interpreted according to such
parallel passages as [Isa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004); [Isa
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#016); [Isa
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017), as signifying God's right and
righteousness in their primarily judicious self-fulfilment. A judgment,
on the part of God the righteous One, would be the means by which Zion
itself, so far as it had remained faithful to Jehovah, and those who
were converted in the midst of the judgment, would be redeemed - a
judgment upon sinners and sin, by which the power that had held in
bondage the divine nature of Zion, so far as it still continued to
exist, would be broken, and in consequence of which those who turned to
Jehovah would be incorporated into His true church. Whilst, therefore,
God was revealing Himself in His punitive righteousness; He was working
out a righteousness which would be bestowed as a gift of grace upon
those who escaped the former. The notion of "righteousness" is now
following a New Testament track. In front it has the fire of the law;
behind, the love of the gospel. Love is concealed behind the wrath, like
the sun behind the thunder-clouds. Zion, so far as it truly is or is
becoming Zion, is redeemed, and none but the ungodly are destroyed. But,
as is added in the next verse, the latter takes place without mercy.

[Isaiah 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 1:28</span></span>

"And breaking up of the rebellious and sinners together; and those who
forsake Jehovah will perish." The judicial side of the approaching act
of redemption is here expressed in a way that all can understand. The
exclamatory substantive clause in the first half of the v. is explained
by a declaratory verbal clause in the second. The "rebellious" were
those who had both inwardly and outwardly broken away from Jehovah;
"sinners," those who were living in open sins; and "those who forsake
Jehovah," such as had become estranged from God in either of these ways.

[Isaiah 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 1:29</span></span>

[Isa 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029) declares how God's judgment
of destruction would fall upon all of these. The v. is introduced with
an explanatory "for" (Chi): "For they become ashamed of the terebinths,
in which ye had your delight; and ye must blush for the gardens, in
which ye took pleasure." The terebinths and gardens (the second word
with the article, as in [Hab 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008),
first binharim, then banneharim) are not referred to as objects of
luxury, as Hitzig and Drechsler assume, but as unlawful places of
worship and objects of worship (see [Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021)). They are both of them
frequently mentioned by the prophets in this sense ([Isa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#005); [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003); [Isa
66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017)): Châmor and bâchar are also the
words commonly applied to an arbitrary choice of false gods ([Isa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009); [Isa
41:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#024); [Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)), and bosh min is the general
phrase used to denote the shame which falls upon idolaters, when the
worthlessness of their idols becomes conspicuous through their
impotence. On the difference between bosh and Châpher, see the comm. on
[Psa 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004).

(Note: It is perfectly certain that Châpher (Arab. Chaphira, as
distinguished from Châphar, hafara, to dig) signifies to blush,
erubescere; but the combination of bosh and yâbash (bâda), which would
give albescere or expallescere (to turn white or pale) as the primary
idea of bosh, has not only the Arabic use of bayyada and ibyadda (to
rejoice, be made glad) against it, but above all the dialectic bechath,
bahita (bahuta), which, when taken in connection with bethath (batta),
points rather to the primary idea of being cut off (abscindi: cf., spes
abscissa). See Lane's Arabic-English Lexicon, i. 263.)

The word elim is erroneously translated "idols" in the Septuagint and
other ancient versions. The feeling which led to this, however, was a
correct one, since the places of worship really stand for the idols
worshipped in those places.

(Note: With regard to the derivation, êlim, whether used in the sense of
strong men, or gods, or rams, or terebinths, is still but one word,
derived from ı̄l or ūl, so that in all three senses it may be written
either with or without Yod. Nevertheless elim in the sense of "rams"
only occurs without Yod in [Job 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#008).
In the sense of "gods" it is always written without Yod; in that of
"strong men" with Yod. In the singular the name of the terebinth is
always written elah without Yod; in the plural, however, it is written
either with or without. But this no more presupposes a singular êl
(ayil) in common use, than bêtzim presupposes a singular bêts (bayits);
still the word êl with Yod does occur once, viz., in [Gen
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006). Allâh and allōn, an oak, also
spring from the same root, namely âlal = il; just as in Arabic both ı̄l
and ill are used for ēl (God); and âl and ill, in the sense of
relationship, point to a similar change in the form of the root.)

The excited state of the prophet at the close of his prophecy is evinced
by his abrupt leap from an exclamation to a direct address (Ges. 137,
Anm. 3).

[Isaiah 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 1:30</span></span>

He still continues in the same excitement, piling a second explanatory
sentence upon the first, and commencing this also with "for" (Chi); and
then, carried away by the association of ideas, he takes terebinths and
gardens as the future figures of the idolatrous people themselves. "For
ye shall become like a terebinth with withered leaves, and like a garden
that hath no water." Their prosperity is distroyed, so that they
resemble a terebinth withered as to its leaves, which in other cases are
always green (nobleth ‛aleah, genitives connection according to (Ges.
112, 2). Their sources of help are dried up, so that they are like a
garden without water, and therefore waste. In this withered state
terebinths and gardens, to which the idolatrous are compared, are easily
set on fire. All that is wanted is a spark to kindle them, when they are
immediately in flames.

[Isaiah 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 1:31</span></span>

[Isa 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031) shows in a third figure
where this spark was to come from: "And the rich man becomes tow, and
his work the spark; and they will both burn together, and no one
extinguishes them." The form poalo suggests at first a participial
meaning (its maker), but החסון would be a very unusual epithet to apply
to an idol. Moreover, the figure itself would be a distorted one, since
the natural order would be, that the idol would be the thing that
kindled the fire, and the man the object to be set on fire, and not the
reverse. We therefore follow the lxx, Targ., and Vulg., with Gesenius
and other more recent grammarians, and adopt the rendering "his work"
(opus ejus). The forms פּעלו and פּעלו (cf., [Isa
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014) and [Jer
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013)) are two equally admissible
changes of the ground-form פעלו (פּעלו). As [Isa
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029) refers to idolatrous worship,
poalo (his work) is an idol, a god made by human hands (cf., [Isa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008); [Isa
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#019), etc.). The prosperous idolater,
who could give gold and silver for idolatrous images out of the
abundance of his possessions (Châson is to be interpreted in accordance
with [Isa 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#006)), becomes tow (talm.
"the refuse of flax:" the radical meaning is to shake out, viz., in
combing), and the idol the spark which sets this mass of fibre in
flames, so that they are both irretrievably consumed. For the fire of
judgment, by which sinners are devoured, need not come from without. Sin
carries the fire of indignation within itself. And an idol is, as it
were, an idolater's sin embodied and exposed to the light of day.

The date of the composition of this first prophecy is a puzzle. Caspari
thoroughly investigated every imaginary possibility, and at last adopted
the conclusion that it dates from the time of Uzziah, inasmuch as [Isa
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007) do not relate to an actual, but
merely to an ideal, present. But notwithstanding all the acuteness with
which Caspari has worked out his view, it still remains a very forced
one. The oftener we return to the reading of this prophetic address, the
stronger is our impression that [Isa
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007) contain a description of the
state of things which really existed at the time when the words were
spoken. There were actually two devastations of the land of Judah which
occurred during the ministry of Isaiah, and in which Jerusalem was only
spared by the miraculous interposition of Jehovah: one under Ahaz in the
year of the Syro-Ephraimitish war; the other under Hezekiah, when the
Assyrian forces laid the land waste but were scattered at last in their
attack upon Jerusalem. The year of the Syro-Ephraimitish war is
supported by Gesenius, Rosenmller (who expresses a different opinion in
every one of the three editions of his Scholia), Maurer, Movers, Knobel,
Hvernick, and others; the time of the Assyrian oppression by Hitzig,
Umbreit, Drechsler, and Luzzatto. Now, whichever of these views we may
adopt, there will still remain, as a test of its admissiblity, the
difficult question, How did this prophecy come to stand at the head of
the book, if it belonged to the time of Uzziah-Jotham? This question,
upon which the solution of the difficulty depends, can only be settled
when we come to [Isa 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001). Till
then, the date of the composition of chapter 1 must be left undecided.
It is enough for the present to know, that, according to the accounts
given in the books of Kings and Chronicles, there were two occasions
when the situation of Jerusalem resembled the one described in the
present chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 2](isa002)

</div>
