<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa001)  [Next](isa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

[Isaiah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 2:1</span></span>

The limits of this address are very obvious. The end of [Isa
4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001) connects itself with the
beginning of chapter 2, so as to form a circle. After various
alternations of admonition, reproach, and threatening, the prophet
reaches at last the object of the promise with which he started. Chapter
5, on the other hand, commences afresh with a parable. It forms an
independent address, although it is included, along with the previous
chapters, under the heading in [Isa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001) : "The word which Isaiah the son
of Amoz saw over Judah and Jerusalem." Chapters 2-5 may have existed
under this heading before the whole collection arose. It was then
adopted in this form into the general collection, so as to mark the
transition from the prologue to the body of the book. The prophet
describes what he here says concerning Judah and Jerusalem as "the word
which he saw." When men speak to one another, the words are not seen,
but heard. But when God spoke to the prophet, it was in a supersensuous
way, and the prophet saw it. The mind indeed has no more eyes than ears;
but a mind qualified to perceive what is supersensuous is altogether
eye.

The manner in which Isaiah commences this second address is altogether
unparalleled. There is no other example of a prophecy beginning with
והיה. And it is very easy to discover the reason why. The praet.
consecutivum v'hâyâh derives the force of a future from the context
alone; whereas the fut. consecutivum vay'hi (with which historical books
and sections very generally commence) is shown to be an aorist by its
simple form. Moreover, the Vav in the fut. consecut. has almost entirely
lost its copulative character; in the praet. consec., on the other hand,
it retains it with all the greater force. The prophet therefore
commences with "and"; and it is from what follows, not from what goes
before, that we learn that hayah is used in a future sense. But this is
not the only strange thing. It is also an unparalleled occurrence, for a
prophetic address, which runs as this does through all the different
phases of the prophetic discourses generally (viz., exhortation,
reproof, threatening, and promise), to commence with a promise. We are
in a condition, however, to explain the cause of this remarkable
phenomenon with certainty, and not merely to resort to conjecture. [Isa
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) do not contain Isaiah's own
words, but the words of another prophet taken out of their connection.
We find them again in [Mic 4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001); and
whether Isaiah took them from Micah, or whether both Isaiah and Micah
took them from some common source, in either case they were not
originally Isaiah's.

(Note: The historical statement in [Jer
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018), from which we learn that it was
in the days of Hezekiah that Micah uttered the threat contained in [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012) (of which the promise sin [Mic
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001) and [Isa
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) are the direct antithesis),
apparently precludes the idea that Isaiah borrowed from Micah, whilst
the opposite is altogether inadmissible, for reasons assigned above.
Ewald and Hitzig have therefore come to the conclusion, quite
independently of each other, that both Micah and Isaiah repeated the
words of a third and earlier prophet, most probably of Joel. And the
passage in question has really very much in common with the book of
Joel, viz., the idea of the melting down of ploughshares and
pruning-hooks ([Joe 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010)), the
combination of râb (many) and âtsum (strong), of gephen (vine) and
te'enah (fig-tree), as compared with [Mic
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004); also the attesting formula, "For
Jehovah hath spoken it" (Chi Jehovah dibber: [Joe
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#008)), which is not found in Micah,
whereas it is very common in Isaiah - a fact which makes the sign itself
a very feeble one (cf., [Kg1 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#011),
also [Oba 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018)). Hitzig, indeed,
maintains that it is only by restoring this passage that the prophetic
writings of Joel receive their proper rounding off and an appropriate
termination; but although swords and spears beaten into ploughshares and
pruning-hooks form a good antithesis to ploughshares and pruning-hooks
beaten into swords and spears ([Joe
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010)), the coming of great and mighty
nations to Mount Zion after the previous judgment of extermination would
be too unprepared or much too abrupt a phenomenon. On the other hand, we
cannot admit the force of the arguments adduced either by E. Meier
(Joel, p. 195) or by Knobel and G. Baur (Amos, p. 29) against the
authorship of Joel, which rest upon a misapprehension of the meaning of
Joel's prophecies, which the former regards as too full of storm and
battle, the latter as too exclusive and one-sided, for Joel to be the
author of the passage in question. At the same time, we would call
attention to the fact, that the promises in Micah form the obverse side
to the previous threatenings of judgment, so that there is a presumption
of their originality; also that the passage contains as many traces of
Micah's style (see above at [Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003))
as we could expect to find in these three verses; and, as we shall show
at the conclusion of this cycle of predictions (chapters 1-6), that the
historical fact mentioned in [Jer
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018) may be reconciled in the
simplest possible manner with the assumption that Isaiah borrowed these
words of promise from Micah. (See Caspari, Micha, p. 444ff.))

Nor was it even intended that they should appear to be his. Isaiah has
not fused them into the general flow of his own prophecy, as the
prophets usually do with the predictions of their predecessors. He does
not reproduce them, but, as we may observe from the abrupt commencement,
he quote them. It is true, this hardly seems to tally with the heading,
which describes what follows as the word of Jehovah which Isaiah saw.
But the discrepancy is only an apparent one. It was the spirit of
prophecy, which called to Isaiah's remembrance a prophetic saying that
had already been uttered, and made it the starting-point of the thoughts
which followed in Isaiah's mind. The borrowed promise is not introduced
for its own sake, but is simply a self-explaining introduction to the
exhortations and threatenings which follow, and through which the
prophet works his way to a conclusion of his own, that is closely
intertwined with the borrowed commencement.

[Isaiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 2:2</span></span>

The subject of the borrowed prophecy is Israel's future glory: "And it
cometh to pass at the end of the days, the mountain of the house of
Jehovah will be set at the top of the mountains, and exalted over hills;
and all nations pour unto it." The expression "the last days" (acharith
hayyamim, "the end of the days"), which does not occur anywhere else in
Isaiah, is always used in an eschatological sense. It never refers to
the course of history immediately following the time being, but
invariably indicates the furthest point in the history of this life -
the point which lies on the outermost limits of the speaker's horizon.
This horizon was a very fluctuating one. The history of prophecy is just
the history of its gradual extension, and of the filling up of the
intermediate space. In Jacob's blessing (Gen 49) the conquest of the
land stood in the foreground of the acharith or last days, and the
perspective was regulated accordingly. But here in Isaiah the acharith
contained no such mixing together of events belonging to the more
immediate and the most distant future. It was therefore the last time in
its most literal and purest sense, commencing with the beginning of the
New Testament aeon, and terminating at its close (compare [Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001); [Pe1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020), with 1 Cor 15 and the
Revelation). The prophet here predicted that the mountain which bore the
temple of Jehovah, and therefore was already in dignity the most exalted
of all mountains, would. one day tower in actual height above all the
high places of the earth. The basaltic mountains of Bashan, which rose
up in bold peaks and columns, might now look down with scorn and
contempt upon the small limestone hill which Jehovah had chosen ([Psa
68:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016)); but this was an incongruity
which the last times would remove, by making the outward correspond to
the inward, the appearance to the reality and the intrinsic worth. That
this is the prophet's meaning is confirmed by [Eze
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#002), where the temple mountain looks
gigantic to the prophet, and also by [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010), where all Jerusalem is
described as towering above the country round about, which would one day
become a plain. The question how this can possibly take place in time,
since it presupposes a complete subversion of the whole of the existing
order of the earth's surface, is easily answered. The prophet saw the
new Jerusalem of the last days on this side, and the new Jerusalem of
the new earth on the other ([Rev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010)), blended as it were together,
and did not distinguish the one from the other. But whilst we thus avoid
all unwarrantable spiritualizing, it still remains a question what
meaning the prophet attached to the word b'rosh ("at the top"). Did he
mean that Moriah would one day stand upon the top of the mountains that
surrounded it (as in [Psa 72:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#016)), or
that it would stand at their head (as in [Kg1
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#009), [Kg1
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#012); [Amo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#007); [Jer
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007))? The former is Hofmann's view,
as given in his Weissagung und Erfllung, ii. 217: "he did not indeed
mean that the mountains would be piled up one upon the other, and the
temple mountain upon the top, but that the temple mountain would appear
to float upon the summit of the others." But as the expression "will be
set" (nacon) does not favour this apparently romantic exaltation, and
b'rosh occurs more frequently in the sense of "at the head" than in that
of "on the top," I decide for my own part in favour of the second view,
though I agree so far with Hofmann, that it is not merely an exaltation
of the temple mountain in the estimation of the nations that is
predicted, but a physical and external elevation also. And when thus
outwardly exalted, the divinely chosen mountain would become the
rendezvous and centre of unity for all nations. They would all "flow
unto it" (nâhar, a denom. verb, from nâhâr, a river, as in [Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044); [Jer
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012)). It is the temple of Jehovah
which, being thus rendered visible to nations afar off, exerts such
magnetic attraction, and with such success. Just as at a former period
men had been separated and estranged from one another in the plain of
Shinar, and thus different nations had first arisen; so would the
nations at a future period assemble together on the mountain of the
house of Jehovah, and there, as members of one family, live together in
amity again. And as Babel (confusion, as its name signifies) was the
place whence the stream of nations poured into all the world; so would
Jerusalem (the city of peace) become the place into which the stream of
nations would empty itself, and where all would be reunited once more.
At the present time there was only one people, viz., Israel, which made
pilgrimages to Zion on the great festivals, but it would be very
different then.

[Isaiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 2:3</span></span>

"And peoples in multitude go and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain
of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; let Him instruct us out of
His ways, and we will walk in His paths." This is their signal for
starting, and their song by the way (cf., [Zac
8:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#021)). What urges them on is the
desire for salvation. Desire for salvation expresses itself in the name
they give to the point towards which they are travelling: they call
Moriah "the mountain of Jehovah," and the temple upon it "the house of
the God of Jacob." Through frequent use, Israel had become the popular
name for the people of God; but the name they employ is the choicer name
Jacob, which is the name of affection in the mouth of Micah, of whose
style we are also reminded by the expression "many peoples" (ammim
rabbim). Desire for salvation expresses itself in the object of their
journey; they wish Jehovah to teach them "out of His ways," - a rich
source of instruction with which they desire to be gradually entrusted.
The preposition min (out of, or from) is not partitive here, but refers,
as in [Psa 94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012), to the source of
instruction. The "ways of Jehovah" are the ways which God Himself takes,
and by which men are led by Him - the revealed ordinances of His will
and action. Desire for salvation also expresses itself in the resolution
with which they set out: they not only wish to learn, but are resolved
to act according to what they learn. "We will walk in His paths:" the
hortative is used here, as it frequently is (e.g., [Gen
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#004), vid., Ges. 128, 1, c), to
express either the subjective intention or subjective conclusion. The
words supposed to be spoken by the multitude of heathen going up to Zion
terminate here. The prophet then adds the reason and object of this holy
pilgrimage of the nations: "For instruction will go out from Zion, and
the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem." The principal emphasis is upon the
expressions "from Zion" and "from Jerusalem." It is a triumphant
utterance of the sentiment that "salvation is of the Jews" ([Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)). From Zion-Jerusalem there would
go forth thorah, i.e., instruction as to the questions which man has to
put to God, and debar Jehovah, the word of Jehovah, which created the
world at first, and by which it is spiritually created anew. Whatever
promotes the true prosperity of the nations, comes from Zion-Jerusalem.
There the nations assemble together; they take it thence to their own
homes, and thus Zion-Jerusalem becomes the fountain of universal good.
For from the time that Jehovah made choice of Zion, the holiness of
Sinai was transferred to Zion ([Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)), which now presented the same
aspect as Sinai had formerly done, when God invested it with holiness by
appearing there in the midst of myriads of angels. What had been
commenced at Sinai for Israel, would be completed at Zion for all the
world. This was fulfilled on that day of Pentecost, when the disciples,
the first-fruits of the church of Christ, proclaimed the thorah of Zion,
i.e., the gospel, in the languages of all the world. It was fulfilled,
as Theodoret observes, in the fact that the word of the gospel, rising
from Jerusalem "as from a fountain," flowed through the whole of the
known world. But these fulfilments were only preludes to a conclusion
which is still to be looked for in the future. For what is promised in
the following v. is still altogether unfulfilled.

[Isaiah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 2:4</span></span>

"And He will judge between the nations, and deliver justice to many
peoples; and they forge their swords into coulters, and their spears
into pruning-hooks: nation lifts not up the sword against nation,
neither do they exercise themselves in war any more." Since the nations
betake themselves in this manner as pupils to the God of revelation and
the word of His revelation, He becomes the supreme judge and umpire
among them. If any dispute arise, it is no longer settled by the
compulsory force of war, but by the word of God, to which all bow with
willing submission. With such power as this in the peace-sustaining word
of God ([Zac 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010)), there is no more
need for weapons of iron: they are turned into the instruments of
peaceful employment, into ittim (probably a synonym for ethim in [Sa1
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#021)), plough-knives or coulters,
which cut the furrows for the ploughshare to turn up and mazmeroth,
bills or pruning-hooks, with which vines are pruned to increase their
fruit-bearing power. There is also no more need for military practice,
for there is no use in exercising one's self in what cannot be applied.
It is useless, and men dislike it. There is peace, not an armed peace,
but a full, true, God-given and blessed peace. What even a Kant regarded
as possible is now realized, and that not by the so-called Christian
powers, but by the power of God, who favours the object for which an
Elihu Burritt enthusiastically longs, rather than the politics of the
Christian powers. It is in war that the power of the beast culminates in
the history of the world. This beast will then be destroyed. The true
humanity which sin has choked up will gain the mastery, and the world's
history will keep Sabbath. And may we not indulge the hope, on the
ground of such prophetic words as these, that the history of the world
will not terminate without having kept a Sabbath? Shall we correct
Isaiah, according to Quenstedt, lest we should become chiliasts? "The
humanitarian ideas of Christendom," says a thoughtful Jewish scholar,
"have their roots in the Pentateuch, and more especially in Deuteronomy.
But in the prophets, particularly in Isaiah, they reach a height which
will probably not be attained and fully realized by the modern world for
centuries to come." Yet they will be realized. What the prophetic words
appropriated by Isaiah here affirm, is a moral postulate, the goal of
sacred history, the predicted counsel of God.

[Isaiah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 2:5</span></span>

Isaiah presents himself to his contemporaries with this older prophecy
of the exalted and world-wide calling of the people of Jehovah, holds it
up before them as a mirror, and exclaims in [Isa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005), "O house of Jacob, come, let us
walk in the light of Jehovah." This exhortation is formed under the
influence of the context, from which [Isa
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) are taken, as we may see from
[Mic 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005), and also of the quotation
itself. The use of the term Jacob instead of Israel is not indeed
altogether strange to Isaiah ([Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017); [Isa
10:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#020); [Isa
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#023)), but he prefers the use of
Israel (compare [Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024) with [Gen
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024)).With the words "O house of
Jacob" he now turns to his people, whom so glorious a future awaits,
because Jehovah has made it the scene of His manifested presence and
grace, and summons it to walk in the light of such a God, to whom all
nations will press at the end of the days. The summons, "Come, let us
walk," is the echo of [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003), "Come,
let us go;" and as Hitzig observes, "Isaiah endeavours, like Paul in
[Rom 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014), to stir up his countrymen
to a noble jealousy, by setting before them the example of the heathen."
The "light of Jehovah" ('or Jehovah, in which the echo of v'yorenu in
[Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003) is hardly accidental; cf.,
[Pro 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023)) is the knowledge of Jehovah
Himself, as furnished by means of positive revelation, His manifested
love. It was now high time to walk in the light of Jehovah, i.e., to
turn this knowledge into life, and reciprocate this love; and it was
especially necessary to exhort Israel to this, now that Jehovah had
given up His people, just because in their perverseness they had done
the very opposite. This mournful declaration, which the prophet was
obliged to make in order to explain his warning cry, he changes into the
form of a prayerful sigh.

[Isaiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 2:6</span></span>

"For Thou hast rejected Thy people, the house of Jacob; for they are
filled with things from the east, and are conjurors like the
Philistines; and with the children of foreigners they go hand in hand."
Here again we have "for" (Chi) twice in succession; the first giving the
reason for the warning cry, the second vindicating the reason assigned.
The words are addressed to Jehovah, not to the people. Saad., Gecatilia,
and Rashi adopt the rendering, "Thou has given up thy nationality;" and
this rendering is supported by J. D. Michaelis, Hitzig, and Luzzatto.
But the word means "people," not "nationality;" and the rendering is
inadmissible, and would never have been thought of were it not that
there was apparently something strange in so sudden an introduction of
an address to God. But in [Isa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009);
[Isa 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002), and other passages, the
prophecy takes the form of a prayer. And nâtash (cast off) with âm
(people) for its object recals such passages as [Psa
94:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#014) and [Sa1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#022). Jehovah had put away His
people, i.e., rejected them, and left them to themselves, for the
following reasons: (1.) Because they were "full from the east"
(mikkedem: min denotes the source from which a person draws and fills
himself, [Jer 51:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#034); [Eze
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#006)), i.e., full of eastern manners
and customs, more especially of idolatrous practices. By "the east"
(kedem) we are to understand Arabia as far as the peninsula of Sinai,
and also the Aramaean lands of the Euphrates. Under Uzziah and Jotham,
whose sway extended to Elath, the seaport town of the Elanitic Gulf, the
influence of the south-east predominated; but under Ahaz and Hezekiah,
on account of their relations to Asshur, Aram, and Babylon, that of the
north-east. The conjecture of Gesenius, that we should read mikkesem,
i.e., of soothsaying, it a very natural one; but it obliterates without
any necessity the name of the region from which Judah's imitative
propensities received their impulse and materials. (2.) They were onenim
(= meonenim, [Mic 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#011), from the
poelonen: [Kg2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006)), probably
"cloud-gatherers" or "storm-raisers,"

(Note: There is no force in the explanation "concealing," i.e.,
practising secret arts; for the meaning "cover" or "conceal" is
arbitrarily transferred to the verb onen, from gânan and Cânan, which
are supposed to be cognate roots. As a denominative of ânân, the cloud,
however (on this name for the clouds, see at [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005)), onen might mean "he gathered
auguries from the clouds." Or if we take onen as a synonym of innen in
[Gen 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#014), it would mean "to raise
storms," which would give the rendering νεφοδιῶκται, tempestarii,
storm-raisers. The derivation of onen from Ny(i, in the sense of the
Arabic 'âna (impf. ya ı̄nu), as it were to ogle, oculo maligno petere et
fascinare, founders on annen, the word used in the Targums, which cannot
possibly be traced to Ny(i. From a purely philological standpoint,
however, there is still another explanation possible. From the idea of
coming to meet we get the transitive meaning to hold back, shut in, or
hinder, particularly to hold back a horse by the reins (inân), or when
applied to sexual relations, 'unna ('unnina, u'inna) )an el-mar'ati, "he
is prevented (by magic) from approaching his wife," Beside the Arabic
'innı̄n and ma'nūn (to render sexually impotent by witchcraft), we find
the Syriac 'anono used in the same sense.)

like the Philistines (the people conquered by Uzziah, and then again by
Hezekiah), among whom witchcraft was carried on in guilds, whilst a
celebrated oracle of Baal-Zebub existed at Ekron. (3.) And they make
common cause with children of foreigners. This is the explanation
adopted by Gesenius, Knobel, and others. Sâphak with Cappaim signifies
to clap hands ([Job 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#023)). The hiphil
followed by Beth is only used here in the sense of striking hands with a
person. Luzzatto explains it as meaning, "They find satisfaction in the
children of foreigners; it is only through them that they are
contented;" but this is contrary to the usage of the language, according
to which hispik in post-biblical Hebrew signifies either suppeditare or
(like saphak in [Kg1 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#010)) sufficere.
Jerome renders it pueris alienis adhaeserunt; but yalde nâc'rim does not
mean pueri alieni, boys hired for licentious purposes, but the "sons of
strangers" generally ([Isa 60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010); [Isa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#005)), with a strong emphasis upon
their unsanctified birth, the heathenism inherited from their mother's
womb. With heathen by birth, the prophet would say, the people of
Jehovah made common cause.

[Isaiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 2:7</span></span>

In [Isa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007), [Isa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008) he describes still further how the
land of the people of Jehovah, in consequence of all this (on the future
consec. see Ges. 129, 2, a), was crammed full of objects of luxury, of
self-confidence, of estrangement from God: "And their land is filled
with silver and gold, and there is no end of their treasures; and their
land is filled with horses, and there is no end of their chariots. And
their land is filled with - idols; the work of their own hands they
worship, that which their own fingers have made." The glory of Solomon,
which revived under Uzziah's fifty-two years' reign, and was sustained
through Jotham's reign of sixteen years, carried with it the curse of
the law; for the law of the king, in [Deu
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014)., prohibited the multiplying of
horses, and also the accumulation of gold and silver. Standing armies,
and stores of national treasures, like everything else which ministers
to carnal self-reliance, were opposed to the spirit of the theocracy.
Nevertheless Judaea was immeasurably full of such seductions to
apostasy; and not of those alone, but also of things which plainly
revealed it, viz., of elilim, idols (the same word is used in [Lev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#004); [Lev
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001), from elil, vain or worthless; it
is therefore equivalent to "not-gods"). They worshipped the work of
"their own" hands, what "their own" fingers had made: two distributive
singulars, as in [Isa 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#023), the hands
and fingers of every individual (vid., [Mic
5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#012), where the idols are
classified). The condition of the land, therefore, was not only opposed
to the law of the king, but at variance with the decalogue also. The
existing glory was the most offensive caricature of the glory promised
to the nation; for the people, whose God was one day to become the
desire and salvation of all nations, had exchanged Him for the idols of
the nations, and was vying with them in the appropriation of heathen
religion and customs.

[Isaiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 2:9</span></span>

It was a state ripe for judgment, from which, therefore, the prophet
could at once proceed, without any further preparation, to the
proclamation of judgment itself."Thus, then, men are bowed down, and
lords are brought low; and forgive them - no, that Thou wilt not." The
consecutive futures depict the judgment, as one which would follow by
inward necessity from the worldly and ungodly glory of the existing
state of things. The future is frequently used in this way (for example,
in [Isa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007).). It was a judgment by
which small and great, i.e., the people in all its classes, were brought
down from their false eminence. "Men" and "lords" (âdâm and ish, as in
[Isa 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#015); [Psa
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003), and [Pro
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#004), and like άνθρωπος and ανήρ in the
Attic dialect), i.e., men who were lost in the crowd, and men who rose
above it - all of them the judgment would throw down to the ground, and
that without mercy ([Rev 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015)). The
prophet expresses the conviction (al as in [Kg2
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#027)), that on this occasion God
neither could nor would take away the sin by forgiving it. There was
nothing left for them, therefore, but to carry out the command of the
prophet in [Isa 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010) : "Creep into the
rock, and bury thyself in the dust, before the terrible look of Jehovah,
and before the glory of His majesty." The glorious nation would hide
itself most ignominiously, when the only true glory of Jehovah, which
had been rejected by it, was manifested in judgment. They would conceal
themselves in holes of the rocks, as if before a hostile army ([Jdg
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002); [Sa1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006); [Sa1
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#011)), and bury themselves with their
faces in the sand, as if before the fatal simōm of the desert, that they
might not have to bear this intolerable sight. And when Jehovah
manifested Himself in this way in the fiery glance of judgment, the
result summed up in [Isa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011) must
follow: "The people's eyes of haughtiness are humbled, and the pride of
their lords is bowed down; and Jehovah, He only, stands exalted in that
day." The result of the process of judgment is expressed in perfects:
nisgab is the third pers. praet., not the participle: Jehovah "is
exalted," i.e., shows Himself as exalted, whilst the haughty conduct of
the people is brought down (shâphel is a verb, not an adjective; it is
construed in the singular by attraction, and either refers to âdâm, man
or people: Ges. 148, 1; or what is more probable, to the logical unity
of the compound notion which is taken as subject, the constr. ad synesin
s. sensum: Thiersch, 118), and the pride of the lords is bowed down
(shach = shâchach, [Job 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#013)). The
first strophe of the proclamation of judgment appended to the prophetic
saying in [Isa 2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) is here brought
to a close. The second strophe reaches to [Isa
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#017), where [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011) is repeated as a concluding
verse.

[Isaiah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 2:12</span></span>

The expression "that day" suggests the inquiry, What day is referred to?
The prophet answers this question in the second strophe. "For Jehovah of
hosts hath a day over everything towering and lofty, and over everything
exalted; and it becomes low." "Jehovah hath a day" (yom layehovah),
lit., there is to Jehovah a day, which already exists as a finished
divine thought in that wisdom by which the course of history is guided
([Isa 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#026), cf., [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)), the secret of which He
revealed to the prophets, who from the time of Obadiah and Joel
downwards proclaimed that day with one uniform watchword. But when the
time appointed for that day should arrive, it would pass out of the
secret of eternity into the history of time - a day of world-wide
judgment, which would pass, through the omnipotence with which Jehovah
rules over the hither as well as lower spheres of the whole creation,
upon all worldly glory, and it would be brought low (shaphel). The
current accentuation of [Isa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#012) is
wrong; correct MSS have על with mercha, כל־נשׂא with tifcha. The word
v'shâphel (third pers. praet. with the root-vowel ee) acquires the force
of a future, although no grammatical future precedes it, from the future
character of the day itself: "and it will sink down" (Ges. 126, 4).

[Isaiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 2:13</span></span>

The prophet then proceeds to enumerate all the high things upon which
that day would fall, arranging them two and two, and binding them in
pairs by a double correlative Vav. The day of Jehovah comes, as the
first two pairs affirm, upon everything lofty in nature. "As upon all
the cedars of Lebanon, the lofty and exalted, so upon all the oaks of
Bashan. As upon all mountains, the lofty ones, so upon all hills the
exalted ones." But wherefore upon all this majestic beauty of nature? Is
all this merely figurative? Knobel regards it as merely a figurative
description of the grand buildings of the time of Uzziah and Jotham, in
the erection of which wood had been used from Lebanon as well as from
Bashan, on the western slopes of which the old shady oaks (sindiân and
ballūt) are flourishing still.

(Note: On the meaning of the name of this region, Bashan (Basanitis),
see Comm. on Job, Appendix, Eng. Tr.)

But the idea that trees can be used to signify the houses built with the
good obtained from them, is one that cannot be sustained from [Isa
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009) (10.), where the reference is not
to houses built of sycamore and cedar wood, but to trunks of trees of
the king mentioned; nor even from [Nah
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004) (3.), where habberoshim refers to
the fir lances which are brandished about in haughty thirst for battle.
So again mountains and hills cannot denote the castles and
fortifications built upon them, more especially as these are expressly
mentioned in [Isa 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#015) in the most
literal terms. In order to understand the prophet, we must bear in mind
what the Scriptures invariably assume, from their first chapter to the
very close, namely, that the totality of nature is bound up with man in
one common history; that man and the totality of nature are inseparably
connected together as centre and circumference; that this circumference
is affected by the sin which proceeds from man, as well as by the anger
or the mercy which proceeds from God to man; that the judgments of God,
as the history of the nations proves, involve in fellow-suffering even
that part of the creation which is not free; and that this participation
in the "corruption" (phthora) and "glory" (doxa) of humanity will come
out with peculiar distinctness and force at the close of the world's
history, in a manner corresponding to the commencement; and lastly, that
the world in its present condition needs a palingenesia, or
regeneration, quite as much as the corporeal nature of man, before it
can become an object of good pleasure on the part of God. We cannot be
surprised, therefore, that, in accordance with this fundamental view of
the Scriptures, when the judgment of God fell upon Israel, it should
also be described as going down to the land of Israel, and as
overthrowing not only the false glory of the nation itself, but
everything glorious in the surrounding nature, which had been made to
minister to its national pride and love of show, and to which its sin
adhered in many different ways. What the prophet foretold began to be
fulfilled even in the Assyrian wars. The cedar woods of Lebanon were
unsparingly destroyed; the heights and valleys of the land were trodden
down and laid waste; and, in the period of the great empires which
commenced with Tiglath-pileser, the Holy Land was reduced to a shadow of
its former promised beauty.

[Isaiah 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 2:15</span></span>

The glory of nature is followed by what is lofty and glorious in the
world of men, such as magnificent fortifications, grand commercial
buildings, and treasures which minister to the lust of the eye. "As upon
every high tower, so upon every fortified wall. As upon all ships of
Tarshish, so upon all works of curiosity." It was by erecting
fortifications for offence and defence, both lofty and steep (bâzur,
praeruptus, from bâzar, abrumpere, secernere), that Uzziah and Jotham
especially endeavoured to serve Jerusalem and the land at large. The
chronicler relates, with reference to Uzziah, in 2 Chron 26, that he
built strong towers above "the corner-gate, the valley-gate, and the
southern point of the cheesemakers' hollow," and fortified these places,
which had probably been till that time the weakest points in Jerusalem;
also that he built towers in the desert (probably in the desert between
Beersheba and Gaza, to increase the safety of the land, and the numerous
flocks which were pastured in the shephelah, i.e., the western portion
of southern Palestine). With regard to Jotham, it is related in both the
book of Kings ([Kg2 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032).) and the
Chronicles, that he built the upper gate of the temple; and in the
Chronicles ([Ch2 27:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001)) that he
fortified the 'Ofel, i.e., the southern spur of the temple hill, still
more strongly, and built cities on the mountains of Judah, and erected
castles and towers in the forests (to watch for hostile attacks and ward
them off). Hezekiah also distinguished himself by building enterprises
of this kind ([Ch2 32:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#027)). But the
allusion to the ships of Tarshish takes us to the times of Uzziah and
Jotham, and not to those of Hezekiah (as [Psa
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007) does to the time of Jehoshaphat);
for the seaport town of Elath, which was recovered by Uzziah, was lost
again to the kingdom of Judah during the reign of Ahaz. Jewish ships
sailed from this Elath (Ailath) through the Red Sea and round the coast
of Africa to the harbour of Tartessus, the ancient Phoenician emporium
of the maritime region watered by the Baetis (Guadalquivir), which
abounded in silver, and then returned through the Pillars of Hercules
(the Straits of Gibraltar: vid., Duncker, Gesch. i. 312-315). It was to
these Tartessus vessels that the expression "ships of Tarshish"
primarily referred, though it was afterwards probably applied to
mercantile ships in general. The following expression, "works of
curiosity" (sechiyyoth hachemdah), is taken in far too restricted a
sense by those who limit it, as the lxx have done, to the ships already
spoken of, or understand it, as Gesenius does, as referring to beautiful
flags. Jerome's rendering is correct: "et super omne quod visu pulcrum
est" (and upon everything beautiful to look at); seciyyâh, from sâcâh,
to look, is sight generally. The reference therefore is to all kinds of
works of art, whether in sculpture or paintings (mascith is used of
both), which delighted the observer by their imposing, tasteful
appearance. Possibly, however, there is a more especial reference to
curiosities of art and nature, which were brought by the trading vessels
from foreign lands.

[Isaiah 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 2:17</span></span>

[Isa 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#017) closes the second strophe of
the proclamation of judgment appended to the earlier prophetic word:
"And the haughtiness of the people is bowed down, and the pride of the
lords brought low; and Jehovah, He alone, stands exalted on that day."
The closing refrain only varies a little from [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011). The subjects of the verbs are
transposed. With a feminine noun denoting a thing, it is almost a rule
that the predicate shall be placed before it in masculine (Ges. 147, a).

[Isaiah 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 2:18</span></span>

The closing refrain of the next two strophes is based upon the
concluding clause of [Isa 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010). The
proclamation of judgment turns now to the elilim, which, as being at the
root of all the evil, occupied the lowest place in the things of which
the land was full ([Isa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007), [Isa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008)). In a short v. of one clause
consisting of only three words, their future is declared as it were with
a lightning-flash. "And the idols utterly pass away." The translation
shows the shortness of the verse, but not the significant synallage
numeri. The idols are one and all a mass of nothingness, which will be
reduced to absolute annihilation: they will vanish Câlil, i.e., either
"they will utterly perish" (funditus peribunt), or, as Câlil is not used
adverbially in any other passage, "they will all perish" (tota peribunt,
[Jdg 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040)) - their images, their
worship, even their names and their memory ([Zac
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002)).

[Isaiah 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 2:19</span></span>

What the idolaters themselves will do when Jehovah has so completely
deprived their idols of all their divinity, is then described in [Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019) : "And they will creep into caves
in the rocks, and cellars in the earth, before the terrible look of
Jehovah, and before the glory of His majesty, when He ariseth to put the
earth in terror." Meârâh is a natural cave, and mechillah a
subterraneous excavation: this is apparently the distinction between the
two synonyms. "To put the earth in terror:" lârotz hâ-aretz, a
significant paronomasia, which can be reproduced in Latin, thus: ut
terreat terram. Thus the judgment would fall upon the earth without any
limitation, upon men universally (compare the word hâ-âdâm in [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020), which is scarcely ever applied
to a single individual ([Jos 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015)),
excepting, of course, the first man, but generally to men, or to the
human race) and upon the totality of nature as interwoven in the history
of man - one complete whole, in which sin, and therefore wrath, had
gained the upper hand. When Jehovah rose up, i.e., stood up from His
heavenly throne, to reveal the glory manifested in heaven, and turn its
judicial fiery side towards the sinful earth, the earth would receive
such a shock as would throw it into a state resembling the chaos of the
beginning. We may see very clearly from [Rev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015), where this description is
borrowed, that the prophet is here describing the last judgment,
although from a national point of view and bounded by a national
horizon.

[Isaiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 2:20</span></span>

[Isa 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020) forms the commencement to
the fourth strophe: "In that day will a man cast away his idols of gold
and his idols of silver, which they made for him to worship, to the
moles and to the bats." The traditional text separates lachpor peroth
into two words,

(Note: Abulwali=d Parchon and others regard the double word as the
singular of a substantive, applied to a particular bird (possibly a
woodpecker), as a pecker of fruit (peroth). Kimchi would rather take
lachpor as an infinitive (as in [Jos
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#002)), to dig pits; and compares with
it the talmudic word pēr, a pit or grave. No one adopts the rendering
"into mouse-holes," simply because pērah, a mouse (from an Arabic word
fa'ara, to dig, or root up), was not a Hebrew word at all, but was
adopted at a later period from the Arabic (hence the Hebraeo-Arabic
purah, a mousetrap).)

though without its being possible to discover what they are supposed to
mean. The reason for the separation was simply the fact that plurilitera
were at one time altogether misunderstood and regarded as Composita: for
other plurilitera, written as two words, compare [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001); [Hos
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#018); [Jer
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020). The prophet certainly
pronounced the word lachparpâroth (Ewald, 157, c); and Chapharpârâh is
apparently a mole (lit. thrower up of the soil), talpa, as it is
rendered by Jerome and interpreted by Rashi. Gesenius and Knobel,
however, have raised this objection, that the mole is never found in
houses. But are we necessarily to assume that they would throw their
idols into lumber-rooms, and not hide them in holes and crevices out of
doors? The mole, the shrew-mouse, and the bat, whose name (atalleph) is
regarded by Schultens as a compound word (atal-eph, night-bird), are
generically related, according to both ancient and modern naturalists.
Bats are to birds what moles are to the smaller beasts of prey (vid.,
Levysohn, Zoologie des Talmud, p. 102). The lxx combine with these two
words l'hishtachavoth (to worship). Malbim and Luzzatto adopt this
rendering, and understand the words to mean that they would sink down to
the most absurd descriptions of animal worship. But the accentuation,
which does not divide the v. at עשׂוּ־לו, as we should expect if this
were the meaning, is based upon the correct interpretation. The
idolaters, convinced of the worthlessness of their idols through the
judicial interposition of God, and enraged at the disastrous manner in
which they had been deceived, would throw away with curses the images of
gold and silver which artists' hands had made according to their
instructions, and hide them in the holes of bats and in mole-hills, to
conceal them from the eyes of the Judge, and then take refuge there
themselves after ridding themselves of this useless and damnable burden.

[Isaiah 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 2:21</span></span>

"To creep into the cavities of the stone-blocks, and into the clefts of
the rocks, before the terrible look of Jehovah, and before the glory of
His majesty, when He arises to put the earth in terror." Thus ends the
fourth strophe of this "dies irae, dies illa," which is appended to the
earlier prophetic word. But there follows, as an epiphonem, this nota
bene in [Isa 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022) : Oh, then, let man
go, in whose nose is a breath; for what is he estimated at? The
Septuagint leaves this v. out altogether. But was it so utterly
unintelligible then? Jerome adopted a false pointing, and has therefore
given this marvellous rendering: excelsus (bâmâh!) reputatus est ipse,
by which Luther was apparently misled. But if we look backwards and
forwards, it is impossible to mistake the meaning of the verse, which
must be regarded not only as the resultant of what precedes it, but also
as the transition to what follows. It is preceded by the prediction of
the utter demolition of everything which ministers to the pride and vain
confidence of men; and in [Isa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001).
the same prediction is resumed, with a more special reference to the
Jewish state, from which Jehovah is about to take away every prop, so
that it shall utterly collapse. Accordingly the prophet exhorts, in [Isa
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022), to a renunciation of trust in
man, and everything belonging to him, just as in [Psa
118:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008); [Psa
146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003), and [Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005). The construction is as general
as that of a gnome. The dat. Commodi לכם (Ges. 154, 3, e) renders the
exhortation both friendly and urgent: from regard to yourselves, for
your own good, for your own salvation, desist from man, i.e., from your
confidence in him, in whose nose (in cujus naso, the singular, as in
[Job 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#003); whereas the plural is used
in [Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007) in the same sense, in
nares ejus, "into his nostrils") is a breath, a breath of life, which
God gave to him, and can take back as soon as He will ([Job
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#014); [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)). Upon the breath, which passes
out and in through his nose, his whole earthly existence is suspended;
and this, when once lost, is gone for ever ([Job
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007)). It is upon this breath,
therefore, that all the confidence placed in man must rest - a bad soil
and foundation! Under these conditions, and with this liability to
perish in a moment, the worth of man as a ground of confidence is really
nothing. This thought is expressed here in the form of a question: At
(for) what is he estimated, or to be estimated? The passive participle
nechshâb combines with the idea of the actual (aestimatus) that of the
necessary (aestimandus), and also of the possible or suitable
(aestimabilis); and that all the more because the Semitic languages have
no special forms for the latter notions. The Beth is Beth pretı̄,
corresponding to the Latin genitive (quanti) or ablative (quanto) - a
modification of the Beth instrumenti, the price being regarded as the
medium of exchange or purchase: "at what is he estimated," not with what
is he compared, which would be expressed by ‛eth ([Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012); compare μετά, [Luk
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#037)) or ‛im ([Psa
88:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)). The word is בּמּה, not בּמּה,
because this looser form is only found in cases where a relative clause
follows (eo quod, [Ecc 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022)), and not
bama=h, because this termination with ā is used exclusively where the
next word begins with Aleph, or where it is a pausal word (as in [Kg1
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#021)); in every other case we have
bammeh. The question introduced with this quanto (quanti), "at what,"
cannot be answered by any positive definition of value. The worth of
man, regarded in himself, and altogether apart from God, is really
nothing.

The proclamation of judgment pauses at this porisma, but only for the
purpose of gathering fresh strength. The prophet has foretold in four
strophes the judgment of God upon every exalted thing in the kosmos that
has fallen away from communion with God, just as Amos commences his book
with a round of judgments, which are uttered in seven strophes of
uniform scope, bursting like seven thunder-claps upon the nations of the
existing stage of history. The seventh stroke falls upon Judah, over
which the thunderstorm rests after finding such abundant booty. And in
the same manner Isaiah, in the instance before us, reduces the universal
proclamation of judgment to one more especially affecting Judah and
Jerusalem. The current of the address breaks through the bounds of the
strophe; and the exhortation in [Isa
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022) not to trust in man, the reason
for which is assigned in what precedes, also forms a transition from the
universal proclamation of judgment to the more special one in [Isa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001), where the prophet assigns a fresh
ground for the exhortation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 3](isa003)

</div>
