<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa015)  [Next](isa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)

[Isaiah 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 16:1</span></span>

But just because this lion is Judah and its government, the summons goes
forth to the Moabites, who have fled to Edom, and even to Sela, i.e.,
Petra (Wady Musa), near Mount Hor in Arabia Petraea, to which it gave
its name, to turn for protection to Jerusalem. "Send a land-ruler's
tribute of lambs from Sela desert-wards to the mountain of the daughter
of Zion." This v. is like a long-drawn trumpet-blast. The prophecy
against Moab takes the same turn here as in [Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032); [Isa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007); [Isa
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016)., [Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018). The judgment first of all
produces slavish fear; and this is afterwards refined into loving
attachment. Submission to the house of David is Moab's only deliverance.
This is what the prophet, weeping with those that weep, calls out to
them in such long-drawn, vehement, and urgent tones, even into the
farthest hiding-place in which they have concealed themselves, viz., the
rocky city of the Edomites. The tribute of lambs which was due to the
ruling prince is called briefly car mōshēl-'eretz. This tribute, which
the holders of the pasture-land so rich in flocks have hitherto sent to
Samaria ([Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004)), they are now to
send to Jerusalem, the "mountain of the daughter of Zion" (as in [Isa
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#032), compared with [Isa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007)), the way to which lay through
"the desert," i.e., first of all in a diagonal direction through the
Arabah, which stretched downwards to Aelath.

[Isaiah 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 16:2</span></span>

The advice does not remain without effect, but they embrace it
eagerly."And the daughters of Moab will be like birds fluttering about,
a scared nest, at the fords of the Arnon." "The daughters of Moab," like
"the daughters of Judah," for example, in [Psa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012), are the inhabitants of the
cities and villages of the land of Moab. They were already like birds
soaring about ([Pro 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#008)), because of
their flight from their own land; but here, as we may see from the
expression תהיינה ... והיה, the simile is intended to depict the
condition into which they would be thrown by the prophet's advice. The
figure (cf., [Isa 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014)) as well as
the expression (cf., [Isa 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#002)) is
thoroughly Isaiah's. It is a state of anxious and timid indecision,
resembling the fluttering to and fro of birds, that have been driven
away from their nest, and wheel anxiously round and round, without
daring to return to their old home. In this way the daughters of Moab,
coming out of their hiding-places, whether nearer or more remote, show
themselves at the fords of the Arnon, that is to say, on the very soil
of their old home, which was situated between the Arnon and Wady
el-Ahsa, and which was now devastated by the hand of a foe. לארנון
מעברות we should regard as in apposition to benoth Moab (the daughters
of Moab), if ma‛bâroth signifies the coast-lands (like ‛ebrē in [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020)), and not, as it invariably does,
the fords. It is locative in its meaning, and is so accentuated.

[Isaiah 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 16:3</span></span>

There they show themselves, on the spot to which their land once reached
before it passed into the possession of Israel - there, on its farthest
boundary in the direction towards Judah, which was seated above; and
taking heart, address the following petitions to Zion, or to the Davidic
court, on the other side. "Give counsel, form a decision, make thy
shadow like night in the midst of noon; hide the outcasts, do not betray
the wanderers. Let mine outcasts tarry in thee, Moab; be a covert to it
from before the spoiler." In their extremity they appeal to Zion for
counsel, and the once proud but now thoroughly humbled Moabites place
the decision of their fate in the hands of the men of Judah (so
according to the Keri), and stand before Zion praying most earnestly for
shelter and protection. Their fear of the enemy is so great, that in the
light of the noon-day sun they desire to be covered with the protecting
shade of Zion as with the blackness of night, that they may not be seen
by the foe. The short-sentences correspond to the anxious urgency of the
prayer (cf., [Isa 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#008)). Pelilâh (cf.,
peililyyâh, [Isa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007)) is the decision
of a judge (pâlil); just as in [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005) sheilshiyyâh is the age and
standing of three years. The figure of the shadow is the same as in [Isa
30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002); [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002), etc.; nōdēd is the same as in
[Isa 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014); niddâchai as in [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); sēther as in [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002), and other passages; shōdēd as in
[Isa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001); mippenē as in [Isa
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#015). The whole is word for word
Isaiah's. There is no necessity to read nidchē instead of niddâc Mo'âb
in [Isa 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004); still less is ay a
collective termination, as in [Isa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#004). Nor are the words to be rendered
"my outcasts ... of Moab," and the expression to be taken as a syntaxis
ornata (cf., [Isa 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006)). On the
contrary, such an expression is absolutely impossible here, where the
speaker is alluding to himself. It is better to abide by the punctuation
as we have it, with niddâchai (zakeph) closing the first clause of [Isa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004), and Moab (tebir, which is
subordinate to the following tiphchah, and with this to athnach) opening
the second as an absolute noun. This is the way in which we have
rendered it above: "Moab ... be a shield to it ... " (though without
taking lâmō as equivalent to lō).

The question then arises, By what means has Zion awakened such reverence
and confidence on the part of Moab? This question is answered in [Isa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004), [Isa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005) : "For the extortioner is at an
end, desolation has disappeared, treaders down are away from the land.
And a throne is established by grace, and there sits thereon in truth in
the tent of David one judging, and zealous for right, and practised in
righteousness." The imperial world-power, which pressed out both marrow
and blood (mētz, a noun of the same form as lētz, like mı̄tz in [Pro
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#033), pressure), and devastated and
trod down everything ([Isa 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#020); [Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006); [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001), cf., [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008)), is swept away from the land on
this side of the Jordan; Jerusalem is not subject to it now, but has
come forth more gloriously out of all her oppressions than ever she did
before. And the throne of the kingdom of Judah has not fallen down, but
by the manifestation of Jehovah's grace has been newly established.
There no longer sits thereon a king who dishonours Him, and endangers
His kingdom; but the tent-roof of the fallen and now re-erected hut of
David ([Amo 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)) is spread over a
King in whom the truth of the promise of Jehovah is verified, inasmuch
as justice and righteousness are realized through all that He does. The
Messianic times must therefore have dawned (so the Targum understands
it), since grace and truth (chesed ve'emeth) and "justice and
righteousness" (mishpât ūtzedâkâh) are the divino-human signs of those
times, and as it were their kindred genii; and who can here fail to
recall to mind the words of [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)
(cf., [Isa 33:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#005))? The king depicted
here is the same as "the lion out of Judah," threatened against Moab in
[Isa 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#009). Only by thus submitting to
Him and imploring His grace will it escape the judgment.

[Isaiah 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 16:6</span></span>

But if Moab does this, and the law of the history of Israel, which is
that "a remnant shall return," is thus reflected in the history of Moab;
[Isa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006) cannot possibly contain the
answer which Moab receives from Zion, as the more modern commentators
assume according to an error that has almost become traditional. On the
contrary, the prophecy enters here upon a new stage, commencing with
Moab's sin, and depicting the fate of Moab in still more elegiac
strains. "We have heard of the pride of Moab, the very haughty (pride),
his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath, the falsehood of his
speech." The future self-humiliation of Moab, which would be the fruit
of its sufferings, is here contrasted with the previous self-exaltation,
of which these sufferings were the fruit. "We have heard," says the
prophet, identifying himself with his people. Boasting pompousness has
hitherto been the distinguishing characteristic of Moab in relation to
the latter (see [Isa 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#011)). The
heaping up of words of the same verbal stem (cf., [Isa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001)) is here intended to indicate how
thoroughly haughty was their haughtiness (cf., [Rom
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013), "that sin might become exceeding
sinful"), and how completely it had taken possession of Moab. It boasted
and was full of rage towards Israel, to which, so far as it retained its
consciousness of the truth of Jehovah, the talk of Moab (בדיו from בדד =
בדא, בטא, to talk at random) must necessarily appear as לא־כן,
not-right, i.e., at variance with fact. These expressions of opinion had
been heard by the people of God, and, as Jeremiah adds in [Jer
48:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029), by Israel's God as well.

[Isaiah 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 16:7</span></span>

Therefore the delightful land is miserably laid waste. "Therefore will
Moab wail for Moab, everything will wail: for the grape-cakes of
Kir-hareseth will ye whine, utterly crushed. For the fruit-fields of
Heshbon have faded away: the vine of Sibmah, lords of the nations its
branches smote down; they reached to Ja'zer, trailed through the desert:
its branches spread themselves out wide, crossed over the sea." The
Lamed in l'Moab is the same as in [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005), and in la'ashishē, which follows
here. Kir-hareseth (written Kir-heres in [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011), and by Jeremiah; compare [Kg2
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025), where the vowel-pointing is
apparently false): Heres or Hareseth may possibly refer to the glazed
tiles or grooved stones. As this was the principal fortress of Moab, and
according to [Isa 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001) it had already
been destroyed, ‛ashishē appears to mean the "strong foundations," -
namely, as laid bare; in other words, the "ruins" (cf., [Jer
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#015), and mōsedē in [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)). But in every other passage in
which the word occurs it signifies a kind of cake; and as the
devastation of the vines of Moab is made the subject of mourning
afterwards, it has the same meaning here as in [Hos
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001), namely raisin-cakes, or raisins
pressed into the form of cakes. Such cakes as these may have been a
special article of the export trade of Kir. Jeremiah has altered
'ashishē into 'anshē ([Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031)), and
thus made men out of the grapes. Hâgâh is to be understood in accordance
with [Isa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014); [Isa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#011) (viz., of the cooing of the
dove); 'ac (in good texts it is written with mercha, not with makkeph)
according to [Deu 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#015). On the
construction of the pluralet. shadmoth, compare [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017). We have rendered the clause
commencing with baalē goyim (lords of the nations) with the same
amphibolism as we find in the Hebrew. It might mean either "lords of the
nations (domini gentium) smote down its branches" (viz., those of the
vine of Sibmah;

(Note: In MSS Shibmah is written with gaya, in order that the two
labials may be distinctly expressed.)

hâlam being used as in [Isa 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#007)), or
"its branches smote down (i.e., intoxicated) lords of the nations"
(dominos gentium; hâlam having the same meaning as in the undisputed
prophecy of Isaiah in [Isa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)). As
the prophet enlarges here upon the excellence of the Moabitish wine, the
latter is probably intended. The wine of Sibmah was so good, that it was
placed upon the tables of monarchs, and so strong that it smote down,
i.e., inevitably intoxicated, even those who were accustomed to good
wines. This Sibmah wine was cultivated, as the prophet says, far and
wide in Moab - northwards as far as Ja'zer (between Ramoth, i.e., Salt,
and Heshbon, now a heap of ruins), eastwards into the desert, and
southwards across the Dead Sea - a hyperbolical expression for close up
to its shores. Jeremiah defines yâm (the sea) more closely as yam Ja‛zer
(the sea of Jazer; vid., [Jer 48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032)),
so that the hyperbole vanishes. But what sea can the sea of Jazer be?
Probably some celebrated large pool, like the pools of Heshbon, in which
the waters of the Wady (Nahr) Sir, which takes its rise close by, were
collected. Seetzen found some pools still there. The "sea" (yâm) in
Solomon's temple shows clearly enough that the term sea was also
commonly applied to artificial basins of a large size; and in Damascus
the marble basins of flowing water in the halls of houses are still
called baharât; and the same term is applied to the public reservoirs in
all the streets of the city, which are fed by a network of aqueducts
from the river Baradâ. The expression "break through the desert" (tâ‛u
midbâr) is also a bold one, probably pointing to the fact that, like the
red wines of Hungary at the present time, they were trailing vines,
which did not require to be staked, but ran along the ground.

[Isaiah 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 16:9</span></span>

The beauties of nature and fruitfulness of the land, which come into the
possession of any nation, are gifts from the riches of divine goodness,
remnants of the paradisaical commencement of the history of man, and
types of its paradisaical close; and for this very reason they are not
matters of indifference to the spirit of prophecy. And for the same
reason, it is not unworthy of a prophet, who predicts the renovation of
nature and the perfecting of it into the beauty of paradise, to weep
over such a devastation as that of the Moabitish vineyards which was now
passing before his mind (cf., [Isa
32:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#012)). "Therefore I bemoan the
vines of Sibmah with the weeping of Jazer; I flood thee with my tears, O
Heshbon and Elealeh, that Hdad hath fallen upon thy fruit-harvest and
upon thy vintage." A tetrastich, the Hebrew equivalent, in measure and
movement, of a sapphic strophe. The circumstantiality of the vision is
here swallowed up again by the sympathy of the prophet; and the
prophecy, which is throughout as truly human as it is divine, becomes
soft and flowing like an elegy. The prophet mingles his tears with the
tears of Jazer. Just as the latter weeps for the devastated vines of
Sibmah, so does he also weep. The form אריּוך, transposed from ארוּיך =
ארוּך (cf., Ewald, 253, a, where it is explained as being a rare
"voluntative" formation), corresponds to the elegiac tone of the whole
strophe. Heshbon and Elealeh, those closely connected cities, with their
luxuriant fields (shedemoth, [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008)), are now lying in ruins; and the
prophet waters them with tears, because hedad has fallen upon the
fruit-harvest and vintage of both the sister cities. In other instances
the term kâtzı̄r is applied to the wheat-harvest; but here it is used in
the same sense as bâtzı̄r, to which it is preferred on account of
Isaiah's favourite alliteration, viz., with kaytz (compare, for example,
the alliteration of mistor with sēther in [Isa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006)). That it does not refer to the
wheat-harvest here, but to the vintage, which was nearly coincident with
the fruit-harvest (which is called kaytz, as in [Isa
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#004)), is evident from the figure
suggested in the word hēdâd, which was the shout raised by the pressers
of the grapes, to give the time for moving their feet when treading out
the wine ([Isa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010); [Jer
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030)). A hēdâd of this kind had
fallen upon the rich floors of Heshbon-Elealeh, inasmuch as they had
been trodden down by enemies - a Hedad, and yet no Hedad, as Jeremiah
gives it in a beautiful oxymoron ([Jer
48:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#033)), i.e., no joyous shout of
actual grape-treaders.

[Isaiah 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 16:10</span></span>

The prophet, to whose favourite words and favourite figures Carmel
belongs, both as the name of a place and as the name of a thing, now
proceeds with his picture, and is plunged still more deeply into
mourning. "And joy is taken away, and the rejoicing of the garden-land;
and there is no exulting, no shouting in the vineyards: the treader
treads out no wine in the presses; I put an end to the Hedad. Therefore
my bowels sound for Moab like a harp, and my inside for Kir-heres." It
is Jehovah who says "I put an end;" and consequently the words, "My
bowels sound like a harp," or, as Jeremiah expresses it ([Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036)), like flutes, might appear to
be expressive of the feelings of Jehovah. And the Scriptures do not
hesitate to attribute mē‛ayim (viscera) to God (e.g., [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015); [Jer
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)). But as the prophet is the
sympathizing subject throughout the whole of the prophecy, it is better,
for the sake of unity, to take the words in this instance also as
expressing the prophet's feelings. Just as the hand or plectrum touches
the strings of the harp, so that they vibrate with sound; so did the
terrible things that he had heard Jehovah say concerning Moab touch the
strings of his inward parts, and cause them to resound with notes of
pain. By the bowels, or rather entrails (viscera), the heart, liver, and
kidneys are intended - the highest organs of the Psyche, and the
sounding-board, as it were, of those "hidden sounds" which exist in
every man. God conversed with the prophet "in the spirit;" but what
passed there took the form of individual impressions in the domain of
the soul, in which impressions the bodily organs of the psychical life
sympathetically shared. Thus the prophet saw in the spirit the purpose
of God concerning Moab, in which he could not and would not make any
change; but it threw his soul into all the restlessness of pain.

[Isaiah 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 16:12</span></span>

The ultimate reason for this restlessness is, that Moab does not know
the living God. "And it will come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is
weary with weeping upon the mountain height, and enters into its
sanctuary to pray, it will not gain anything." נלאה נראה, a pictorial
assonance, such as Isaiah delights in. נראה .ni st is transferred from
the Israelitish worship (appearance before God in His temple) to the
heathen; syntactically, si apparuerit, etc., with Vav before the
apodosis. It would be with the Moabites as with the priests of Baal in
the time of Elijah ([Kg1 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026).).

[Isaiah 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 16:13</span></span>

The massa is now brought to a close, and there follows an epilogue which
fixes the term of the fulfilment of what is not predicted now for the
first time, from the standpoint of the anticipated history. "This is the
word which Jehovah spake long ago concerning Moab. And now Jehovah
speaketh thus: In three years, like years of a hireling, the glory of
Moab is disgraced, together with all the multitude of the great; a
remnant is left, contemptibly small, not great at all." The time fixed
is the same as in [Isa 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003). Of
working time the hirer remits nothing, and the labourer gives nothing
in. The statement as to the time, therefore, is intended to be taken
exactly: three years, not more, rather under than over. Then will the
old saying of God concerning Moab be fulfilled. Only a remnant, a
contemptible remnant, will be left (וּשׁאר, cf., וּמשׂושׂ, [Isa
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006), in sense equivalent to ושׁאר);
for every history of the nations is but the shadow of the history of
Israel.

The massa in Isaiah 15:1-16:12 was a word that had already gone forth
from Jehovah "long ago." This statement may be understood in three
different senses. In the first place, Isaiah may mean that older
prophecies had already foretold essentially the same concerning Moab.
But what prophecies? We may get an answer to this question from the
prophecies of Jeremiah concerning Moab in Jer 48. Jeremiah there
reproduces the massa Moab of the book of Isaiah, but interweaves with it
reminiscences (1.) out of the mâshal on Moab in [Num
21:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027); (2.) out of Balaam's
prophecy concerning Moab in [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017); (3.) out of the prophecy of
Amos concerning Moab ([Amo 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001)). And
it might be to these earlier words of prophecy that Isaiah here refers
(Hvernick, Drechsler, and others). But this is very improbable, as there
is no ring of these earlier passages in the massa, such as we should
expect if Isaiah had had them in his mind. Secondly, Isaiah might mean
that [Isa 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001). contained the prophecy
of an older prophet, which he merely brought to remembrance in order to
connect therewith the precise tenor of its fulfilment which had been
revealed to him. This is at present the prevailing view. Hitzig, in a
special work on the subject (1831), as well as in his Commentary, has
endeavoured to prove, on the ground of [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025), that in all probability Jonah
was the author of the oracle which Isaiah here resumes. And Knobel,
Maurer, Gustav Baur, and Thenius agree with him in this; whilst De
Wette, Ewald, and Umbreit regard it as, at any rate, decidedly
non-Messianic. If the conjecture that Jonah was the author could but be
better sustained, we should heartily rejoice in this addition to the
history of the literature of the Old Testament. But all that we know of
Jonah is at variance with such a conjecture. He was a prophet of the
type of Elijah and Elisha, in whom the eloquence of a prophet's words
was thrown altogether into the shade by the energy of a prophet's deeds.
His prophecy concerning the restoration of the kingdom of Israel to its
old boundaries, which was fulfilled by the victories of Jeroboam II, we
cannot therefore imagine to have been so pictorial or highly poetical as
the massa Moab (which would only be one part of that prophecy) really
is; and the fact that he was angry at the sparing of Nineveh harmonizes
very badly with its elegiac softness and its flood of tears. Moreover,
it is never intimated that the conquerors to whom Moab was to succumb
would belong to the kingdom of Israel; and the hypothesis is completely
overthrown by the summons addressed to Moab to send tribute to
Jerusalem. But the conclusion itself, that the oracle must have
originated with any older prophet whatever, is drawn from very
insufficient premises. No doubt it is a thing altogether unparalleled
even in Isaiah, that a prophecy should assume so thoroughly the form of
a kinah, or lamentation; still there are tendencies to this in [Isa
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#004) (cf., [Isa
21:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003)), and Isaiah was an
inexhaustible master of language of every character and colour. It is
true we do light upon many expressions which cannot be pointed out
anywhere else in the book of Isaiah, such as baalē goyim, hedâd,
yelâlâh, yâra‛, yithrâh, mâhir, mētz, nosâphoth, pekuddâh (provision,
possession); and there is something peculiar in the circular movement of
the prophecy, which is carried out to such an extent in the indication
of reason and consequence, as well as in the perpetually returning,
monotonous connection of the sentences by ci (for) and ‛al-cēn (lâcēn,
therefore), the former of which is repeated twice in [Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001), three times in [Isa
15:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#008), and four times in succession
in [Isa 15:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005). But there is probably
no prophecy, especially in chapters 13-23, which does not contain
expressions that the prophet uses nowhere else; and so far as the
conjunctions ci and a‛ l-cēn (lâcēn), are concerned, Isaiah crowds them
together in other passages as well, and here almost to monotony, as a
natural consequence of the prevailing elegiac tone. Besides, even Ewald
can detect the characteristics of Isaiah in [Isa
16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001); and you have only to dissect
the whole rhetorically, syntactically, and philologically, with the
carefulness of a Caspari, to hear throughout the ring of Isaiah's style.
And whoever has retained the impression which he brought with him from
the oracle against Philistia, will be constrained to say, that not only
the stamp and outward form, but also the spirit and ideas, are
thoroughly Isaiah's. Hence the third possible conjecture must be the
correct one. Thirdly, then, Isaiah may mean that the fate of Moab, which
he has just proclaimed, was revealed to him long ago; and the addition
made now is, that it will be fulfilled in exactly three years. מאז does
not necessarily point to a time antecedent to that of Isaiah himself
(compare [Isa 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#008); [Isa
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#003), [Isa
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#005), [Isa
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#007), with [Sa2
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#034)). If we assume that what Isaiah
predicts down to [Isa 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#012) was
revealed to him in the year that Ahaz died, and that the epilogue
reckons from the third or tenth year of Hezekiah, in either case the
interval is long enough for the mê'âz (from of old). And we decide in
favour of this. Unfortunately, we know nothing certain as to the time at
which the three years commence. The question whether it was
Shalmanassar, Sargon, or Sennacherib who treated the Moabites so
harshly, is one that we cannot answer. In Herodotus (ii. 141),
Sennacherib is called "king of the Arabians and Assyrians;" and Moab
might be included in the Arabians. In any case, after the fulfilment of
Isaiah's prophecy in the Assyrian times, there was still a portion left,
the fulfilment of which, according to Jer 48, was reserved for the
Chaldeans.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 17](isa017)

</div>
