<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa020)  [Next](isa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 21:0</span></span>

The Oracle Concerning the Desert of the Sea (Babylon) - [Isa
21:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

Ewald pronounces this and other headings to be the glosses of ancient
readers (proph. i. 56, 57). Even Vitringa at first attributed it to the
collectors, but he afterwards saw that this was inadmissible. In fact,
it is hardly possible to understand how the expression "desert of the
sea" (midbar-yâm) could have been taken from the prophecy itself; for
yâm cannot signify the south (as though synonymous with negeb), but is
invariably applied to the west, whilst there is nothing about a sea in
the prophecy. The heading, therefore, is a peculiar one; and this Knobel
admits, though he nevertheless adheres to the opinion that it sprang
from a later hand. But why? According to modern critics, the hand by
which the whole massa was written was certainly quite late enough. From
Koppe to Knobel they are almost unanimous in asserting that it emanated
from a prophet who lived at the end of the Babylonian captivity. And
Meier asserts with dictatorial brevity, that no further proof is needed
that Isaiah was not the author. But assuming, what indeed seems
impossible to modern critics - namely, that a prophet's insight into
futurity might stretch over hundreds of years - the massa contains
within itself and round about itself the strongest proofs of its
genuineness. Within itself: for both the thoughts themselves, and the
manner in which they are expressed, are so thoroughly Isaiah's, even in
the most minute points, that it is impossible to conceive of any
prophecy in a form more truly his own. And round about itself: inasmuch
as the four massa's ([Isa 21:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001),
[Isa 21:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011), [Isa
21:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013); 22), are so intertwined the
one with the other as to form a tetralogy, not only through their
emblematical titles (compare [Isa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006)) and their visionary bearing, but
also in many ways through the contexts themselves. Thus the designation
of the prophet as a "watchman" is common to the first and second
massa's; and in the fourth, Jerusalem is called the valley of vision,
because the watch-tower was there, from which the prophet surveyed the
future fate of Babylon, Edom, and Arabia. And just as in the first, Elam
and Madai march against Babylon; so in the fourth ([Isa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006)) Kir and Elam march against
Jerusalem. The form of expression is also strikingly similar in both
instances (compare [Isa 22:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006), with
[Isa 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)). Is it then possible that
the first portion of the tetralogy should be spurious, and the other
three genuine? We come to the same conclusion in this instance as we did
at [Isa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001).; and that, most truly,
neither from a needless apologetical interest, nor from forced
traditional prejudice. Just as the massâ Bâbel rests upon a prophecy
against Asshur, which forms, as it were, a pedestal to it, and cannot be
supposed to have been placed there by any one but Isaiah himself; so
that massa midbar-yâm rests, as it were, upon the pillars of its
genuineness, and announces itself velut de tripode as Isaiah's. This
also applies to the heading. We have already noticed, in connection with
[Isa 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001), how closely the headings
fit in to the prophecies themselves. Isaiah is fond of symbolical names
([Isa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001); [Isa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007)). And midbar-yâm (desert of the
sea) is a name of this kind applied to Babylon and the neighbourhood.
The continent on which Babylon stood was a midbâr, a great plain running
to the south into Arabia deserta; and so intersected by the Euphrates as
well as by marshes and lakes, that it floated, as it were, in the sea.
The low-lying land on the Lower Euphrates had been wrested, as it were,
from the sea; for before Semiramis constructed the dams, the Euphrates
used to overflow the whole just like a sea (πελαγίζειν, Herod. i. 184).
Abydenus even says, that at first the whole of it was covered with
water, and was called thalassa (Euseb. praep. ix. 41). We may learn from
[Isa 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023), why it was that the
prophet made use of this symbolical name. The origin and natural
features of Babylon are made into ominous prognostics of its ultimate
fate. The true interpretation is found in Jeremiah ([Jer
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013); [Jer
50:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#038)), who was acquainted with this
oracle.

[Isaiah 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 21:1</span></span>

The power which first brings destruction upon the city of the world, is
a hostile army composed of several nations. "As storms in the south
approach, it comes from the desert, from a terrible land. Hard vision is
made known to me: the spoiler spoils, and the devastator devastates. Go
up, Elam! Surround, Maday! I put an end to all their sighing." "Storms
in the south" (compare [Isa 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021);
[Amo 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)) are storms which have their
starting-point in the south, and therefore come to Babylon from Arabia
deserta; and like all winds that come from boundless steppes, they are
always violent ([Job 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019); [Job
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009); see [Hos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015)). It would be natural,
therefore, to connect mimmidbâr with lachalōph (as Knobel and Umbreit
do), but the arrangement of the words is opposed to this; lachalōōph
("pressing forwards") is sued instead of yachalōph (see Ges. 132, Anm.
1, and still more fully on [Hab 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017)).
The conjunctio periphrastica stands with great force at the close of the
comparison, in order that it may express at the same time the violent
pressure with which the progress of the storm is connected. It is true
that, according to Herod. i. 189, Cyrus came across the Gyndes, so that
he descended into the lowlands to Babylonia through Chalonitis and
Apolloniatis, by the road described by Isidor V. Charax in his
Itinerarium,

(Note: See C. Masson's "Illustration of the route from Seleucia to
Apobatana, as given by Isid. of Charax," in the Asiatic Journal, xii.
97ff.)

over the Zagros pass through the Zagros-gate (Ptolem. vi. 2) to the
upper course of the Gyndes (the present Diyala), and then along this
river, which he crossed before its junction with the Tigris. But if the
Medo-Persian army came in this direction, it could not be regarded as
coming "from the desert." If, however, the Median portion of the army
followed the course of the Choaspes (Kerkha) so as to descend into the
lowland of Chuzistan (the route taken by Major Rawlinson with a Guran
regiment),

(Note: See Rawlinson's route as described in Ritter's Erdkunde, ix. 3
(West-asien), p. 397ff.)

and thus approached Babylon from the south-east, it might be regarded in
many respects as coming mimmidbâr (from the desert), and primarily
because the lowland of Chuzistan is a broad open plain - that is to say,
a midbâr. According to the simile employed of storms in the south, the
assumption of the prophecy is really this, that the hostile army is
advancing from Chuzistan, or (as geographical exactitude is not to be
supposed) from the direction of the desert of ed-Dahna, that portion of
Arabia deserta which bounded the lowland of Chaldean on the south-west.
The Medo-Persian land itself is called "a terrible land," because it was
situated outside the circle of civilised nations by which the land of
Israel was surrounded. After the thematic commencement in [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001), which is quite in harmony with
Isaiah's usual custom, the prophet begins again in [Isa
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002). Châzuth (a vision) has the same
meaning here as in [Isa 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011) (though
not [Isa 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018)); and châzuth kâshâh is
the object of the passive which follows (Ges. 143, 1, b). The prophet
calls the look into the future, which is given to him by divine
inspiration, hard or heavy (though in the sense of difficilis, not
gravis, câbēd), on account of its repulsive, unendurable, and, so to
speak, indigestible nature. The prospect is wide-spread plunder and
devastation (the expression is the same as in [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001), compare [Isa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004); [Isa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016), bâgad denoting faithless or
treacherous conduct, then heartless robbery), and the summoning of the
nations on the east and north of Babylonia to the conquest of Babylon;
for Jehovah is about to put an end (hishbatti, as in [Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010)) to all their sighing
(anchâthâh, with He raf. and the tone upon the last syllable), i.e., to
all the lamentations forced out of them far and wide by the oppressor.

[Isaiah 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 21:3</span></span>

Here again, as in the case of the prophecy concerning Moab, what the
prophet has given to him to see does not pass without exciting his
feelings of humanity, but works upon him like a horrible dream.
"Therefore are my loins full of cramp: pangs have taken hold of me, as
the pangs of a travailing woman: I twist myself, so that I do not hear;
I am brought down with fear, so that I do not see. My heart beats
wildly; horror hath troubled me: the darkness of night that I love, he
hath turned for me into quaking." The prophet does not describe in
detail what he saw; but the violent agitation produced by the impression
leads us to conclude how horrible it must have been. Chalchâlâh is the
contortion produced by cramp, as in [Nah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011); tzirim is the word properly
applied to the pains of childbirth; na‛avâh means to bend, or bow one's
self, and is also used to denote a convulsive utterance of pain; tâ‛âh,
which is used in a different sense from [Psa
95:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#010) (compare, however, [Psa
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)), denotes a feverish and
irregular beating of the pulse. The darkness of evening and night, which
the prophet loved so much (chēshek, a desire arising from inclination,
[Kg1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#001), [Kg1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#019)), and always longed for, either
that he might give himself up to contemplation, or that he might rest
from outward and inward labour, had bee changed into quaking by the
horrible vision. It is quite impossible to imagine, as Umbreit suggests,
that nesheph chishki (the darkness of my pleasure) refers to the
nocturnal feast during which Babylon was stormed (Herod. i. 191, and
Xenophon, Cyrop. vii. 23).

[Isaiah 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 21:5</span></span>

On the other hand, what Xenophon so elaborately relates, and what is
also in all probability described in [Dan
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030) (compare [Jer
51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039), [Jer
51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057)), is referred to in [Isa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005) : "They cover the table, watch
the watch, eat, drink. Rise up, ye princes! Anoint the shield!" This is
not a scene from the hostile camp, where they are strengthening
themselves for an attack upon Babylon: for the express allusion to the
covering of the table is intended to create the impression of confident
and careless good living; and the exclamation "anoint the shield" (cf.,
[Jer 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011)) presupposes that they have
first of all to prepare themselves for battle, and therefore that they
have been taken by surprise. What the prophet sees, therefore, is a
banquet in Babylon. The only thing that does not seem quite to square
with this is one of the infinitives with which the picture is so vividly
described (Ges. 131, 4, b), namely tzâpōh hatztzâphith. Hitzig's
explanation, "they spread carpets" (from tzâphâh, expandere, obducere,
compare the Talmudic tziphâh, tziphtâh, a mat, storea), commends itself
thoroughly; but it is without any support in biblical usage, so that we
prefer to follow the Targum, Peshito, and Vulgate (the Sept. does not
give any translation of the words at all), and understand the hap. leg.
tzâphith as referring to the watch: "they set the watch." They content
themselves with this one precautionary measure, and give themselves up
with all the greater recklessness to their night's debauch (cf., [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)). The prophet mentions this,
because (as Meier acknowledges) it is by the watch that the cry, "Rise
up, ye princes," etc., is addressed to the feasters. The shield-leather
was generally oiled, to make it shine and protect it from wet, and, more
than all, to cause the strokes it might receive to glide off (compare
the laeves clypeos in Virg. Aen. vii. 626). The infatuated
self-confidence of the chief men of Babylon was proved by the fact that
they had to be aroused. They fancied that they were hidden behind the
walls and waters of the city, and therefore they had not even got their
weapons ready for use.

[Isaiah 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 21:6</span></span>

The prophecy is continued with the conjunction "for" (ci). The tacit
link in the train of thought is this: they act thus in Babylon, because
the destruction of Babylon is determined. The form in which this thought
is embodied is the following: the prophet receives instruction in the
vision to set a metzappeh upon the watch-tower, who was to look out and
see what more took place. "For thus said the Lord to me, Go, set a spy;
what he seeth, let him declare." In other cases it is the prophet
himself who stands upon the watch-tower ([Isa
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011); [Hab
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)); but here in the vision a
distinction is made between the prophet and the person whom he stations
upon the watch-tower (specula). The prophet divides himself, as it were,
into two persons (compare [Isa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004)
for the introduction; and for the expression "go," [Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002)). He now sees through the medium
of a spy, just as Zechariah sees by means of the angel speaking in him;
with this difference, however, that here the spy is the instrument
employed by the prophet, whereas there the prophet is the instrument
employed by the angel.

[Isaiah 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 21:7</span></span>

What the man upon the watch-tower sees first of all, is a long, long
procession, viz., the hostile army advancing quietly, like a caravan, in
serried ranks, and with the most perfect self-reliance. "And he saw a
procession of cavalry, pairs of horsemen, a procession of asses, a
procession of camels; and listened sharply, as sharply as he could
listen." Receb, both here and in [Isa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009), signifies neither riding-animals
nor war-chariots, but a troop seated upon animals - a procession of
riders. In front there was a procession of riders arranged two and two,
for Persians and Medes fought either on foot or on horseback (the
latter, at any rate, from the time of Cyrus; vid., Cyrop. iv 3); and
pârâsh signifies a rider on horseback (in Arabic it is used in
distinction from râkib, the rider on camels). Then came lines of asses
and camels, a large number of which were always taken with the Persian
army for different purposes. They not only carried baggage and
provisions, but were taken into battle to throw the enemy into
confusion. Thus Cyrus gained the victory over the Lydians by means of
the great number of his camels (Herod. i. 80), and Darius Hystaspis the
victory over the Scythians by means of the number of asses that he
employed (Herod. iv 129). Some of the subject tribes rode upon asses and
camels instead of horses: the Arabs rode upon camels in the army of
Xerxes, and the Caramanians rode upon asses. What the spy saw was
therefore, no doubt, the Persian army. But he only saw and listened. It
was indeed "listening, greatness of listening," i.e., he stretched his
ear to the utmost (rab is a substantive, as in [Isa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007); [Psa
145:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#007); and hikshib, according to its
radical notion, signifies to stiffen, viz., the ear);

(Note: Bttcher has very correctly compared kâshab (kasuba) with kâshâh
(kasa), and Fleischer with sarra (tzâr), which is applied in the kal and
hiphil (asarra) to any animal (horse, ass, etc.) when it holds its ears
straight and erect to listen to any noise (sarra udhneı̄h, or udhnahu
bi-udhneı̄h, or bi-udhnı̄h iv., asarra bi-udhnı̄h, and also absolutely
asarra, exactly like hikshib).)

but he heard nothing, because the long procession was moving with the
stillness of death.

[Isaiah 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 21:8</span></span>

At length the procession has vanished; he sees nothing and hears
nothing, and is seized with impatience. "Then he cried with lion's
voice, Upon the watch-tower, O Lord, I stand continually by day, and
upon my watch I keep my stand all the nights." He loses all his
patience, and growls as if he were a lion (compare [Rev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#003)), with the same dull, angry
sound, the same long, deep breath out of full lungs, complaining to God
that he has to stand so long at his post without seeing anything, except
that inexplicable procession that has now vanished away.

[Isaiah 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 21:9</span></span>

But when he is about to speak, his complaint is stifled in his mouth.
"And, behold, there came a cavalcade of men, pairs of horsemen, and
lifted up its voice, and said, Fallen, fallen is Babylon; and all the
images of its gods He hath dashed to the ground!" It is now clear enough
where the long procession went to when it disappeared. It entered
Babylon, made itself master of the city, and established itself there.
And now, after a long interval, there appears a smaller cavalcade, which
has to carry the tidings of victory somewhere; and the spy hears them
cry out in triumph, "Fallen, fallen is Babylon!" In [Rev
18:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001), the same words form the shout
of triumph raised by the angel, the antitype being more majestic than
the type, whilst upon the higher ground of the New Testament everything
moves on in spiritual relations, all that is merely national having lost
its power. Still even here the spiritual inwardness of the affair is so
far expressed, that it is Jehovah who dashes to the ground; and even the
heathen conquerors are obliged to confess that the fall of Babylon and
its pesilim (compare [Jer 51:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#047), [Jer
51:52](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#052)) is the work of Jehovah Himself.
What is here only hinted at from afar - namely, that Cyrus would act as
the anointed of Jehovah - is expanded in the second part (Isaiah 40-66)
for the consolation of the captives.

[Isaiah 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 21:10</span></span>

The night vision related and recorded by the prophet, a prelude to the
revelations contained in Chapters 40-60, was also intended for the
consolation of Israel, which had already much to suffer, when Babylon
was still Assyrian, but would have to suffer far more from it when it
should become Chaldean. "O thou my threshing, and child of my
threshing-floor! What I have heard from Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel, I have declared to you." Threshing (dūsh) is a figure used to
represent crushing oppression in [Isa
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015) and [Mic
4:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012); and judicial visitation in
[Jer 51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033) (a parallel by which we
must not allow ourselves to be misled, as Jeremiah has there given a
different turn to Isaiah's figure, as he very frequently does); and
again, as in the present instance, chastising plagues, in which wrath
and good intention are mingled together. Israel, placed as it was under
the tyrannical supremacy of the imperial power, is called the medŭsshâh
(for medūshah, i.e., the threshing) of Jehovah - in other words, the
corn threshed by Him; also His "child of the threshing-floor," inasmuch
as it was laid in the floor, in the bosom as it were of the
threshing-place, to come out threshed (and then to become a thresher
itself, [Mic 4:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012)). This floor, in
which Jehovah makes a judicial separation of grains and husks in Israel,
was their captivity. Babylon is the instrument of the threshing wrath of
God. But love also takes part in the threshing, and restrains the wrath.
This is what the prophet has learned in the vision ("I have heard," as
in [Isa 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#022)) - a consolatory figure
for the threshing-corn in the floor, i.e., for Israel, which was now
subject to the power of the world, and had been mowed off its own field
and carried captive into Babylonia.

[Isaiah 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 21:11</span></span>

This oracle consists of a question, addressed to the prophet from Seir,
and of the prophet's reply. Seir is the mountainous country to the south
of Palestine, of which Edom took possession after the expulsion of the
Horites. Consequently the Dumah of the heading cannot be either the Dūma
of Eastern Hauran (by the side of which we find also a Tema and a
Buzan); or the Duma in the high land of Arabia, on the great Nabataean
line of traffic between the northern harbours of the Red Sea and Irak,
which bore the cognomen of the rocky (el-gendel) or Syrian Duma ([Gen
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#014)); or the Duma mentioned in the
Onom., which was seventeen miles from Eleutheropolis (or according to
Jerome on this passage, twenty) "in Daroma hoc est ad australem plagam,"
and was probably the same place as the Duma in the mountains of Judah -
that is to say, judging from the ruins of Daume, to the south-east of
Eleutheropolis (see the Com. on [Jos
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#052)), a place out of which Jerome
has made "a certain region of Idumaea, near which are the mountains of
Seir." The name as it stands here is symbolical, and without any
demonstrable topographical application. Dūmâh is deep, utter silence,
and therefore the land of the dead ([Psa
94:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#017); [Psa
115:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#017)). The name אדום is turned into
an emblem of the future fate of Edom, by the removal of the a sound from
the beginning of the word to the end. It becomes a land of deathlike
stillness, deathlike sleep, deathlike darkness. "A cry comes to me out
of Seir: Watchman, how far is it in the night? Watchman, how far in the
night?" Luther translates the participle correctly, "they cry" (man
ruft; compare the similar use of the participle in [Isa
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#024); [Isa
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#004)). For the rest, however, we have
deviated from Luther's excellent translation, for the purpose of giving
to some extent the significant change from מלּילה and מלּיל. The more
winged form of the second question is expressive of heightened, anxious
urgency and haste. The wish is to hear that it is very late in the
night, and that it will soon be past; min is partitive (Saad.), "What
part of the night are we at now?" Just as a sick man longs for a
sleepless night to come to an end, and is constantly asking what time it
is, so do they inquire of the prophet out of Edom, whether the night of
tribulation will not be soon over. We are not to understand, however,
that messengers were really sent out of Edom to Isaiah; the process was
purely a pneumatical one. The prophet stands there in Jerusalem, in the
midst of the benighted world of nations, like a sentry upon the watch
tower; he understands the anxious inquiries of the nations afar off, and
answers them according to the word of Jehovah, which is the plan and
chronological measure of the history of the nations, and the key to its
interpretation. What, then, is the prophet's reply? He lets the inquirer
"see through a glass darkly."

[Isaiah 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 21:12</span></span>

"Watchman says, Morning cometh, and also night. Will ye inquire,
inquire! Turn, come!!" The answer is intentionally and pathetically
expressed in an Aramaean form of Hebrew. אתא (written even with א at the
end, cf., [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)) is the Aramaean
word for בּוא; and בּעה בּעא) the Aramaean word for שׁאל, from the
primary form of which (בּעי) the future tib‛âyūn is taken here (as in
[Isa 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#007)), and the imperative be'ây
(Ges. 75, Anm. 4). אתיוּ, which is here pointed in the Syriac style,
אתיוּ, as in [Isa 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009), [Isa
56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012), would be similarly traceable to
אתי (cf., Ges. 75, Anm. 4, with 23, Anm. 2). But what is the meaning?
Luther seems to me to have hit upon it: "When the morning comes, it will
still be night." But v'gam (and also) is not equivalent to "and yet," as
Schrring explains it, with a reference to Ewald, 354, a. With the simple
connection in the clauses, the meaning cannot possibly be, that a
morning is coming, and that it will nevertheless continue night, but
that a morning is coming, and at the same time a night, i.e., that even
if the morning dawns, it will be swallowed up again directly by night.
And the history was quite in accordance with such an answer. The
Assyrian period of judgment was followed by the Chaldean, and the
Chaldean by the Persian, and the Persian by the Grecian, and the Grecian
by the Roman. Again and again there was a glimmer of morning dawn for
Edom (and what a glimmer in the Herodian age!), but it was swallowed up
directly by another night, until Edom became an utter Dūmâh, and
disappeared from the history of the nations. The prophet does not see to
the utmost end of these Edomitish nights, but he has also no consolation
for Edom. It is altogether different with Edom from what it is with
Israel, the nocturnal portion of whose history has a morning dawn,
according to promise, as its irrevocable close. The prophet therefore
sends the inquirers home. Would they ask any further questions, they
might do so, might turn and come. In shūbū (turn back) there lies a
significant though ambiguous hint. It is only in the case of their
turning, coming, i.e., coming back converted, that the prophet has any
consolatory answer for them. So long as they are not so, there is
suspended over their future an interminable night, to the prophet as
much as to themselves. The way to salvation for every other people is
just the same as for Israel - namely, the way of repentance.

[Isaiah 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 21:13</span></span>

The heading בּערב משּׂא (the ע written according to the best codd. with
a simple sheva), when pointed as we have it, signifies, according to
[Zac 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001) (cf., [Isa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007)), "oracle against Arabia." But why
not massâ ‛Arâb, since massâ is followed by a simple genitive in the
other three headings? Or again, is this the only heading in the
tetralogy that is not symbolical? We must assume that the Beth by which
this is distinguished is introduced for the express purpose of rendering
it symbolical, and that the prophet pointed it first of all בּערב, but
had at the same time בּערב in his mind. The earlier translators (lxx,
Targum, Syr., Vulg., Ar.) read the second בּערב like the first, but
without any reason. The oracle commences with an evening scene, even
without our altering the second בּערב. And the massa has a symbolical
title founded upon this evening scene. Just as 'Edom becomes Dumah,
inasmuch as a night without a morning dawn falls upon the mountain land
of Seir, so will בּערב soon be בּערב, inasmuch as the sun of Arabia is
setting. Evening darkness is settling upon Arabia, and the morning-land
is becoming an evening-land. "In the wilderness in Arabia ye must pass
the night, caravans of the Dedanians. Bring water to meet thirsty ones!
The inhabitants of the land of Tema are coming with its bread before the
fugitive. For they are flying before swords, before drawn swords, and
before a bent bow, and before oppressive war." There is all the less
ground for making any alteration in בּערב בּיער, inasmuch as the second
Beth (wilderness in Arabia for of Arabia) is favoured by Isaiah's common
usage ([Isa 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021); [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002); compare [Sa2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021); [Amo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)). ‛Arab, written with pathach, is
Arabia ([Eze 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#021); ‛arâb in pause,
[Jer 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#024)); and ya‛ar here is the
solitary barren desert, as distinguished from the cultivated land with
its cities and villages. Wetzstein rejects the meaning nemus, sylva,
with ya‛ar has been assumed to have, because it would be rather a
promise than a threat to be told that they would have to flee from the
steppe into the wood, since a shady tree is the most delicious dream of
the Beduins, who not only find shade in the forest, but a constant
supply of green pasture, and fuel for their hospitable hearths. He
therefore renders it, "Ye will take refuge in the V‛ar of Arabia," i.e.,
the open steppe will no longer afford you any shelter, so that ye will
be obliged to hide yourselves in the V‛ar. Arab. wa‛ur for example, is
the name applied to the trachytic rayon of the Syro-Hauranitic volcanoes
which is covered with a layer of stones. But as the V‛ar in this sense
is also planted with trees, and furnishes firewood, this epithet must
rest upon some peculiar distinction in the radical meaning of the word
ya‛ar, which really does mean a forest in Hebrew, though not necessarily
a forest of lofty trees, but also a wilderness overgrown with brushwood
and thorn-bushes. The meaning of the passage before us we therefore take
to be this: the trading caravans ('ârchōth, like hailı̄coth in [Job
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019)) of the Dedanians, that mixed
tribe of Cushites and Abrahamides dwelling in the neighbourhood of the
Edomites ([Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007); [Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003)), when on their way from east to
west, possibly to Tyre ([Eze 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020)),
would be obliged to encamp in the wilderness, being driven out of the
caravan road in consequence of the war that was spreading from north to
south. The prophet, whose sympathy mingles with the revelation in this
instance also, asks for water for the panting fugitives (התיוּ, as in
[Jer 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009), an imperative equivalent to
האתיוּ = האתיוּ; compare [Kg2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#003) :
there is no necessity to read קדמוּ, as the Targum, Dderlein, and Ewald
do). They are driven back with fright towards the south-east as far as
Tema, on the border of Negd and the Syrian desert. The Tema referred to
is not the trans-Hauranian Tm, which is three-quarters of an hour from
Dumah, although there is a good deal that seems to favour this,

(Note: See Wetzstein, ut supra, p. 202; compare Job, ii. 425.)

but the Tema on the pilgrim road from Damascus to Mecca, between Tebuk
and Wadi el-Kora, which is about the same distance (four days' journey)
from both these places, and also from Chaibar (it is to be
distinguished, however, from Tihama, the coast land of Yemen, the
antithesis of which is ne'gd, the mountain district of Yemen).

(Note: See Sprenger, Post und Reise-routen des Orients, Heft i. (1864),
pp. 118, 119.))

But even here in the land of Tema they do not feel themselves safe. The
inhabitants of Tema are obliged to bring them water and bread ("its
bread," lachmo, referring to nōdēd: the bread necessary in order to save
them), into the hiding-places in which they have concealed themselves.
"How humiliating," as Drechsler well observes, "to be obliged to
practise their hospitality, the pride of Arabian customs, in so
restricted a manner, and with such unbecoming secrecy!" But it could not
possibly be done in any other way, since the weapons of the foe were
driving them incessantly before them, and the war itself was rolling
incessantly forward like an overwhelming colossus, as the repetition of
the word "before" (mippenē) no less than four times clearly implies.

[Isaiah 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 21:16</span></span>

Thus does the approaching fate of Arabia present itself in picture
before the prophet's eye, whilst it is more distinctly revealed in [Isa
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#016), [Isa
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017) : "For thus hath the Lord spoken
to me, Within a year, as the years of a hired labourer, it is over with
all the glory of Kedar. And the remnant of the number of bows of heroes
of the Kedarenes will be small: for Jehovah, the God of Israel, hath
spoken." The name Kedar is here the collective name of the Arabic tribes
generally. In the stricter sense, Kedar, like Nebaioth, which is
associated with it, as a nomadic tribe of Ishmaelites, which wandered as
far as the Elanitic Gulf. Within the space of a year, measured as
exactly as is generally the case where employers and labourers are
concerned, Kedar's freedom, military strength, numbers, and wealth (all
these together constituting its glory), would all have disappeared.
Nothing but a small remnant would be left of the heroic sons of Kedar
and their bows. They are numbered here by their bows (in distinction
from the numbering by heads), showing that the righting men are referred
to - a mode of numbering which is customary among the Indian tribes of
America, for example.

(Note: See the work of V. Martius on the Indians of Brazil, i. 395, 411,
etc.)

The noun she'âr (remnant) is followed by five genitives here (just as
peri is by four in [Isa 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012)); and
the predicate ימעטוּ is in the plural because of the copiousness of the
subject. The period of the fulfilment of the prophecy keeps us still
within the Assyrian era. In Herodotus (2, 141), Sennacherib is actually
called "king of Arabians and Assyrians" (compare Josephus, Ant. x. 1,
4); and both Sargon and Sennacherib, in their annalistic inscriptions,
take credit to themselves for the subjugation of Arabian tribes. But in
the Chaldean era Jeremiah predicted the same things against Kedar
(chapter 49) as against Edom; and [Jer
49:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#030) was evidently written with a
retrospective allusion to this oracle of Isaiah. When the period fixed
by Isaiah for the fulfilment arrived, a second period grew out of it,
and one still more remote, inasmuch as a second empire, viz., the
Chaldean, grew out of the Assyrian, and inaugurated a second period of
judgment for the nations. After a short glimmer of morning, the night
set in a second time upon Edom, and a second time upon Arabia.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 22](isa022)

</div>
