<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa043)  [Next](isa045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001)

[Isaiah 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 44:1</span></span>

The prophet cannot bear to dwell any longer upon this dark picture of
their state of punishment; and light of the promise breaks through
again, and in this third field of the fourth prophecy in all the more
intensive form. "And now hear, O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I
have chosen. Thus saith Jehovah, thy Creator, and thy Former from the
womb, who cometh to thy help; Fear not, my servant Jacob; and Jeshurun,
whom I have chosen! For I will pour out water upon thirsty ones, and
brooks upon the dry ground; will pour out my Spirit upon thy seed, and
my blessing upon thine after-growth; and they shoot up among the grass,
as willows by flowing waters." In contrast with the cheerem, i.e., the
setting apart for destruction, there is here presented the promise of
the pouring out of the Spirit and of blessing; and in contrast with the
giddūphı̄m, the promise of general eagerness to come and honour Israel
and its God ([Isa 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005)). The epithets
by which Jehovah designates Himself, and those applied to Israel in [Isa
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001), [Isa
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002), make the claim to love all the
more urgent and emphatic. The accent which connects מבּטן ויצרך, so as
to make יעזרך by itself an attributive clause like בו בּחרתּי, is
confirmed by [Isa 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024) and [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005) : Israel as a nation and all the
individuals within it are, as the chosen servant of Jehovah ([Isa
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001)), the direct formation of Jehovah
Himself from the remotest point of their history. In [Isa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026), Jeshurun is used
interchangeably with Jacob. This word occurs in three other passages
(viz., [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015); [Deu
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005), [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)), and is always written with
kibbutz, just as it is here. The rendering ̓Ισραελίσκος in Gr. Ven. is
founded upon the supposition that the word is equivalent to ישׂרלוּן - a
strange contraction, which is inadmissible, if only on account of the
substitution of שׁ for שׂ. The שׁ points back to ישׁר, to be straight or
even; hence A. S. Th. εὐθύσς (elsewhere εὐθύτατος), Jerome rectissimus
(though in [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015) he renders it,
after the lxx, dilectus). It is an offshoot of ישׁר = ישׁר ([Psa
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021)), like זבלוּן, ידתוּן from זבל,
ידת; and ūn (= ōn) does not stamp it as a diminutive (for אישׁון, which
Kamphausen adduces in opposition to Hengstenberg and Volck, does not
stand in the same relation to אישׁ as mannikin to man, but rather as the
image of a man to a man himself; compare the Arabic insân). We must not
render it therefore as an affectionate diminutive, as Gesenius does, the
more especially as Jehovah, though speaking in loving terms, does not
adopt the language of a lover. The relation of Jeshurun to ישׁר is
rather the same as that of שׁלמה to שׁלום, so that the real meaning is
"gentleman," or one of gentlemanly or honourable mind, though this need
not appear in the translation, since the very nature of a proper name
would obliterate it. In [Isa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003), the
blessings to be expected are assigned as the reason for the exhortation
to be of good cheer. In [Isa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003)
water is promised in the midst of drought, and in [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003) the Spirit and blessing of God,
just as in Joel the promise of rain is first of all placed in contrast
with drought; and this is followed by the promise of the far surpassing
antitype, namely, the outpouring of the Spirit. There is nothing at
variance with this in the fact that we have not the form צמאה in the
place of צמא fo e (according to the analogy of עיפה ארץ, ציּה, נלאה,
[Psa 68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010)). By צמא) we understand the
inhabitants of the land who are thirsting for rain, and by yabbâshâh the
parched land itself. Further on, however, an express distinction is made
between the abundance of water in the land and the prosperous growth of
the nation planted by the side of water-brooks ([Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)). We must not regard [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003), therefore, as a figure, and [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003) as the explanation, or turn [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003) into a simile introduced in the
form of a protasis, although unquestionably water and mountain streams
are made the symbol, or rather the anagogical type, of spiritual
blessings coming down from above in the form of heavenly gifts, by a
gradual ascent from מים and נוזלים (from נזל, to trickle downwards, [Sol
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015), [Jer
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#014)) to ה רוּח and ה בּרכת (בּרכּת).
When these natural and spiritual waters flow down upon the people, once
more restored to their home, they spring up among (בּבין only met with
here, lxx and Targum כּבין) the grass, like willows by water-brooks.

The willows

(Note: "The garab," says Wetzstein, "was only met with by me in one
locality, or, at any rate, I only noticed it once, namely in the Wady
So'b, near to a ford of the river which is called the Hd ford, from the
chirbet el-Hd, a miserable ruin not far off. It is half an hour to the
west of Nimrin (Nimrim, [Isa 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006)),
or, speaking more exactly, half an hour above (i.e., to the east of)
Zaft Nimriin, an antique road on the northern bank of the river, hewn in
a precipitous wall of rock, like the ladder of Tyre. I travelled through
the valley in June 1860, and find the following entry in my diary: 'At
length the ravine opened up into a broader valley, so that we could get
down to the clear, copious, and rapid stream, and were able to cross it.
Being exhausted by the heat, we lay down near the ford among the
oleanders, which the mass of flowers covered with a rosy glow. The reed
grows here to an unusual height, as in the Wady Yarmk, and willows
(zafzaf) and garab are mingled together, and form many-branched trees of
three or four fathoms in height. The vegetation, which is fresh and
luxuriant by the water-side, is scorched up with the heat in the valley
within as little as ten paces from the banks of the stream. The farthest
off is the 'osar plant, with its thick, juicy, dark green stalks and
leaves, and its apple-like fruit, which is of the same colour, and
therefore not yet ripe. The garab tree has already done flowering. The
leaves of this tree stand quite close around the stem, as in the case of
the Sindiana (the Syrian oak), and, like the leaves of the latter, are
fringed with little thorns; but, like the willow, it is a water plant,
and our companions Abdallah and Nasrallah assured us that it was only
met with near flowing water and in hot lowlands. Its bunches of flowers
are at the points of the slender branches, and assume an umbelliferous
form. This is the ערב of the Bible.' Consequently the garab (or (as nom.
unitatis) the garaba cannot be regarded as a species of willow; and
Winer's assumption (Real-Wrterbuch, s.v. Weiden), that the weeping
willow is intended at any rate in [Psa
137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002), is an error. In Arabic the
weeping willow is always called shafshaf mustachi (the drooping tree).
At the same time, we may render ערבים 'willows,' since the garab loves
running water as well as the willow, and apparently they seek one
another's society; it is quite enough that the difference should be
clearly pointed out in the commentary. The reason why the garab did not
find its way into my herbarium was the following. On my arrival in Salt,
I received the first intelligence of the commencement of the slaughter
of the Christians on Antilibanus, and heard the report, which was then
commonly believed, that a command had been sent from Constantinople to
exterminate Christianity from Syria. This alarming report compelled me
to inquire into the actual state of affairs; therefore, leaving my
luggage and some of my companions behind, I set off with all speed to
Jerusalem, where I hoped to obtain reliable information, accompanied by
Herr Drgen, my kavas, and two natives, viz., Abdallah the smith, from
Salt, and Nasrallah the smith, from Ain Genna. For a ride like this,
which did not form part of the original plan of my journey, everything
but weapons, even a herbarium, would have been in the way. Still there
are small caravans going every week between Salt and Jerusalem, and they
must always cross the Hd ford, so that it would be easy to get a twig of
the garab. So far as I remember, the remains of the blossom were of a
dirty white colour." (Compare p. 213, where we have taken nachal
hâ‛ărâbhı̄m, according to the meaning of the words, as a synonym of Wady
Sufsaf, or, more correctly, Safsf. From the description given above, the
garab is a kind of viburnum with indented leaves. This tree, which is of
moderate height, is found by the side of streams along with the willow.
According to Sprengel (Gesch. der Botanik. i. 25), the safsâf is the
salix subserrata of Wildenow).)

are the nation, which has hitherto resembled withered plants in a barren
soil, but is now restored to all the bloom of youth through the Spirit
and blessing of God. The grass stands for the land, which resembles a
green luxuriant plain; and the water-brooks represent the abundant
supply of living waters, which promote the prosperity of the land and
its inhabitants.

[Isaiah 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 44:5</span></span>

When Jehovah has thus acknowledged His people once more, the heathen, to
whose giddūphı̄m (blasphemies) Israel has hitherto been given up, will
count it the greatest honour to belong to Jehovah and His people. "One
will say, I belong to Jehovah; and a second will solemnly name the name
of Jacob; and a third will inscribe himself to Jehovah, and name the
name of Israel with honour." The threefold zeh refers to the heathen, as
in [Psa 87:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004). One will declare
himself to belong to Jehovah; another will call with the name of Jacob,
i.e., (according to the analogy of the phrase ה בשׁם קרא) make it the
medium and object of solemn exclamation; a third will write with his
hand (ידו, an acc. of more precise definition, like חמה in [Isa
42:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#025), and זביחך in [Isa
43:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#023)), "To Jehovah," thereby
attesting that he desires to belong to Jehovah, and Jehovah alone. This
is the explanation given by Gesenius, Hahn, and others; whereas Hitzig
and Knobel follow the lxx in the rendering, "he will write upon his hand
'‛layehōvâh,' i.e., mark the name of Jehovah upon it." But apart from
the fact that kâthabh, with an accusative of the writing materials,
would be unprecedented (the construction required would be על־ידו), this
view is overthrown by the fact that tatooing was prohibited by the
Israelitish law ([Lev 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#028); compare
the mark of the beast in [Rev 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016)).
בשׁם קרא is interchanged with בסם כּנּה, to surname, or entitle (the
Syriac and Arabic are the same; compare the Arabic kunye, the name given
to a man as the father of such and such a person, e.g., Abu-Muhammed,
rhetorically called metonymy). The name Israel becomes a name or title
of honour among the heathen. This concludes the fourth prophecy, which
opens out into three distinct fields. With ועתּה in [Isa
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001) it began to approach the close,
just as the third did in [Isa 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001) -a
well-rounded whole, which leaves nothing wanting.

[Isaiah 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 44:6</span></span>

A new pledge of redemption is given, and a fresh exhortation to trust in
Jehovah; the wretchedness of the idols and their worshippers being
pointed out, in contrast with Jehovah, the only speaking and acting God.
[Isa 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006) "Thus saith Jehovah the King
of Israel, and its Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts; I am first, and I last;
and beside me there is no God." The fact that His deity, which rules
over not only the natural world, but history as well, is thus without
equal and above all time, is now proved by Him from the fact that He
alone manifests Himself as God, and that by the utterance of prophecy.
[Isa 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#007) "And who preaches as I do?
Let him make it known, and show it to me; since I founded the people of
ancient time! And future things, and what is approaching, let them only
make known." Jehovah shows Himself as the God of prophecy since the time
that He founded עם־עולם (יקרא refers to the continued preaching of
prophecy). ‛Am‛ōlâm is the epithet applied in [Eze
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#020) to the people of the dead, who
are sleeping the long sleep of the grave; and here it does not refer to
Israel, which could neither be called an "eternal" nation, nor a people
of the olden time, and which would have been more directly named; but
according to [Isa 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007) and [Isa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005), where ‛am signifies the human
race, and [Job 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015)., where ‛ōlâm is
the time of the old world before the flood, it signifies humanity as
existing from the very earliest times. The prophecies of Jehovah reach
back even to the history of paradise. The parenthetical clause, "Let him
speak it out, and tell it me," is like the apodosis of a hypothetical
protasis: "if any one thinks that he can stand by my side." The
challenge points to earlier prophecies; with ואתיּות it takes a turn to
what is future, אתיות itself denoting what is absolutely future,
according to [Isa 41:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#023), and תּבאנה
אשׁר what is about to be realized immediately; lâmō is an ethical
dative.

[Isaiah 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 44:8</span></span>

Of course, none of the heathen gods could in any way answer to the
challenge. So much the more confident might Israel be, seeing that it
had quite another God. "Despair ye not, neither tremble: have not I told
thee long ago, and made known, and ye are my witnesses: is there a God
beside me? And nowhere a rock; I know of none." The Jewish
lexicographers derive תּרהוּ (with the first syllable closed) from רהה
(רה); whereas modern lexicographers prefer some of them to read תּרהוּ,
tı̄rehū, from ירהּ (Ges., Knobel), and others תּיראוּ (Ewald). But the
possibility of there being a verb רהה, to tremble or fear, cannot for a
moment be doubted when we think of such words as ירא, ירע, compare also
Arab. r'h (applied to water moving to and fro). It was not of the
heathen deities that they were directed not to be afraid, as in [Jer
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005), but rather the great catastrophe
coming upon the nations, of which Cyrus was the instrument. In the midst
of this, when one nation after another would be overthrown, and its
tutelar gods would prove to be worthless, Israel would have nothing to
fear, since its God, who was no dumb idol, had foretold all this, and
that indeed long ago (מאז, cf., מראשׁ, [Isa
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#026)), as they themselves must bear
witness. Prophecies before the captivity had foretold the conquest of
Babylon by Medes and Elamites, and the deliverance of Israel from the
Babylonian bondage; and even these prophecies themselves were like a
spirit's voice from the far distant past, consoling the people of the
captivity beforehand, and serving to support their faith. On the ground
of such well-known self-manifestations, Jehovah could well ask, "Is
there a God beside me?" - a virtual denial in the form of an
interrogation, to which the categorical denial, "There is no rock (i.e.,
no ground of trust, [Isa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#004); [Isa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010)), I know of none (beside me),"
is attached.

[Isaiah 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 44:9</span></span>

The heathen gods are so far from being a ground of trust, that all who
trust in them must discover with alarm how they have deceived
themselves. "The makers of idols, they are all desolation, and their
bosom-children worthless; and those who bear witness for them see
nothing and know nothing, that they may be put to shame. Who hath formed
the god, and cast the idol to no profit? Behold, all its followers will
be put to shame; and the workmen are men: let them all assemble
together, draw near, be alarmed, be all put to shame together." The
chămūdı̄m (favourites) of the makers of idols are the false gods, for
whose favour they sue with such earnestness. If we retain the word המּה,
which is pointed as critically suspicious, and therefore is not
accentuated, the explanation might possibly be, "Their witnesses (i.e.,
witnesses against themselves) are they (the idols): they see not, and
are without consciousness, that they (those who trust in them) may be
put to shame." In any case, the subject to yēbhōshū (shall be put to
shame) is the worshippers of idols. If we erase המה, (עדיהם will be
those who come forward as witnesses for the idols. This makes the words
easier and less ambiguous. At the same time, the Septuagint retains the
word (καὶ μάρτυρες αὐτῶν εἰσίν). As "not seeing" here signifies to be
blind, so "not knowing" is also to be understood as a self-contained
expression, meaning to be irrational, just as in [Isa
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#020); [Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010) (in [Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003), on the other hand, we have taken
it in a different sense). למען implies that the will of the sinner in
his sin has also destruction for its object; and this is not something
added to the sin, but growing out of it. The question in [Isa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010) summons the maker of idols for
the purpose of announcing his fate, and in הועיל לבלתּי (to no profit)
this announcement is already contained. [Isa
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#011) is simply a development of this
expression, "to no profit." יצר, like נטע in [Isa
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014), is contrary to the rhythmical
law milra which prevails elsewhere. חבריו (its followers) are not the
fellow-workmen of the maker of idols (inasmuch as in that case the maker
himself would be left without any share in the threat), but the
associates (i.e., followers) of the idols ([Hos
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#017); [Co1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020)). It is a pernicious work that
they have thus had done for them. And what of the makers themselves?
They are numbered among the men. So that they who ought to know that
they are made by God, become makers of gods themselves. What an
absurdity! Let them crowd together, the whole guild of god-makers, and
draw near to speak to the works they have made. All their eyes will soon
be opened with amazement and alarm.

[Isaiah 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 44:12</span></span>

The prophet now conducts us into the workshops. "The iron-smith has a
chisel, and works with red-hot coals, and shapes it with hammers, and
works it with his powerful arm. He gets hungry thereby, and his strength
fails; if he drink no water, he becomes exhausted. The carpenter draws
the line, marks it with the pencil, carries it out with planes, and
makes a drawing of it with the compass, and carries it out like the
figure of a man, like the beauty of a man, which may dwell in the
house." The two words chârash barzel are connected together in the sense
of faber ferrarius, as we may see from the expression chârash ‛ētsı̄m
(the carpenter, faber lignarius), which follows in [Isa
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#013). Chârash is the construct of
chârâsh (= charrâsh), as in [Exo
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#011). The second kametz of this form
of noun does indeed admit of contraction, but only to the extent of a
full short vowel; consequently the construct of the plural is not חרשׁי,
but חרשׁי ([Isa 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016), etc.). Hence
[Isa 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#012) describes how the smith
constructs an idol of iron, [Isa 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#013)
how the carpenter makes one of wood. But the first clause, מעצד בּרזל
חרשׁ, is enigmatical. In any case, מעצד is a smith's tool of some kind
(from עצד, related to חצד). And consequently Gesenius, Umbreit, and
others, adopt the rendering, "the smith an axe, that does he work ... ;"
but the further account of the origin of an idol says nothing at all
about this axe, which the smith supplies to the carpenter, that he may
hew out an idol with it. Hitzig renders it, "The smith, a hatchet does
he work, and forms it (viz., into an idol);" but what a roundabout way!
first to make a hatchet and then make it into an idol, which would look
very slim when made. Knobel translates it, "As for the cutting-smith, he
works it;" but this guild of cutting-smiths certainly belongs to Utopia.
The best way to render the sentence intelligible, would be to supply לו:
"The smith has (uses) the ma‛ătsâd." But in all probability a word has
dropped out; and the Septuagint rendering, ὅτι ὤξυνεν τέκτων σίδηρον
σκεπάρνω εἰργάσατο κ.τ.λ, shows that the original reading of the text
was מעצד ברזל חרס חדד, and that חדד got lost on account of its proximity
to יחץ. The meaning therefore is, "The smith has sharpened, or sharpens
(chiddēd, syn. shinnēn) the ma‛ătsâd," possibly the chisel, to cut the
iron upon the anvil; and works with red-hot coals, making the iron
red-hot by blowing the fire. The piece of iron which he cuts off is the
future idol, and this he shapes with hammers (יצרהוּ the future of יצר).
And what of the carpenter? He stretches the line upon the block of wood,
to measure the length and breadth of the idol; he marks it upon the wood
with red-stone (sered, rubrica, used by carpenters), and works it with
planes (maqtsu‛ōth, a feminine form of מקצוע, from קצע, to cut off, pare
off, plane; compare the Arabic mikta‛), and with the compasses
(mechūgâh, the tool used, lâchūg, i.e. for making a circle) he draws the
outline of it, that is to say, in order that the different parts of the
body may be in right proportion; and he constructs it in such a manner
that it acquires the shape of a man, the beautiful appearance of a man,
to be set up like a human inmate in either a temple or private house.
The piel תּאר (תּאר), from which comes yetāărēhū, is varied here
(according to Isaiah's custom; cf., [Isa
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#007); [Isa
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#005)) with the poelתּאר, which is to
be understood as denoting the more exact configuration. The preterites
indicate the work for which both smith and carpenter have made their
preparations; the futures, the work in which they are engaged.

[Isaiah 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 44:14</span></span>

The prophet now traces the origin of the idols still further back. Their
existence or non-existence ultimately depends upon whether it rains or
not. "One prepares to cut down cedars, and takes holm and oak-tree, and
chooses for himself among the trees of the forest. He has planted a fig,
and the rain draws it up. And it serves the man for firing: he takes
thereof, and warms himself; he also heats, and bakes bread; he also
works it into a god, and prostrates himself; makes an idol of it, and
falls down before it. The half of it he has burned in the fire: over the
half of it he eats flesh, roasts a roast, and is satisfied; he also
warms himself, and says, Hurrah, I am getting warm, I feel the heat. And
the rest of it he makes into a god, into his idol, and says, Save me,
for thou art my god." The subject of the sentence is not the carpenter
of the previous verse, but "any one." ארזים apparently stands first, as
indicating the species; and in the Talmud and Midrash the trees named
are really described as ארזים מיני. But tirzâh (from târaz, to be hard
or firm) does not appear to be a coniferous tree; and the connection
with 'allōn, the oak, is favourable to the rendering ἀγριοβάλανος (lxx,
A. Th.), ilex (Vulg.). On 'immēts, to choose, see [Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010). ארן (with Nun minusculum),
plur. ארונים (b. Ros-ha Sana 23a) or ארנים (Para iii. 8), is explained
by the Talmud as ערי, sing. ערא, i.e., according to Aruch and Rashi,
laurier, the berries of which are called baies. We have rendered it
"fig," according to the lxx and Jerome, since it will not do to follow
the seductive guidance of the similarity in sound to ornus (which is
hardly equivalent to ὀρεινός).

(Note: The ἀρία of Theophrastus is probably quercus ilex, which is still
called ἀρία; the laurus nobilis is now called βαΐηά, from the branches
which serve instead of palm-branches.)

The description is genealogical, and therefore moves retrogressively,
from the felling to the planting. והיה in [Isa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015) refers to the felled and planted
tree, and primarily to the ash. מהם (of such as these) is neuter, as in
[Isa 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006); at the same time, the
prophet had the עצים (the wood, both as produce and material) in his
mind. The repeated אף lays emphasis upon the fact, that such different
things are done with the very same wood. It is sued for warming, and
fore the preparation of food, as well as for making a god. On the verbs
of adoration, hishtachăvâh (root shach, to sink, to settle down) and
sâgad, which is only applied to idolatrous worship, and from which
mes'gid, a mosque, is derived, see Holemann's Bibelstudien, i. 3. למו
may no doubt be take as a plural (= להם, as in [Isa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005)), "such things (taila) does he
worship," as Stier supposes; but it is probably pathetic, and equivalent
to לו, as in [Isa 53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008) (compare [Psa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007); Ewald, 247, a). According to the
double application of the wood mentioned in [Isa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015), a distinction is drawn in [Isa
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016), [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017) between the one half of the wood
and the other. The repeated chetsyō (the half of it) in [Isa
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016) refers to the first half, which
furnishes not only fuel for burning, but shavings and coals for roasting
and baking as well. And as a fire made for cooking warms quite as much
as one made expressly for the purpose, the prophet dwells upon this
benefit which the wood of the idol does confer. On the tone upon the
last syllable of chammōthı̄, see at [Job
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017); and on the use of the word ראה
as a comprehensive term, embracing every kind of sensation and
perception, see my Psychologie, p. 234. Diagoras of Melos, a pupil of
Democritus, once threw a wooden standing figure of Hercules into the
fire, and said jocularly, "Come now, Hercules, perform thy thirteenth
labour, and help me to cook the turnips."

[Isaiah 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 44:18</span></span>

So irrational is idolatry; but yet, through self-hardening, they have
fallen under the judgment of hardness of heart ([Isa
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009); [Isa
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#003); [Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010)), and have been given up to a
reprobate mind ([Rom 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)). "They
perceive not, and do not understand: for their eyes are smeared over, so
that they do not see; their hearts, so that they do not understand. And
men take it not to heart, no perception and no understanding, that men
should say, The half of it I have burned in the fire, and also baked
bread upon the coals thereof; roasted flesh, and eaten: and ought I to
make the rest of it an abomination, to fall down before the produce of a
tree?" Instead of טח, [Lev 14:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#042), the
third person is written טח (from tâchach, Ges. 72, Anm. 8) in a
circumstantial sense: their eyes are, as it were, smeared over with
plaster. The expression אל־לב השׁיב or על־לב ([Isa
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008)), literally to carry back into
the heart, which we find as well as על־לב שׂים, to take to heart ([Isa
42:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#025)), answers exactly to the idea of
reflection, here with reference to the immense contrast between a piece
of wood and the Divine Being. The second and third לא in [Isa
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#019) introduce substantive clauses,
just as verbal clauses are introduced by ואין. לאמר is used in the same
manner as in [Isa 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008) : "perception
and insight showing themselves in their saying." On būl, see [Job
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020); the meaning "block" cannot be
established: the talmudic būl, a lump or piece, which Ewald adduces, is
the Greek βῶλος.

[Isaiah 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 44:20</span></span>

This exposure of the infatuation of idolatry closes with an epiphonem in
the form of a gnome (cf., [Isa 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#007),
[Isa 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#010)). "He who striveth after
ashes, a befooled heart has led him astray, and he does not deliver his
soul, and does not think, Is there not a lie in my right hand?" We have
here a complete and self-contained sentence, which must not be broken up
in the manner proposed by Knobel, "He hunts after ashes; his heart is
deceived," etc. He who makes ashes, i.e., things easily scattered,
perishable, and worthless, the object of his effort and striving
(compare rūăch in [Hos 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#002)), has bee
led astray from the path of truth and salvation by a heart overpowered
by delusion; he is so certain, that he does not think of saving his
soul, and it never occurs to him to say, "Is there not a lie in my right
hand?" All that belongs to idolatry is sheqer - a fabrication and a lie.
רעה means primarily to pasture or tend, hence to be concerned about, to
strive after. הותל is an attributive, from tâlal - hâtal, ludere,
ludificare (see at [Isa 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#010)).

[Isaiah 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 44:21</span></span>

The second half of the prophecy commences with [Isa
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021). It opens with an admonition.
"Remember this, Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed
thee; thou art servant to me, O Israel: thou art not forgotten by me."
The thing to which the former were blind - namely, that idolatry is a
lie - Jacob was to have firmly impressed upon its mind. The words "and
Israel," which are attached, are a contract for "and remember this, O
Israel" (compare the vocatives after Vâv in [Pro
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#005) and [Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)). In the reason assigned, the
tone rests upon my in the expression "my servant," and for this reason
"servant to me" is used interchangeably with it. Israel is the servant
of Jehovah, and as such it was formed by Jehovah; and therefore
reverence was due to Him, and Him alone. The words which follow are
rendered by the lxx, Targum, Jerome, and Luther as though they read לא
תנשׁני, though Hitzig regards the same rendering as admissible even with
the reading תנּשנּי, inasmuch as the niphal נשּׁה has the middle sense
of ἐπιλανθάνεσθαι, oblivisci. But it cannot be shown that nizkar is ever
used in the analogous sense of μιμνήσκεσθαι, recordari. The niphal,
which was no doubt originally reflective, is always used in Hebrew to
indicate simply the passive endurance of something which originated with
the subject of the action referred to, so that nisshâh could only
signify "to forget one's self." We must indeed admit the possibility of
the meaning "to forget one's self" having passed into the meaning "to be
forgetful," and this into the meaning "to forget." The Aramaean תנשׁי
also signifies to be forgotten and (with an accent following) to forget,
and the connection with an objective suffix has a support in ויּלּחמוּני
in [Psa 109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003). But the latter is
really equivalent to אתּי וילחמו, so that it may be adduced with equal
propriety in support of the other rendering, according to which תּנּשׁני
is equivalent to לי תנש (Ges., Umbr., Ewald, Stier). There are many
examples of this brachyological use of the suffix (Ges. 121, 4), so that
this rendering is certainly the safer of the two. It also suits the
context quite as well as the former, "Oh, forget me not;" the assurance
"thou wilt not be forgotten by me" (compare [Isa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015) and the lamentation of Israel in
[Isa 40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027)) being immediately followed
by an announcement of the act of love, by which the declaration is most
gloriously confirmed. - [Isa 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022) "I
have blotted out thy transgressions as a mist, and thy sins as clouds:
return to me; for I have redeemed thee." We have adopted the rendering
"mist" merely because we have no synonym to "cloud;" we have not
translated it "thick cloud," because the idea of darkness, thickness, or
opacity, which is the one immediately suggested by the word, had become
almost entirely lost (see [Isa 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#005)).
Moreover, קל עב is evidently intended here (see [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)), inasmuch as the point of
comparison is not the dark, heavy multitude of sins, but the facility
and rapidity with which they are expunged. Whether we connect with
מסהיתי the idea of a stain, as in [Psa
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003), [Psa
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011), or that of a debt entered in a
ledge, as in [Col 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014), and as we
explained it in [Isa 43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025) (cf.,
mâchâh, [Exo 32:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)), in any case
sin is regarded as something standing between God and man, and impeding
or disturbing the intercourse between them. This Jehovah clears away,
just as when His wind sweeps away the clouds, and restores the blue sky
again ([Job 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013)). Thus does God's
free grace now interpose at the very time when Israel thinks He has
forgotten it, blotting out Israel's sin, and proving this by redeeming
it from a state of punishment. What an evangelical sound the preaching
of the Old Testament evangelist has in this passage also! Forgiveness
and redemption are not offered on condition of conversion, but the mercy
of God comes to Israel in direct contrast to what its works deserve, and
Israel is merely called upon to reciprocate this by conversion and
renewed obedience. The perfects denote that which has essentially taken
place. Jehovah has blotted out Israel's sin, inasmuch as He does not
impute it any more, and thus has redeemed Israel. All that yet remains
is the outward manifestation of this redemption, which is already
accomplished in the counsel of God.

[Isaiah 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 44:23</span></span>

There is already good ground, therefore, for exuberant rejoicing; and
the reply of the church to these words of divine consolation is as
follows: "Exult, O heavens; for Jehovah hath accomplished it: shout, ye
depths of the earth; break out, ye mountains, into exulting; thou
forest, and all the wood therein: for Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, and
He showeth Himself glorious upon Israel." All creation is to rejoice in
the fact that Jehovah has completed what He purposed, that He has
redeemed His people, and henceforth will show Himself glorious in them.
The heavens on high are to exult; also the depths of the earth, i.e.,
not Hades, which would be opposed to the prevailing view of the Old
Testament (Ps 66, cf., [Psa 88:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#013)),
but the interior of the earth, with its caves, its pits, and its deep
abysses (see [Psa 139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015)); and the
mountains and woods which rise up from the earth towards heaven - all
are to unite in the exultation of the redeemed: for the redemption that
is being accomplished in man will extend its effects in all directions,
even to the utmost limits of the natural world.

This exulting finale is a safe boundary-stone of this fifth prophecy. It
opened with "Thus saith the Lord," and the sixth opens with the same.

[Isaiah 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 44:24</span></span>

The promise takes a new turn here, acquiring greater and greater
speciality. It is introduced as the word of Jehovah, who first gave
existence to Israel, and has not let it go to ruin. "Thus saith Jehovah,
thy Redeemer, and He that formed thee from the womb, I Jehovah am He
that accomplisheth all; who stretched out the heavens alone, spread out
the earth by Himself; who bringeth to nought the signs of the prophets
of lies, and exposeth the soothsayers as raging mad; who turneth back
the wise men, and maketh their science folly; who realizeth the word of
His servant, and accomplisheth the prediction of His messengers; who
saith to Jerusalem, She shall be inhabited! and to the cities of Judah,
They shall be built, and their ruins I raise up again! who saith to the
whirlpool, Dry up; and I dry its streams! who saith to Koresh, My
shepherd and he will perform all my will; and will say to Jerusalem, She
shall be built, and the temple founded!" The prophecy which commences
with [Isa 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024) is carried on through
this group of vv. in a series of participial predicates to אנכי (I)
Jehovah is ‛ōseh kōl, accomplishing all (perficiens omnia), so that
there is nothing that is not traceable to His might and wisdom as the
first cause. It was He who alone, without the co-operation of any other
being, stretched out the heavens, who made the earth into a wide plain
by Himself, i.e., so that it proceeded from Himself alone: מאתּי, as in
[Jos 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#020) (compare מני, [Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001); and mimmennı̄ in [Hos
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004)), chethib אתּי מי, "who was with
me," or "who is it beside me?" The Targum follows the keri; the
Septuagint the chethib, attaching it to the following words, τίς ἕτερος
διασκεδάσει. [Isa 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025) passes on from
Him whom creation proves to be God, to Him who is proving Himself to be
so in history also, and that with obvious reference to the Chaldean
soothsayers and wise men ([Isa
47:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009)), who held out to proud
Babylon the most splendid and hopeful prognostics. "Who brings to nought
(mēphēr, opp. mēqı̄m) the signs," i.e., the marvellous proofs of their
divine mission which the false prophets adduced by means of fraud and
witchcraft. The lxx render baddı̄m, ἐγγαστριμύθων, Targ. bı̄dı̄n (in other
passages = 'ōb, [Lev 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027); 'ōbōth,
[Lev 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031); hence = πύθων πύθωνες). At
[Isa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006) and [Job
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#003) we have derived it as a common
noun from בּדה = בּטא, to speak at random; but it is possible that בּדה
may originally have signified to produce or bring forth, without any
reference to βαττολογεῖν, then to invent, to fabricate, so that baddı̄m
as a personal name (as in [Jer 50:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#036))
would be synonymous with baddâ'ı̄m, mendaces. On qōsemı̄m, see [Isa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#002); on yehōlēl, ([Job
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#017), where it occurs in connection
with a similar predicative description of God according to His works.

In [Isa 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026) a contrast is draw
between the heathen soothsayers and wise men, and the servant and
messengers of Jehovah, whose word, whose ‛ētsâh, i.e., determination or
disclosure concerning the future (cf., yâ‛ats, [Isa
41:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#028)), he realizes and perfectly
fulfils. By "his servant" we are to understand Israel itself, according
to [Isa 42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019), but only relatively,
namely, as the bearer of the prophetic word, and therefore as the kernel
of Israel regarded from the standpoint of the prophetic mission which it
performed; and consequently "his messengers" are the prophets of Jehovah
who were called out of Israel. The singular "his servant" is expanded in
"his messenger" into the plurality embraced in the one idea. This is far
more probable than that the author of these prophetic words, who only
speaks of himself in a roundabout manner even in [Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006), should here refer directly to
himself (according to [Isa 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003)). In
[Isa 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026) the predicates become
special prophecies, and hence their outward limits are also defined. As
we have תּוּשׁב and not תּוּשׁבי, we must adopt the rendering habitetur
and oedificentur, with which the continuation of the latter et vastata
ejus erigam agrees. In [Isa 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#027) the
prophecy moves back from the restoration of Jerusalem and the cities of
Judah to the conquest of Babylon. The expression calls to mind the
drying up of the Red Sea ([Isa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010);
[Isa 43:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#016)); but here it relates to
something future, according to [Isa
42:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#015); [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002) -namely, to the drying up of the
Euphrates, which Cyrus turned into the enlarged basin of Sepharvaim, so
that the water sank to the depth of a single foot, and men could "go
through on foot" (Herod. i. 191). But in the complex view of the
prophet, the possibility of the conqueror's crossing involved the
possibility or the exiles' departing from the prison of the imperial
city, which was surrounded by a natural and artificial line of waters
([Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015)). צוּלה (from צוּל = צלל,
to whiz or whirl) refers to the Euphrates, just as metsūlâh in [Job
41:23](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#023); [Zac
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011), does to the Nile; נתרריה is
used in the same sense as the Homeric ̓Ωοκεάνοιο ῥέεθρα. In [Isa
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028) the special character of the
promise reaches its highest shoot. The deliverer of Israel is mentioned
by name: "That saith to Koresh, My shepherd (i.e., a ποιμὴν λαῶν
appointed by me), and he who performs all my will" (chēphets, θέλημα,
not in the generalized sense of πρᾶγμα), and that inasmuch as he (Cyrus)
saith to (or of) Jerusalem, It shall be built (tibbâneh, not the second
pers. tibbânı̄), and the foundation of the temple laid (hēkhâl a
masculine elsewhere, here a feminine). This is the passage which is said
by Josephus to have induced Cyrus to send back the Jews to their native
land: "Accordingly, when Cyrus read this, and admired the divine power,
an earnest desire and ambition seized upon him to fulfil what was so
written" (Jos. Ant. xi. 2). According to Ctesias and others, the name of
Cyrus signifies the sun.But all that can really be affirmed is, that it
sounds like the name of the sun. For in Neo-Pers. the sun is called
char, in Zendic hvarĕ (karĕ), and from this proper names are formed,
such as chars'ı̂d (Sunshine, also the Sun); but Cyrus is called Kuru or
Khuru upon the monuments, and this cannot possibly be connected with our
chur, which would be uwara in Old Persian (Rawlinson, Lassen, Spiegel),
and Kōresh is simply the name of Kuru (Κῦρ-ος) Hebraized after the
manner of a segholate. There is a marble-block, for example, in the
Murghab valley, not far from the mausoleum of Cyrus, which contained the
golden coffin with the body of the king (see Strabo, xv 3, 7); and on
this we find an inscription that we also meet with elsewhere, viz.,
adam. k'ur'us.khsâya

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

thiya.hakhâmanisiya, i.e., I am Kuru the king of the Achaemenides.

(Note: See the engraving of this tomb of Cyrus, which is now called the
"Tomb of Solomon's mother," in Vaux's Nineveh and Persepolis (p. 345).
On the identity of Murghb and Pasargadae, see Spiegel, Keil-inschriften,
pp. 71, 72; and with regard to the discovery of inscriptions that may
still be expected around the tomb of Cyrus, the Journal of the Asiatic
Society, x. 46, note 4 (also compare Spiegel's Geschichte der
Entzifferung der Keil-schrift, im "Ausland," 1865, p. 413).)

This name is identical with the name of the river Kur (Κῦρ-ος); and what
Strabo says is worthy of notice - namely, that "there is also a river
called Cyrus, which flows through the so-called cave of Persis near
Pasargadae, and whence the king took his name, changing it from
Agradates into Cyrus" (Strab. xv 3, 6). It is possible also that there
may be some connection between the name and the Indian princely title of
Kuru.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 45](isa045)

</div>

</div>
