<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa059)  [Next](isa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)

[Isaiah 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 60:1</span></span>

It is still night. The inward and outward condition of the church is
night; and if it is night followed by a morning, it is so only for those
who "against hope believe in hope." The reality which strikes the senses
is the night of sin, of punishment, of suffering, and of mourning - a
long night of nearly seventy years. In this night, the prophet,
according to the command of God, has bee prophesying of the coming
light. In his inward penetration of the substance of his own preaching,
he has come close to the time when faith is to be turned to sight. And
now in the strength of God, who has made him the mouthpiece of His own
creative fiat, he exclaims to the church, [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001) : "Arise, grow light; for thy
light cometh, and the glory of Jehovah riseth upon thee." The appeal so
addressed to Zion-Jerusalem, which is regarded (as in [Isa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018); [Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001); [Isa
52:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001); [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)) as a woman, and indeed as the
mother of Israel. Here, however, it is regarded as the church redeemed
from banishment, and settled once more in the holy city and the holy
land, the church of salvation, which is now about to become the church
of glory. Zion lies prostrate on the ground, smitten down by the
judgment of God, brought down to the ground by inward prostration, and
partly overcome by the sleep of self-security. She now hears the cry,
"Arise" (qūmı̄). This is not a mere admonition, but a word of power which
puts new life into her limbs, so that she is able to rise from the
ground, on which she has lain, as it were, under the ban. The night,
which has brought her to the ground mourning, and faint, and intoxicated
with sleep, is now at an end. The mighty word qūmı̄, "arise," is
supplemented by a second word: 'ōrı̄. What creative force there is in
these two trochees, qūmı̄ 'ōrı̄, which hold on, as it were, till what they
express is accomplished; and what force of consolation in the two iambi,
ki-bhâ 'ōrēkh, which affix, as it were, to the acts of Zion the seal of
the divine act, and add to the ἄρσις (or elevation) its θέσις (or
foundation)! Zion is to become light; it is to, because it can. But it
cannot of itself, for in itself it has no light, because it has so
absolutely given itself up to sin; but there is a light which will
communicate itself to her, viz., the light which radiates from the holy
nature of God Himself. And this light is salvation, because the Holy One
loves Zion: it is also glory, because it not only dispels the darkness,
but sets itself, all glorious as it is, in the place of the darkness.
Zârach is the word commonly applied to the rising of the sun ([Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)). The sun of suns is Jehovah ([Psa
84:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012)), the God who is coming ([Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020)).

[Isaiah 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 60:2</span></span>

It is now all darkness over mankind; but Zion is the east, in which this
sun of suns will rise. [Isa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002) "For,
behold, the darkness covereth the earth, and deep darkness the nations;
and Jehovah riseth over thee, and His glory becomes visible over thee."
The night which settles upon the world of nations is not to be
understood as meaning a night of ignorance and enmity against God. This
prophecy no doubt stands in progressive connection with the previous
one; but, according to [Isa 59:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#019), the
manifestation of judgment, through which Zion is redeemed, brings even
the heathen from west to east, i.e., those who survive the judgment, to
the fear of Jehovah. The idea is rather the following: After the
judgments of God have passed, darkness in its greatest depth still
covers the earth, and a night of clouds the nations. It is still night
as on the first day, but a night which is to give place to light. Where,
then, will the sun rise, by which this darkness is to be lighted up? The
answer is, "Over Zion, the redeemed church of Israel." But whilst
darkness still covers the nations, it is getting light in the Holy Land,
for a sun is rising over Zion, viz., Jehovah in His unveiled glory. The
consequence of this is, that Zion itself becomes thoroughly light, and
that not for itself only, but for all mankind. When Jehovah has
transformed Zion into the likeness of His own glory, Zion transforms all
nations into the likeness of her own. [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003) "And nations walk to thy light,
and kings to the shining of thy rays." Zion exerts such an attractive
force, that nations move towards her light (ל הלך as in לביתו ni sa הלך
and other similar expressions), and kings to the splendour of her rays,
to share in them for themselves, and enjoy them with her. All earthly
might and majesty station themselves in the light of the divine glory,
which is reflected by the church.

[Isaiah 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 60:4</span></span>

Zion is now exhorted, as in [Isa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018), to lift up her eyes, and turn
them in all directions; for she is the object sought by an approaching
multitude. "Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: they all crowd
together, they come to thee: thy sons come from afar, and thy daughters
are carried hither upon arms." The multitude that are crowding together
and coming near are the diaspora of her sons and daughters that have
been scattered far away ([Isa 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)),
and whom the heathen that are now drawing near to her bring with them,
conducting them and carrying them, so that they cling "to the side"
([Isa 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012)) of those who are carrying
them upon their arms and shoulders ([Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022)). תּאמנה is softened from
תאמנּה, the pausal form for אתמנה (compare the softening in [Rut
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#013)), from אמן, to keep, fasten,
support; whence אמן, אמנת, a foster-father, a nurse who has a child in
safe keeping.

[Isaiah 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 60:5</span></span>

When this takes place, Zion will be seized with the greatest delight,
mingled with some trembling. "Then wilt thou see and shine, and thine
heart will tremble and expand; for the abundance of the sea will be
turned to thee, the wealth of the nations cometh to thee." It is a
disputed question whether the proper reading is תּראי, תּראי, or תּיראי
- all three point to יר) - or תּראי, from ראה. The last is favoured by
the lxx, Targ., Syr., Jerome, Saad., and all the earlier Jewish
commentators except AE, and is also the Masoretic reading; for the
Masora finalis (f. 1, col. 6) observes that this רתאי is the only
instance of such a form from ראה (differing therefore from תיראי in [Zep
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015), where we also find the readings
תיראי and תראי); and there is a note in the margin of the Masora, חטף
לית, to the effect that this תראי is the only one with chateph, i.e.,
Sheva. Moreover, תּראי (thou shalt see) is the more natural reading,
according to [Isa 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#014) and [Zac
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007); more especially as ירא is not a
suitable word to use (like pâchad and râgaz in [Jer
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#009)) in the sense of trembling for
joy (compare, on the contrary, ירע, [Isa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004), and רהה in [Isa
44:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#008)). The true rendering therefore
is, "Then wilt thou see and shine," i.e., when thou seest this thou wilt
thine, thy face will light up with joy; nâhar as in [Psa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006). Luther render it, "Then wilt
thou see thy desire, and break out," viz., into shouting; Jerome, on the
contrary, has, "Thou wilt overflow, i.e., thou wilt be inundated with
waters coming suddenly like rivers."

The impression produced by this revolution is so overpowering, that
Zion's heart trembles; yet at the same time it is so elevating, that the
straitened heart expands (ורחב, a figure quite unknown to the classical
languages, although they have angor and angustia; the lxx renders it καὶ
ἐκστήση, after the reading ורהב in Chayug, and Isaac Nathan in his
Concordance, entitled נתיב מיר): for hămōn yâm, i.e., everything of
value that is possessed by islands and coast lands (hâmōm, groaning, a
groaning multitude, more especially of possessions, [Psa
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#016), etc.), is brought to her; and
chēl gōyim, the property, i.e., (looking at the plural of the predicate
which follows; cf., [Hag 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007)) the
riches (gold, silver, etc., [Zac
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014)) of the heathen, are brought
into her, that she may dispose of them to the glory of her God.

[Isaiah 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 60:6</span></span>

The nations engaged in commerce, and those possessing cattle, vie with
one another in enriching the church. "A swarm of camels will cover thee,
the foals of Midian and Ephah: they come all together from Saba; they
bring gold and incense, and they joyfully make known the praises of
Jehovah. All the flocks, of Kedar gather together unto thee, the rams of
Nebaioth will serve thee: they will come up with acceptance upon mine
altar, and I will adorn the house of my adorning." The trading nations
bring their wares to the church. The tribe of Midian, which sprang from
Abraham and Keturah ([Gen 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002)), and
of which Ephah (Targ. Hōlâd, the Hutheilites?) formed one of the several
branches ([Gen 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#004)), had its seat on
the eastern coast of the Elanitic Gulf, which is still indicated by the
town of Madyan, situated, according to the geographers of Arabia, five
days' journey to the south of Aila. These come in such long and numerous
caravans, that all the country round Jerusalem swarms with camels. שׁפעת
as in [Job 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#011); and בּכרי (parallel
to גּמלּים) from בּכר = Arabic bakr or bikr, a young male camel, or
generally a camel's foal (up to the age of not more than nine years; see
Lane's Lexicon, i. 240). All of these, both Midianites and Ephaeans,
come out of Sheba, which Strabo (xvi. 4, 10) describes as "the highly
blessed land of the Sabaeans, in which myrrh, frankincense, and cinnamon
grow." There, viz., in Yemen,

(Note: Seba (סבא, [Isa 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003); [Isa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014)) is Meroe generally, or
(according to Strabo and Steph. Byz.) more especially a port in northern
Ethiopia; Sheba (שׁבא), the principal tribe of southern Arabia, more
especially its capital Marib (Mariaba), which, according to an Arabian
legend, contained the palace of Bilkis, the שׁבא מלכּת (see Exc. iv. in
Krger's Feldzug von Aelius Gallus, 1862). It is true that the following
passage of Strabo (xvi. 14, 21) is apparently at variance with the
opinion that the seat of the Sabaeans was in southern Arabia. "First of
all," he says, "above Syria, Arabia Felix is inhabited by the Nabataeans
and Sabaeans, who frequently marched through the former before it
belonged to the Romans." But as, according to every other account given
by Strabo, the Sabaeans had their home in Arabia Felix, and the
Nabataeans at the northern extremity of the Red Sea, in Arabia Petraea,
all that this passage can imply is, that at that part of Arabia which
stretches towards the Syrian boundary, the expeditions of the Sabaeans
came upon the Nabataeans.))

where spices, jewels, and gold abound, they have purchased gold and
frankincense, and these valuable gifts they now bring to Jerusalem, not
as unwilling tribute, but with the joyful proclamation of the glorious
deeds and attributes of Jehovah, the God of Israel.

And not only do the trading nations come, but the nomad tribes also:
viz., Kedar, the Kedarenes, with their bows ([Isa
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017)), who lived in the desert,
between Babylonia and Syria, in חצרים ([Isa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#011)), i.e., fixed settlements; and
Nebaitoh, also in Ishmaelitish tribe (according to the incontrovertible
account of [Gen 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013)), a nomad tribe,
which was still of no note even in the time of the kings of Israel, but
which rose into a highly cultivated nation in the centuries just before
Christ, and had a kingdom extending from the Elanitic Gulf to the land
on the east of the Jordan, and across Belka as far as Hauran; for the
monuments reach from Egypt to Babylonia, though Arabia Petraea is the
place where they chiefly abound.

(Note: Quatremre rejects the identity of the Nabataeans and the
Ishmaelitish Nebaioth; but it has been justly defended by Winer, Kless,
Knobel, and Krehl (Religion der vorisl. Araber, p. 51).)

The Kedarenes drive their collected flocks to Jerusalem, and the rams
(אילי, arietes, not principes) of the Nabataeans, being brought by them,
are at the service of the church (ישׁרתוּנך a verbal form with a
toneless contracted suffix, as in [Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010)), and ascend על־רצון, according
to good pleasure = acceptably (with the על used to form adverbs, Ewald,
217, i; cf., lerâtsōn in [Isa 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007)),
the altar of Jehovah (âlâh with the local object in the accusative, as
in [Gen 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004); [Num
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017)). The meaning is, that Jehovah
will graciously accept the sacrifices which the church offers from the
gifts of the Nabataeans (and Kedarenes) upon His altar. It would be
quite wrong to follow Antistes Hess and Baumgarten, and draw the
conclusion from such prophecies as these, that animal sacrifices will be
revived again. The sacrifice of animals has been abolished once for all
by the self-sacrifice of the "Servant of Jehovah;" and by the spiritual
revolution which Christianity, i.e., the Messianic religion, as
produced, so far as the consciousness of modern times is concerned, even
in Israel itself, it is once for all condemned (see Holdheim's Schrift
ber das Ceremonial-gesetz im Messiasreich, 1845). The prophet, indeed,
cannot describe even what belongs to the New Testament in any other than
Old Testament colours, because he is still within the Old Testament
limits. But from the standpoint of the New Testament fulfilment, that
which was merely educational and preparatory, and of which there will be
no revival, is naturally transformed into the truly essential purpose at
which the former aimed; so that all that was real in the prophecy
remains unaffected and pure, after the dedication of what was merely the
unessential medium employed to depict it. The very same Paul who
preaches Christ as the end of the law, predicts the conversion of Israel
as the topstone of the gracious counsels of God as they unfold
themselves in the history of salvation, and describes the restoration of
Israel as "the riches of the Gentiles;" and the very same John who wrote
the Gospel was also the apocalyptist, by whom the distinction between
Israel and the Gentiles was seen in vision as still maintained even in
the New Jerusalem. It must therefore be possible (though we cannot form
any clear idea of the manner in which it will be carried out), that the
Israel of the future may have a very prominent position in the perfect
church, and be, as it were, the central leader of its worship, though
without the restoration of the party-wall of particularism and
ceremonial shadows, which the blood of the crucified One has entirely
washed away. The house of God in Jerusalem, as the prophet has already
stated in [Isa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007), will be a house
of prayer (bēth tephillâh) for all nations. Here Jehovah calls the house
built in His honour, and filled with His gracious presence, "the house
of my glory." He will make its inward glory like the outward, by
adorning it with the gifts presented by the converted Gentile world.

[Isaiah 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 60:8</span></span>

From the mainland, over which caravans and flocks are coming, the
prophet now turns his eyes to the sea. "Who are these who fly hither as
a cloud, and like the doves to their windows? Yea, the islands wait for
me; and the ships of Tarshish come first, to bring thy children from
far, their silver and gold with them, to the name of thy God, and to the
holy One of Israel, because He hath ornamented thee." Upon the sea there
appear first of all enigmatical shapes, driving along as swiftly as if
they were light clouds flying before the wind ([Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001); [Isa
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022)), or like doves flying to their
dovecots (celeres cavis se turribus abdunt, as Ovid says), i.e., to the
round towers with their numerous pigeon-holes, which are provided for
their shelter. The question is addressed to Zion, and the answer may
easily be anticipated - namely, that this swarm of swiftly flying
figures are hurrying to a house which they long to reach, as much as
pigeons do to reach their pigeon-house. The kı̄ which follows is
explanatory: this hurrying presents itself to thine eyes, because the
isles wait for me. The reason for all this haste is to be found in the
faith of those who are hurrying on. The Old Testament generally speaks
of faith as hope (ל קוּה as in [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005); [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004)); not that faith is the same as
hope, but it is the support of hope, just as hope is the comfort of
faith. In the Old Testament, when the true salvation existed only in
promise, this epithet, for which there were many synonyms in the
language, was the most appropriate one. The faith of the distant lands
of the west is now beginning to work. The object of all this activity is
expressed in the word להביא. The things thus flying along like clouds
and doves are ships; with the Tartessus ships, which come from the
farthest extremity of the European insular quarter of the globe, at
their head (בּראשׁנה with munach instead of metheg, in the same sense as
in [Num 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#014); lxx ἐν πρώτοις; Jerome,
in principio, in the foremost rank), i.e., acting as the leaders of the
fleet which is sailing to Zion and bringing Zion's children from afar,
and along with them the gold and silver of the owners of the vessels
themselves, to the name (לשׁם, to the name, dative, not equivalent to
למען; lxx διὰ, as in [Isa 55:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#005)) of thy
God, whom they adore, and to the Holy One of Israel, because He hath
ornamented thee, and thereby inspired them with reverence and love to
thee (פארך for פארך, as in [Isa 54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006),
where it even stands out of pause).

[Isaiah 60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 60:10</span></span>

The first turn ([Isa 60:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)) described
the glorification of Zion through the rising of the glory of Jehovah;
the second ([Isa 60:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004)) her
glorification through the recovery of her scattered children, and the
gifts of the Gentiles who bring them home; and now the third depicts her
glorification through the service of the nations, especially of her
former persecutors, and generally through the service of all that is
great and glorious in the world of nature and the world of men. Not only
do the converted heathen offer their possessions to the church on Zion,
but they offer up themselves and their kings to pay her homage and
render service to her. "And sons of strangers build thy walls, and their
kings serve thee: for in my wrath I have smitten thee, and in my favour
I have had mercy upon thee. And thy gates remain open continually day
and night, they shall not be shut, to bring in to thee the possessions
of the nations and their kings in triumph. For the nation and the
kingdom which will not serve thee will perish, and the nations be
certainly laid waste." The walls of Zion (חמתיך doubly defective) rise
up from their ruins through the willing co-operation of converted
foreigners ([Isa 56:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006)), and foreign
kings place themselves at the service of Zion ([Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023)); the help rendered by the
edicts of Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes Longimanus being only a prelude
to events stretching on to the end of time, though indeed, in the view
of the prophet himself, the period immediately succeeding the captivity
really would be the end of time. Of the two perfects in [Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010), הכּיתיך points to the more
remote past; רחמתּיך to the nearer past, stretching forward into the
present (cf., [Isa 54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)). On pittēăch,
patescere, hiscere, see [Isa 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#008),
where it is applied to the ear, as in [Sol
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013) to a bud. The first clause of
[Isa 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011) closes with ולילה; tiphchah
divides more strongly than tebir, which is subordinate to it. At the
same time, "day and night" may be connected with "shall not be shut," as
in [Rev 21:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025). The gates of Zion
may always be left open, for there is no more fear of a hostile attack;
and they must be left open ad importandum, that men may bring in the
possession of the heathen through them (a thing which goes on
uninterruptedly), נהוּגים וּמלכיהם. The last words are rendered by
Knobel, "and their kings are leaders (of the procession);" but nâhūg
would be a strange substantive, having nothing to support it but the
obscure יקוּש from יקושׁ, for אחוּז in [Sol
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#008) does not mean a support, but
amplexus (Ewald, 149, d). The rendering "and their kings escorted,"
i.e., attended by an escort, commends itself more than this; but in the
passage quoted in support of this use of nâhag, viz., [Nah
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#008), it is used as a synonym of hâgâh,
signifying gemere. It is better to follow the lxx and Jerome, and render
it, "and their kings brought," viz., according to [Isa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#004); [Sa1
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#002), as prisoners (Targ. zeqı̄qı̄n,
i.e., beziqqı̄m, in fetters) - brought, however, not by their several
nations who are tired of their government and deliver them up (as Hitzig
supposes), but by the church, by which they have been irresistibly bound
in fetters, i.e., inwardly conquered (compare [Isa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014) with [Psa
149:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#008)), and thus suffer themselves to
be brought in a triumphal procession to the holy city as the captives of
the church and her God. [Isa 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#012) is
connected with this nehūgı̄m; for the state of every nation and kingdom
is henceforth to be determined by its subjection to the church of the
God of sacred history (עבד, δουλεύειν, in distinction from shērēth,
διακονεῖν, θεραπεύειν), and by its entrance into this church - the very
same thought which Zechariah carries out in [Isa
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016). Instead of כי־הגוי, כי is more
properly pointed according to certain MSS with munach (without makkeph);
the article before haggōyim is remonstrative, and the inf. intens.
chârōbh makes the thing threatened unquestionable.

[Isaiah 60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 60:13</span></span>

From the thought that everything great in the world of man is to be made
to serve the Holy One and His church, the prophet passes to what is
great in the world of nature. "The glory of Lebanon will come to thee,
cypresses, plane-trees and Sherbin-trees all together, to beautify the
place of my sanctuary, and to make the place of my feet glorious." The
splendid cedars, which are the glory of Lebanon, and in fact the finest
trees of all kinds, will be brought to Zion, not as trunks felled to be
used as building materials, but dug up with their roots, to ornament the
holy place of the temple ([Jer 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)),
and also to this end, that Jehovah may glorify the "holy place of His
feet," i.e., the place where He, who towers above the heaven of all
heavens, has as it were to place His feet. The temple is frequently
called His footstool (hadōm raglâiv), with especial reference to the ark
of the covenant ([Psa 99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005); [Psa
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007); [Lam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#001); [Ch1
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002)) as being the central point of
the earthly presence of God (cf., [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)). The trees, that is to say,
which tower in regal glory above all the rest of the vegetable world,
are to adorn the environs of the temple, so that avenues of cedars and
plane-trees lead into it; a proof that there is no more fear of any
further falling away to idolatry. On the names of the trees, see [Isa
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019). Three kinds are mentioned here;
we found seven there. The words יחדו ותשׁור תדהר ברושׁ are repeated
verbatim from [Isa 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019).

[Isaiah 60:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 60:14</span></span>

The prophecy now returns to the world of man. "The children also of thy
tormentors come bending unto thee, and all thy despisers stretch
themselves at the soles of thy feet, and call thee 'City of Jehovah,
Zion of the Holy One of Israel.'" The persecutors of the church both in
work and word are now no more ([Isa
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#014)), and their children fell
themselves disarmed. They are seized with shame and repentance, when
they see the church which was formerly tormented and despised so highly
exalted. They come shechōăch (an inf. noun of the form טחון, [Lam
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#013); used here as an accusative of
more precise definition, just as nouns of this kind are frequently
connected directly with the verb הלך, Ewald, 279, c), literally a bow or
stoop, equivalent to bowing or stooping (the opposite to rōmâh in [Mic
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#003)), and stretch themselves "at the
soles of thy feet," i.e., clinging to thee as imploringly and
obsequiously as if they would lay themselves down under thy very feet,
and were not worthy to lie anywhere but there (as in [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023)); and whereas formerly they
called thee by nicknames, they now give thee the honourable name of
"City of Jehovah, Zion of the Holy One of Israel," not "Sanctuary of
Israel," as Meier supposes, since qedōsh Israel is always a name of
Jehovah in the book of Isaiah. It is a genitive construction like
Bethlehem of Judah, Gibeah of Saul, and others.

[Isaiah 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 60:15</span></span>

The fourth turn ([Isa 60:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015))
describes the glorification of Zion through the growth and stability of
its community both without and within. A glorious change takes place in
the church, not only in itself, but also in the judgment of the nations.
"Whereas thou wast forsaken, and hated, and no one walked through thee,
I make thee now into eternal splendour, a rapture from generation to
generation. And thou suckest the milk of nations, and the breast of
kings thou wilt suck, and learn that I Jehovah am thy Saviour and thy
Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob." Of the two ideas of a church (the
mother of Israel) and a city (Metropolis) involved in the term Zion, the
former prevails in [Isa 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015), the
latter in [Isa 60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016). For although
עזוּבה and שׂנוּאה are equally applicable to a city and a church ([Isa
54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006), [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011)), the expression "no one walked
through thee" applies only to the desolate city as she lay in ruins (see
[Isa 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#010)). The fusion of the two
ideas in [Isa 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015) is similar to [Isa
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021). Jerusalem will now become
thoroughly a splendour, and in fact an eternal splendour, a rapture of
successive generations so long as the history of this world continues.
The nations and their kings give up their own vital energy to the
church, just as a mother or nurse gives the milk of her breasts to a
child; and the church has thereby rich food for a prosperous growth, and
a constant supply of fresh material for grateful joy. We cannot for a
moment think of enriching by means of conquest, as Hitzig does; the
sucking is that of a child, not of a vampyre. We should expect melâkhōth
([Isa 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023)) instead of melâkhı̄m
(kings); but by שׁד (as in [Isa 56:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#011)
for שׁדי) the natural character of what is promised is intentionally
spiritualized. The figure proves itself to be only a figure, and
requires an ideal interpretation. The church sees in all this the
gracious superintendence of her God; she learns from experience that
Jehovah is her Saviour, that He is her Redeemer, He the Mighty One of
Jacob, who has conquered for her, and now causes her to triumph (אני כּי
with munach yethib, as in [Isa 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#026),
which passage is repeated almost verbatim here, and [Isa
61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008)).

[Isaiah 60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 60:17</span></span>

The outward and inward beauty of the new Jerusalem is now depicted by
the materials of her structure, and the powers which prevail within her.
"For copper I bring gold, and for iron I bring silver, and for wood
copper, and for stones iron, and make peace thy magistracy, and
righteousness thy bailiffs. Injustice is no more seen in thy land,
wasting and destruction in thy borders; and thou callest salvation thy
walls, and renown thy gates." Wood and stone are not used at all in the
building of the new Jerusalem. Just as in the time of Solomon silver was
counted as nothing ([Kg1 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#021)) and
had only the value of stones ([Kg1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027)), so here Jehovah gives her gold
instead of copper, silver instead of iron; whilst copper and iron are so
despised with this superabundance of the precious metals, that they take
the place of such building materials as wood and stones. Thus the city
will be a massive one, and not even all of stone, but entirely built of
metal, and indestructible not only by the elements, but by all kinds of
foes. The allegorical continuation of the prophecy shows very clearly
that the prophet does not mean his words to be taken literally. The lxx,
Saad., and others, are wrong in adopting the rendering, "I make thy
magistracy peace," etc.; since shâlōm and tsedâqâh are not accusatives
of either the predicate or the object, but such personifications as we
are accustomed to in Isaiah (vid., [Isa
32:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#016); [Isa
59:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#014); cf., [Isa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008)). Jehovah makes peace its
pequddâh, i.e., its "overseership" (like gebhūrâh, heroship, in [Isa
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#025), and ‛ezrâh, helpership, in [Isa
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002)), or magistracy; and
righteousness its bailiffs. The plural נגשׂיך is no disproof of the
personification; the meaning is, that tsedâqâh (righteousness) is to
Jerusalem what the whole body of civil officers together are: that is to
say, righteousness is a substitute for the police force in every form.
Under such magistracy and such police, nothing is ever heard within the
land, of which Jerusalem is the capital, of either châmâs, i.e., a rude
and unjust attack of the stronger upon the weaker, or of shōd, i.e.,
conquest and devastation, and shebher, i.e., dashing to pieces, or
breaking in two. It has walls ([Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010)); but in truth "salvation," the
salvation of its God, is regarded as its impregnable fortifications. It
has gates ([Isa 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011)) but tehillâh,
the renown that commands respect, with which Jehovah has invested it, is
really better than any gate, whether for ornament or protection.

[Isaiah 60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 60:19</span></span>

The fifth turn celebrates the glorifying of Jerusalem, through the
shining of Jehovah as its everlasting light and through the form of its
ever-growing membership, which is so well-pleasing to God. The prophecy
returns to the thought with which it set out, and by which the whole is
regulated, viz., that Jerusalem will be light. This leading thought is
now unfolded in the most majestic manner, and opened up in all its
eschatological depth. "The sun will be no more thy light by day, neither
for brightness will the moon shine upon thee: Jehovah will be to thee an
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy sun will no more go down,
and thy moon will not be withdrawn; for Jehovah will be to thee an
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning will be fulfilled."
Although, in the prophet's view, the Jerusalem of the period of glory in
this world and the Jerusalem of the eternal glory beyond flow into one
another; the meaning of this prophecy is not that the sun and moon will
no longer exist. Even of the Jerusalem which is not to be built by
Israel with the help of converted heathen, but which comes down from
heaven to earth, the seer in [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023) merely says, that the city needs
neither the shining of the sun nor of the moon (as the Targum renders
the passage before us, "thou wilt not need the shining of the sun by
day"), for the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof, i.e., God Himself is instead of a sun to her, and the Lamb
instead of a moon. Consequently we do not agree with Stier, who infers
from this passage that "there is a final new creation approaching, when
there will be no more turning round into the shadow ([Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)), when the whole planetary
system, including the earth, will be changed, and when the earth itself
will become a sun, yea, will become even more than that, in the direct
and primary light which streams down upon it from God Himself." We
rather agree with Hofmann, that "there will still be both sun and moon,
but the Holy Place will be illuminated without interruption by the
manifestation of the presence of God, which outshines all besides." The
prophet has here found the most complete expression, for that which has
already been hinted at in such prophecies in [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005); [Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026); [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023). As the city receives its light
neither from the sun nor from the moon, this implies, what [Rev
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025) distinctly affirms, that there
will be no more night there. The prophet intentionally avoids a לילה
לאור parallel to יומם לאור. We must not render the second clause in [Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019), "and it will not become light
to thee with the shining of the moon," for האיר never means to get
light; nor "and as for the shining of the moon, it does not give the
light," as Hitzig and Knobel propose, for וּלנגהּ is used alone, and not
היּרח וּלנגהּ as the antithesis to יומם לאור, in the sense of "to light
up the night" (compare נגהּ as applied to the shining of the moon in
[Isa 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010), and נגהּ to the glittering
of the stars in [Joe 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010)), and even
the use of הלילה is avoided. The true rendering is either, "and for
lighting, the moon will not shine upon thee" (Stier, Hahn, etc.); or,
what is more in accordance with the accentuation, which would have given
ולנגה tifchah and not tsakeph gadol, if it had been intended to indicate
the object, "and as for the lighting" (ל as in [Isa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001)). The glory of Jehovah, which
soars above Jerusalem, and has come down into her, is henceforth her sun
and her moon - a sun that never sets, a moon יאסף לא which is not taken
in towards morning, like a lamp that has been hung out at night (compare
נאסף, [Isa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010), withdrawn,
disappeared). The triumph of light over darkness, which is the object of
the world's history, is concentrated in the new Jerusalem. How this is
to be understood, is explained in the closing clause of [Isa
60:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#020). The sum of the days of mourning
allotted to the church is complete. The darkness of the corruption of
sin and state of punishment is overcome, and the church is nothing but
holy blessed joy without change or disturbance; for it walks no longer
in sidereal light, but in the eternally unchangeable light of Jehovah,
which with its peaceful gentleness and perfect purity illumines within
as well as without. The seer of the Apocalypse also mentions the Lamb.
The Lamb is also known to our prophet; for the "Servant of Jehovah" is
the Lamb. But the light of transfiguration, in which he sees this
exalted Lamb, is not great enough to admit of its being combined with
the light of the Divine Nature itself.

[Isaiah 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 60:21</span></span>

The next v. shows how deep was his consciousness of the close connection
between darkness, wrath, and sin. "And thy people, they are all
righteous; they possess the land for ever, a sprout of my plantations, a
work of my hands for glorification." The church of the new Jerusalem
consists of none but righteous ones, who have been cleansed from guilt,
and keep themselves henceforth pure from sinning, and therefore possess
the land of promise for ever, without having to fear repeated
destruction and banishment: a "sprout" (nētser as in [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001); [Isa
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019); Arab. nadr, the green branch)
"of my plantations" (מטּעי chethib, erroneously מטּעו or מטּעו), i.e.,
of my creative acts of grace (cf., [Isa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007)), a "work of my hands" (cf., [Isa
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025)), "to glorify me," i.e., in
which I possess that in which I glory (להתפּאר as in [Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)).

[Isaiah 60:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 60:22</span></span>

The life of this church, which is newly created, new-born, through
judgment and grace, gradually expands from the most unassuming centre in
ever widening circles until it has attained the broadest dimensions.
"The smallest one will become thousands, and the meanest one a powerful
nation." "The small and mean one," or, as the idea is a relative one,
"the smallest and meanest one" (Ges. 119, 2), is either a childless one,
or one blessed with very few children. At the same time, the reference
is not exclusively to growth through the blessing of children, but also
to growth through the extension of fellowship. We have a similar
expression in [Mic 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007) (cf., [Isa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)), where 'eleph is employed, just
as it is here, in the sense of לאלף, "to thousands (or chiliads)."

The whole of the prophetic address is now sealed with this declaration:
"I Jehovah, will hasten it in His time." The neuter נּה (as in [Isa
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013); [Isa
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011)) refers to everything that has
been predicted from [Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)
downwards. Jehovah will fulfil it rapidly, when the point of time
(καιρός) which He has fixed for it shall have arrived. As this point of
time is known to Him only, the predicted glory will burst all at once
with startling suddenness upon the eyes of those who have waited
believingly for Him.

This chapter forms a connected and self-contained whole, as we may see
very clearly from the address to Zion-Jerusalem, which is sustained
throughout. If we compare together such passages as [Isa
51:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017) ("Awake, awake, stand up, O
Jerusalem"), [Isa 52:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001) ("Awake,
awake, put on thy strength, O Zion"), and chapter 54 ("Sing, O barren"),
which are all closely related so far as their contents are concerned, we
shall find that these addresses to Zion form an ascending series,
chapter 60 being the summit to which they rise, and that the whole is a
complete counterpart to the address to the daughter of Babylon in [Isa
47:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 61](isa061)

</div>
