<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa055)  [Next](isa057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 56](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)

[Isaiah 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 56:1</span></span>

The note of admonition struck in the foregoing prophecy is continued
here, the sabbatical duties being enforced with especial emphasis as
part of the general righteousness of life. "Thus saith Jehovah, Keep ye
right, and do righteousness: for my salvation is near to come, and my
righteousness to reveal itself. Blessed is the mortal that doeth this,
and the son of man that layeth fast hold thereon; who keepeth the
Sabbath, that he doth not desecrate it, and keepeth his hand from doing
any kind of evil." Jehovah and Israel have both an objective standard in
the covenant relation into which they have entered: משׁפּט (right) is
practice answering to this; ישׁוּעה (salvation) the performance promised
by God; צדקה (righteousness) on both sides such personal activity as is
in accordance with the covenant relation, or what is the same thing,
with the purpose and plan of salvation. The nearer the full realization
on the part of Jehovah of what He has promised, the more faithful ought
Israel to be in everything to which it is bound by its relation to
Jehovah. זאת (this) points, as in [Psa
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#004), to what follows; and so also does
בּהּ, which points back to זאת. Instead of שׁמור or לשׁמר we have here
שׁמר, the זאת being described personally instead of objectively. שּׁבּת
is used as a masculine in [Isa 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002),
[Isa 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006) (cf., [Isa
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)), although the word is not
formed after the same manner as קטּל, but is rather contracted from
שׁבּתת (a festive time, possibly with עת = עדת understood), and
therefore was originally a feminine; and it is so personified in the
language employed in the worship of the synagogue.

(Note: According to b. Sabbath 119a, R. Chanina dressed himself on
Friday evening in his sabbath-clothes, and said, "Come, and let us go to
meet Queen Sabbath." And so did also Jannai, saying, "Come, O bride;
come, O bride." Hence the customary song with which the Sabbath was
greeted had נקבּלה שׁבּת פּני כּלּה לקראת דודי לכה as it commencement
and refrain.)

[Isaiah 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 56:3</span></span>

The אשרי (blessed) of [Isa 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002) is now
extended to those who might imagine that they had no right to console
themselves with the promises which it contained. "And let not the
foreigner, who hath not joined himself to Jehovah, speak thus: Assuredly
Jehovah will cut me off from His people; and let not the eunuch say, I
am only a dry tree." As נלוה is not pointed as a participle (נלוה), but
as a 3rd pers. pres., the ה of הנּלוה is equivalent to אשׁר, as in [Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024); [Gen
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021); [Gen
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#003); [Gen
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027); [Kg1
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009) (Ges. 109). By the eunuchs we are
to understand those of Israelitish descent, as the attributive clause is
not repeated in their case. Heathen, who professed the religion of
Jehovah, and had attached themselves to Israel, might be afraid lest,
when Israel should be restored to its native land, according to the
promise, as a holy and glorious community with a thoroughly priestly
character, Jehovah would no longer tolerate them, i.e., would forbid
their receiving full citizenship. יבדּילני has the connecting vowel , as
in [Gen 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#019); [Gen
29:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#032), instead of the usual ē. And the
Israelitish eunuchs, who had been mutilated against their will, that
they might serve at heathen courts or in the houses of foreign lords,
and therefore had not been unfaithful to Jehovah, might be afraid lest,
as unfruitful trees, they should be pronounced unworthy of standing in
the congregation of Jehovah. There was more ground for the anxiety of
the latter than for that of the former. For the law in [Deu
23:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004) merely prohibits Ammonites and
Moabites for all time to come from reception into the congregation, on
account of their unbrotherly conduct towards the Israelites as they came
out of Egypt, whilst that in [Deu
23:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#008) prohibits the reception of
Edomites and Egyptians to the third generation; so that there was no
prohibition as to other allies - such, for example, as the Babylonians.
On the other hand, the law in [Deu
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002) expressly declares, as an
expression of the horror of God at any such mutilation of nature, and
for the purpose of precluding it, that no kind of emasculated person is
to enter the congregation of Jehovah. But prophecy breaks through these
limits of the law.

[Isaiah 56:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 56:4</span></span>

"For thus saith Jehovah to the circumcised, Those who keep my Sabbaths,
and decide for that in which I take pleasure, and take fast hold of my
covenant; I give to them in my house and within my walls a memorial and
a name better than sons and daughters: I give such a man an everlasting
name, that shall not be cut off." The second condition after the
sanctification of the Sabbath has reference to the regulation of life
according to the revealed will of God; the third to fidelity with regard
to the covenant of circumcision. יד also means a side, and hence a place
([Deu 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#013)); but in the passage
before us, where ושׁם יד form a closely connected pair of words, to
which וּמבּנות מבּנים is appended, it signifies the memorial, equivalent
to מצּבת (2 Sam 18; 1:1-24:25; [Sa1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#012)), as an index lifted up on high
([Eze 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#024)), which strikes the eye
and arrests attention, pointing like a signpost to the person upon whom
it is placed, like monumentum a monendo. They are assured that they will
not be excluded from close fellowship with the church ("in my house and
within my walls"), and also promised, as a superabundant compensation
for the want of posterity, long life in the memory of future ages, by
whom their long tried attachment to Jehovah and His people in
circumstances of great temptation will not be forgotten.

[Isaiah 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 56:6</span></span>

The fears of proselytes from among the heathen are also removed. "And
the foreigners, who have joined themselves to Jehovah, to serve Him, and
to love the name of Jehovah, to be His servants, whoever keepeth the
Sabbath from desecrating it, and those who hold fast to my covenant, I
bring them to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of
prayer; their whole-offerings and their slain-offerings are
well-pleasing upon mine altar: for my house, a house of prayer shall it
be called for all nations." The proselytes, who have attached themselves
to Jehovah (על־הא),

(Note: The oriental reading, not in [Isa
56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003), but here in [Isa
56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006), is על־ה; the western, אל־ה. The
Masora follows the western (מערבאי( nre), i.e., the Palestinian, and
reckons this passage as one of the 31 על־ה in the Old Testament
Scriptures.)

the God of Israel, with the pure intention of serving Him with love, are
not to be left behind in the strange land. Jehovah will bring them along
with His people to the holy mountain, upon which His temple rises once
more; there will He cause them to rejoice, and all that they place upon
His altar will find a most gracious acceptance. It is impossible that
the prophet should be thinking here of the worship of the future without
sacrifice, although in [Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001) he
predicts the self-sacrifice of the "Servant of Jehovah," which puts an
end to all animals sacrifices. But here the temple is called "the house
of prayer," from the prayer which is the soul of all worship. It will be
called a house of prayer for all nations; and therefore its nature will
correspond to its name. This ultimate intention is already indicated in
Solomon's dedicatory prayer ([Kg1
8:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#041)); but our prophet was the
first to give it this definite universal expression. Throughout this
passage the spirit of the law is striving to liberate itself from its
bondage. Nor is there anything to surprise us in the breaking down of
the party wall, built up so absolutely between the eunuchs on the one
hand and the congregation on the other, or the one partially erected
between the heathen and the congregation of Israel; as we may see from
[Isa 66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021), where it is affirmed that
Jehovah will even take priests and Levites out of the midst of the
heathen whom Israel will bring back with it into its own land.

[Isaiah 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 56:8</span></span>

The expression "saying of the Lord" (Ne'um Jehovah), which is so solemn
an expression in itself, and which stands here at the head of the
following declaration, is a proof that it contains not only something
great, but something which needs a solemn confirmation because of its
strangeness. Not only is there no ground for supposing that Gentiles who
love Jehovah will be excluded from the congregation; but it is really
Jehovah's intention to gather some out of the heathen, and add them to
the assembled diaspora of Israel. "Word of the Lord, Jehovah: gathering
the outcasts of Israel, I will also gather beyond itself to its gathered
ones." We only find ה נאם at the commencement of the sentence, in this
passage and [Zac 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001). The double name
of God, Adonai Jehovah, also indicates something great. עליו (to it)
refers to Israel, and לנקבּציו is an explanatory permutative, equivalent
to על־נקבציו; or else על denotes the fact that the gathering will exceed
the limits of Israel (cf., [Gen
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022)), and ל the addition that will
be made to the gathered ones of Israel. The meaning in either case
remains the same. Jehovah here declares what Jesus says in [Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016) : "Other sheep I have which are
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice;
and there shall be one fold and one Shepherd:" "Jehovah one, and His
name one," as it is expressed in [Zac
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009). Such as the views and hopes that
have grown up out of the chastisement inflicted by their captivity. God
has made it a preparatory school for New Testament times. It has been
made subservient to the bursting of the fetters of the law, the
liberation of the spirit of the law, and the establishment of friendship
between Israel and the Gentile world as called to one common salvation.

[Isaiah 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 56:9</span></span>

It is a question whether [Isa 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009)
forms the commencement of a fresh prophecy, or merely the second half of
the prophecy contained in [Isa 56:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001).
We decide, for our part, in favour of the former. If [Isa
56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009). formed an antithetical second
half to the promising first half in [Isa
56:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001), we should expect to find the
prophets and leaders of Israel, whose licentiousness and want of
principle are here so severely condemned, threatened with destruction in
the heathen land, whilst true proselytes and even eunuchs were brought
to the holy mountain. But we meet with this antithesis for the first
time in [Isa 57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013), where we evidently
find ourselves in the midst of another prophetic address. And where can
that address commence, if not at [Isa
56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009), from which point onwards we have
that hard, dull, sharp, and concise language of strong indignation,
which recals to mind psalms written "in a thundering style" (Psalter, i.
80) and the reproachful addresses of Jeremiah, and which passes again in
[Isa 57:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#011). into the lofty crystalline
language peculiar to our prophet's "book of consolation?" The new
prophetic address commences, like [Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001), with a summons. "All ye beasts
of the field, come near! To devour, all ye beasts in the forest!"
According to the accentuation before us (לכל mercha, כלח־יתו tiphchah),
the beasts of the field are summoned to devour the beasts in the forest.
This accentuation, however, is false, and must be exchanged for another
which is supported by some MSS, viz., לכל tiphchah, כלח־יתו mercha, and
ביער Beth raphatum. It is true that even with these accents we might
still adhere to the view favoured by Jewish commentators, viz., that the
beasts of the field are to be devoured by the beasts of the forest, if
this view yielded any admissible sense (compare, for example, that
supported by Meyer, "Ye enemies, devour the scattered ones of my
congregation"), and had not against it the synonymous parallelism of שדי
חיתו and ביער חיתו ([Isa 43:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#020); [Psa
104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011), [Psa
104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020); cf., [Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)). But there remains another view,
according to which ביער כל־חיתו is a second vocative answering to שׂדי
כל־חיתו. According to the Targum, what is to be devoured is the great
body of heathen kings attacking Jerusalem; according to Jerome, Cyril,
Stier, etc., the pasture and food provided by the grace of God. But what
follows teaches us something different from this. Israel has prophets
and shepherds, who are blind to every coming danger, and therefore fail
to give warning of its approach, because they are sunken in selfishness
and debauchery. It resembles a flock with a keeper, and therefore an
easy prey ([Eze 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#005)); and the meaning
of the appeal, which is certainly addressed to the nations of the world,
the enemies of the people of God, is this: "Ye have only to draw near;
ye can feed undisturbed, and devour as much as ye please." This is the
explanation adopted by most of the more modern commentators. In [Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009), which is founded upon this
("Assemble all ye beasts of the field, bring them hither to devour"), it
is also Jerusalem which is assigned as food to the heathen. The parallel
in [Isa 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009) is both synonymous and
progressive. The writer seeks for rare forms, because he is about to
depict a rare inversion of the proper state of things. חיתו (with the
first syllable loosely closed) is the antiquated form of connection,
which was admissible even with ביּער following (cf., [Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011); [Isa
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001); [Sa2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021)). On אתיוּ (= אתוּ), see at [Isa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012) (cf., [Isa
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014)).

[Isaiah 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 56:10</span></span>

The prophet now proceeds with צפו (צפיו): the suffix refers to Israel,
which was also the object to לאכל. "His watchmen are blind: they (are)
all ignorant, they (are) all dumb dogs that cannot bark; raving, lying
down, loving to slumber. And the dogs are mightily greedy, they know no
satiety; and such are shepherds! They know no understanding; they have
all turned to their own ways, every one for his own gain throughout his
border." The "watchmen" are the prophets here, as everywhere else ([Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008), cf., [Isa
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006), [Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001); [Jer
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017); [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017)). The prophet is like a watchman
(tsōpheh) stationed upon his watch-tower (specula), whose duty it is,
when he sees the sword come upon the land, to blow the shōphâr, and warn
the people ([Eze 33:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001)). But just as
Jeremiah speaks of bad prophets among the captives (Jer 29), and the
book of Ezekiel is full of reproaches at the existing neglect of the
office of watchman and shepherd; so does the prophet here complain that
the watchmen of the nation are blind, in direct opposition to both their
title and their calling; they are all without either knowledge or the
capacity for knowledge (vid., [Isa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009); [Isa
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#020)). They ought to resemble
watchful sheep-dogs ([Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)), which
bark when the flock is threatened; but they are dumb, and cannot bark
(nâbhach, root nab), and leave the flock to all its danger. Instead of
being "seers" (chōzı̄m), they are ravers (hōzı̄m; cf., [Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018), where we have a play upon החרס
in ההרס). הזים, from הזה, to rave in sickness, n. act. hadhajan (which
Kimchi compares to parlare in snno); hence the Targum נימים, lxx
ἐνυπνιαζόμενοι A φανταζόμενοι, S ὁραματισταί, Jer. videntes vana. The
predicates which follow are attached to the leading word hōzı̄m (raving),
if not precisely as adjectives, yet as more minutely descriptive.
Instead of watching, praying, wrestling, to render themselves
susceptible of visions of divine revelations for the good of their
people, and to keep themselves in readiness to receive them, they are
idle, loving comfortable ease, talkers in their sleep. And the dogs,
viz., those prophets who resemble the worst of them (see at [Isa
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)), are נפשׁ עזּי, of violent,
unrestrained soul, insatiable. Their soul lives and moves in the lowest
parts of their nature; it is nothing but selfish avarice, self-indulgent
greediness, violent restlessness of passion, that revolves perpetually
around itself. With the words "and these are shepherds," the range of
the prophet's vision is extended to the leaders of the nation generally;
for when the prophet adds as an exclamation, "And such (hi = tales) are
shepherds!" he applies the glaring contrast between calling and conduct
to the holders of both offices, that of teacher and that of ruler alike.
For, apart from the accents, it would be quite at variance with the
general use of the personal pronoun המה, to apply it to any other
persons than those just described (viz., in any such sense as this: "And
those, who ought to be shepherds, do not know"). Nor is it admissible to
commence an adversative minor clause with והמה, as Knobel does, "whereas
they are shepherds;" for, since the principal clause has הכלבים (dogs)
as the subject, this would introduce a heterogeneous mixture of the two
figures, shepherds' dogs and shepherds. We therefore take רעים והמה as
an independent clause: "And it is upon men of such a kind, that the duty
of watching and tending the nation devolves!" These רעים (for which the
Targum reads רעים) are then still further described: they know not to
understand, i.e., they are without spiritual capacity to pass an
intelligible judgment (compare the opposite combination of the two verbs
in [Isa 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#004)); instead of caring for
the general good, they have all turned to their own way (ledarkâm),
i.e., to their own selfish interests, every one bent upon his own
advantage (בּצע from בּצע, abscindere, as we say, seinen Schnitt zu
machen, to reap an advantage, lit., to make an incision). מקּצהוּ, from
his utmost extremity (i.e., from that of his own station, including all
its members), in other words, "throughout the length and breadth of his
own circle;" qâtseh, the end, being regarded not as the terminal point,
but as the circumference (as in [Gen
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#004); [Gen
47:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#021), and [Jer
51:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#031)).

[Isaiah 56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 56:12</span></span>

An office-bearer of the kind described is now introduced per mimesin as
speaking. "Come here, I will fetch wine, and let us drink meth; and
tomorrow shall be like today, great, excessively abundant." He gives a
banquet, and promises the guests that the revelry shall be as great
tomorrow as today, or rather much more glorious. מחר יום is the day of
tomorrow, τὸ ἐπαύριον, for mâchâr is always without an article; hence et
fiet uti hic (dies) dies crastinus, viz., magnus supra modum valde. יתר,
or יתר (as it is to be pointed here according to Kimchi, Michlol 167b,
and Wrterbuch), signifies superabundance; it is used here adverbially in
the sense of extra-ordinarily, beyond all bounds (differing therefore
from יותר, "more," or "singularly," in the book of Ecclesiastes).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 57](isa057)

</div>
