<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa002)  [Next](isa004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001)

[Isaiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 3:1</span></span>

"For, behold, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, takes away from Jerusalem and
from Judah supporter and means of support, every support of bread and
every support of water." The divine name given here, "The Lord, Jehovah
of hosts," with which Isaiah everywhere introduces the judicial acts of
God (cf., [Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024); [Isa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016), [Isa
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033); [Isa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#004)), is a proof that the
proclamation of judgment commences afresh here. Trusting in man was the
crying sin, more especially of the times of Uzziah-Jotham. The glory of
the kingdom at that time carried the wrath of Jehovah within it. The
outbreak of that wrath commenced in the time of Ahaz; and even under
Hezekiah it was merely suspended, not changed. Isaiah foretells this
outbreak of wrath. He describes how Jehovah will lay the Jewish state in
ruins, by taking away the main supports of its existence and growth.
"Supporter and means of support" (mash'en and mash'enah) express, first
of all, the general idea. The two nouns, which are only the masculine
and feminine forms of one and the same word (compare [Mic
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004); [Nah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011), and the examples from the Syriac
and Arabic in Ewald, 172, c), serve to complete the generalization:
fulcra omne genus (props of every kind, omnigena). They are both
technical terms, denoting the prop which a person uses to support
anything, whilst mish'an signifies that which yields support; so that
the three correspond somewhat to the Latin fulcrum, fultura, fulcimen.
Of the various means of support, bread and wine are mentioned first, not
in a figurative sense, but as the two indispensable conditions and the
lowest basis of human life. Life is supported by bread and water: it
walks, as it were, upon the crutch of bread, so that "breaking the staff
of bread" ([Lev 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026); [Eze
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016); [Eze
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016); [Eze
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013); [Psa
105:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#016)) is equivalent to physical
destruction. The destruction of the Jewish state would accordingly be
commenced by a removal on the part of Jehovah of all the support
afforded by bread and water, i.e., all the stores of both. And this was
literally fulfilled, for both in the Chaldean and Roman times Jerusalem
perished in the midst of just such terrible famines as are threatened in
the curses in Lev 26, and more especially in Deut 28; and in both cases
the inhabitants were reduced to such extremities, that women devoured
their own children ([Lam 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020);
Josephus, Wars of Jews, vi. 3, 3, 4). It is very unjust, therefore, on
the part of modern critics, such as Hitzig, Knobel, and Meier, to
pronounce [Isa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001) a gloss, and, in
fact, a false one. Gesenius and Umbreit retracted this suspicion. The
construction of the v. is just the same as that of [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006); and it is Isaiah's custom to
explain his own figures, as we have already observed when comparing [Isa
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007). and [Isa
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023) with what preceded them. "Every
support of bread and every support of water" are not to be regarded in
this case as an explanation of the general idea introduced before,
"supporters and means of support," but simply as the commencement of the
detailed expansion of the idea. For the enumeration of the supports
which Jehovah would take away is continued in the next two verses.

[Isaiah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 3:2</span></span>

"Hero and man of war, judge and prophet, and soothsayer and elder;
captains of fifty, and the highly distinguished, and counsellors, and
masters in art, and those skilled in muttering." As the state had grown
into a military state under Uzziah-Jotham, the prophet commences in both
vv. with military officers, viz., the gibbor, i.e., commanders whose
bravery had been already tried; the "man of war" (ish imlchâmâh), i.e.,
private soldiers who had been equipped and well trained (see [Eze
39:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#020)); and the "captain of fifty"
(sar Chamisshim), leaders of the smallest divisions of the army,
consisting of only fifty men (pentekontarchos, [Kg2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#009), etc.). The prominent members of
the state are all mixed up together; "the judge" (shophet), i.e., the
officers appointed by the government to administer justice; "the elder"
(zâkēn), i.e., the heads of families and the senators appointed by the
town corporations; the "counsellor" (yōetz), those nearest to the king;
the "highly distinguished" (nesu panim), lit., those whose personal
appearance (panim) was accepted, i.e., welcome and regarded with honour
(Saad.: wa'gı̄h, from wa'gh, the face of appearance), that is to say,
persons of influence, not only on account of their office, but also on
account of wealth, age, goodness, etc.; "masters in art" (Chacam
Charâshim: lxx σοφὸς ἀρχιτέκτων ), or, as Jerome has very well rendered
it, in artibus mechanicis exercitatus easque callide tractans (persons
well versed in mechanical arts, and carrying them out with skill). In
the Chaldean captivities skilled artisans are particularly mentioned as
having been carried away ([Kg2 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014).;
[Jer 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001); [Jer
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#002)); so that there can be no doubt
whatever that Charâshim (from Cheresh) is to be understood as signifying
mechanical and not magical arts, as Gesenius, Hitzig, and Meier suppose,
and therefore that Chacam Charâshim does not mean "wizards," as Ewald
renders it (Chărâshim is a different word from Chârâshim, fabri, from
Chârâsh, although in [Ch1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#014), cf.,
[Neh 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#035), the word is regularly
pointed חרשׁים even in this personal sense). Moreover, the rendering
"wizards" produces tautology, inasmuch as masters of the black art are
cited as nebon lachash, "skilled in muttering." Lachash is the
whispering or muttering of magical formulas; it is related both
radically and in meaning to nachash, enchantment (Arabic nachs,
misfortune); it is derived from lachash, sibilare, to hiss (a kindred
word to nâchash; hence nâchâsh, a serpent). Beside this, the masters of
the black art are also represented as kosem, which, in accordance with
the radical idea of making fast, swearing, conjuring, denoted a
soothsayer following heathen superstitions, as distinguished from the
nabi, of false Jehovah prophet (we find this as early as [Deu
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010), [Deu
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#014)).

(Note: According to the primary meaning of the whole thema, which is one
of hardness, rigidity, firmness, aksama (hi. of kâsam) signifies,
strictly speaking, to make sure, i.e., to swear, either by swearing to
the truth and certainty of a thing, or by making a person swear that he
will do or not do a certain thing, by laying as it were a kasam upon
him. The kal, on the other hand (kasama), gets its meaning to divide
from the turn given to the radical idea in the substantive kism, which
signifies, according to the original lexicographers, something fixed (=
nası̄b), definite, i.e., a definite portion. There is just the same
association of ideas in ‛azama as in aksama, namely, literally to be
firm or make firm, i.e., to direct one's will firmly towards an object
or place; also to direct one's will firmly towards a person, to adjure
him to do a thing or not to do it; sometimes with a softer meaning, to
urge or invite a person to anything, at other times to recite conjuring
formulas (‛azâim.)

These came next to bread and water, and were in a higher grade the props
of the state. They are mixed together in this manner without regular
order, because the powerful and splendid state was really a quodlibet of
things Jewish and heathen; and when the wrath of Jehovah broke out, the
godless glory would soon become a mass of confusion.

[Isaiah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 3:4</span></span>

Thus robbed of its support, and torn out of its proper groove, the
kingdom of Judah would fall a prey to the most shameless despotism: "And
I give them boys for princes, and caprices shall rule over them." The
revived "Solomonian" glory is followed, as before, by the times of
Rehoboam. The king is not expressly named. This was intentional. He had
sunk into the mere shadow of a king: it was not he who ruled, but the
aristocratic party that surrounded him, who led him about in leading
strings as unum inter pares. Now, if it is a misfortune in most cases
for a king to be a child (na'ar, [Ecc
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016)), the misfortune is twice as
great when the princes or magnates who surround and advise him are
youngsters (ne'ârim, i.e., young lords) in a bad sense. It produces a
government of tâlulim. None of the nouns in this form have a personal
signification. According to the primary meaning of the verbal stem, the
word might signify childishnesses, equivalent to little children (the
abstract for the concrete, like τἀπαιδικά amasius), as Ewald supposes;
or puppets, fantocci, poltroons, or men without heart or brain, as
Luzzatto maintains. But the latter has no support in the general usage
of the language, and the verb yimshelu (shall rule) does not necessarily
require a personal subject (cf., [Psa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014); [Psa
103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019)). The word tâlulim is formed
from the reflective verb hithallel, which means to meddle, to gratify
one's self, to indulge one's caprice. Accordingly tâlulim itself might
be rendered vexationes ([Isa 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004)).
Jerome, who translates the word effeminati, appears to have thought of
התעלּל in an erotic sense. The Sept. rendering, ἐμπαῖκται is better,
though ἐμπαίγματα would be more exact. When used, as the word is here,
along with ne'arim, it signifies outbursts of youthful caprice, which do
injury to others, whether in joke or earnest. Neither law nor justice
would rule, but the very opposite of justice: a course of conduct which
would make subjects, like slaves, the helpless victims at one time of
their lust ([Jdg 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#025)), and at
another of their cruelty. They would be governed by lawless and
bloodstained caprice, of the most despotic character and varied forms.
And the people would resemble their rulers: their passions would be let
loose, and all restraints of modesty and decorum be snapt asunder.

[Isaiah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 3:5</span></span>

"And the people oppress one another, one this and another that; the boy
breaks out violently upon the old man, and the despised upon the
honoured." Niggas is the reciprocal niphal, as the clause depicting the
reciprocity clearly shows (cf., nilcham, [Isa
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#002)); nagas followed by Beth means to
treat as a tyrant or taskmaster ([Isa
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003)). The commonest selfishness would
then stifle every nobler motive; one would become the tyrant of another,
and ill-mannered insolence would take the place of that reverence, which
is due to the old and esteemed from boys and those who are below them in
position, whether we regard the law of nature, the Mosaic law ([Lev
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032)), or the common custom of
society. Nikleh (from kâlâh, the synonym of הקל, [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001); [Isa
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#009); cf., [Isa
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014), kal, to be light or
insignificant) was a term used to denote whoever belonged to the lowest
stratum of society ([Sa1 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#023)). It
was the opposite of nichâd (from Cabed, to be heavy or of great
importance). The Septuagint rendering, ὁ ἄτιμος πρὸς τὸν ἔντιμον is a
very good one (as the Semitic languages have no such antithetical
formations with ἃ στερητικόν). With such contempt of the distinctions
arising from age and position, the state would very soon become a scene
of the wildest confusion.

[Isaiah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 3:6</span></span>

At length there would be no authorities left; even the desire to rule
would die out: for despotism is sure to be followed by mob-rule, and
mob-rule by anarchy in the most literal sense. The distress would become
so great, that whoever had a coat (cloak), so as to be able to clothe
himself at all decently, would be asked to undertake the government.
"When a man shall take hold of his brother in his father's house, Thou
hast a coat, thou shalt be our ruler, and take this ruin under thy hand;
he will cry out in that day, I do not want to be a surgeon; there is
neither bread nor coat in my house: ye cannot make me the ruler of the
people." "his father's house" - this is not an unmeaning trait in the
picture of misery. The population would have become so thin and
dispirited through hunger, that with a little energy it would be
possible to decide within the narrow circle of a family who should be
ruler, and to give effect to the decision. "In his father's house:" Beth
âbiv is an acc. loci. The father's house is the place where brother
meets with brother; and one breaks out with the urgent petition
contained in the words, which follow without the introductory "saying"
(cf., [Isa 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008), [Isa
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016), and [Isa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#016); [Isa
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014)). לכה for לך with He otians, a
form rarely met with (vid., [Gen
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#037)). תּהיה, which would be written
תּהי before the predicate, is jussive in meaning, though not in form.
"This ruin:" macshelah is used in [Zep
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003) for that which occasions a
person's fall; here it signifies what has been overthrown; and as Câshal
itself, which means not only to stumble, strip, or slide, but also to
fall in consequence of some force applied from without, is not used in
connection with falling buildings, it must be introduced here with an
allusion to the prosopopeia which follows in [Isa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008). The man who was distinguished
above all others, or at any rate above many others, by the fact that he
could still dress himself decently (even if it were only in a blouse),
should be made supreme ruler or dictator (cf., kâtzin, [Jdg
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#006)); and the state which lay so
miserably in ruins should be under his hand, i.e., his direction,
protection, and care ([Kg2 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020); [Gen
41:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#035), cf., [Isa
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009), where the plural is used instead
of the ordinary singular yâd.) The apodosis to the protasis introduced
with Chi as a particle of time (when) commences in [Isa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#007). The answer given by the brother
to the earnest petition is introduced with "he will raise (viz., his
voice, [Isa 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#014)) in that day,
saying." It is given in this circumstantial manner because it is a
solemn protest. He does not want to be a Chobēsh, i.e., a binder, namely
of the broken arms, and bones, and ribs of the ruined state ([Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026); [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006); [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)). The expression ehyeh implies
that he does not like it, because he is conscious of his inability. He
has not confidence enough in himself, and the assumption that he has a
coat is a false cone: he not only has no coat at home (we must remember
that the conversation is supposed to take place in his father's house),
but he has not any bread; so that it is utterly impossible for a naked,
starving man like him to do what is suggested ("in my house," ubebethi
with a Vav of causal connection: Ges. 155, 1, c).

[Isaiah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 3:8</span></span>

The prophet then proceeds, in [Isa
3:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008), to describe this deep,
tragical misery as a just retribution."For Jerusalem is ruined and Judah
fallen; because their tongue and their doings (are) against Jehovah, to
defy the eyes of His glory." Jerusalem as a city is feminine, according
to the usual personification; Judah as a people is regarded as
masculine.

(Note: As a rule, the name of a people (apart from the personification
of the people as beth, a house) is only used as a feminine, when the
name of the land stands for the nation itself (see Gesenius, Lehrbegr.
p. 469).)

The two preterites Câs'lah and nâphal express the general fact, which
occasioned such scenes of misery as the one just described. The second
clause, beginning with "because" (Chi), is a substantive clause, and
attributes the coming judgment not to future sin, but to sin already
existing. "Again Jehovah:" אל is used to denote a hostile attitude, as
in [Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004); [Gen
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008); [Num
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#014); [Jos
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#006). The capital and the land are
against Jehovah both in word and deed, "to defy the eyes of His glory"
(lamroth ‛ēnē Chebodo). עני is equivalent to עיני; and lamroth is a
syncopated hiphil, as in [Isa 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#011),
and like the niphal in [Isa 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012) : we
find the same form of the same word in [Psa
78:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017). The kal mârâh, which is also
frequently construed with the accusative, signifies to thrust away in a
refractory manner; the hiphil himrâh, to treat refractorily, literally
to set one's self rigidly in opposition, obniti; mar, stringere, to draw
tightly, with which unquestionably the meaning bitter as an astringent
is connected, though it does not follow that mârâh, himrâh, and hemar
([Exo 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021)) can be rendered
παραπικραίνειν, as they have been in the Septuagint, since the idea of
opposing, resisting, fighting in opposition, is implied in all these
roots, with distinct reference to the primary meaning. The Lamed is a
shorter expression instead of למען, which is the term generally employed
in such circumstances ([Amo 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007); [Jer
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018); [Jer
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029)). But what does the prophet mean
by "the eyes of His glory?" Knobel's assertion, that Châbod is used here
for the religious glory, i.e., the holiness of God, is a very strange
one, since the Châbod of God is invariably the fiery, bright doxa which
reveals Him as the Holy One. but his remark does not meet the question,
inasmuch as it does not settle the point in dispute, whether the
expression "the eyes of His glory" implies that the glory itself has
eyes, or the glory is a quality of the eyes. The construction is
certainly not a different one from "the arm of His glory" in [Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010), so that it is to be taken as an
attribute. But this suggests the further question, what does the prophet
mean by the glory-eyes or glorious eyes of Jehovah? If we were to say
the eyes of Jehovah are His knowledge of the world, it would be
impossible to understand how they could be called holy, still less how
they could be called glorious. This abstract explanation of the
anthropomorphisms cannot be sustained. The state of the case is rather
the following. The glory (Châbod) of God is that eternal and glorious
morphē which His holy nature assumes, and which men must picture to
themselves anthropomorphically, because they cannot imagine anything
superior to the human form. In this glorious form Jehovah looks upon His
people with eyes of glory. His pure but yet jealous love, His holy love
which breaks out in wrath against all who meet it with hatred instead of
with love, is reflected therein.

[Isaiah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 3:9</span></span>

But Israel, instead of walking in the consciousness of being a constant
and favourite object of these majestic, earnestly admonishing eyes, was
diligently engaged in bidding them defiance both in word and deed, not
even hiding its sin from fear of them, but exposing them to view in the
most shameless manner. - "The look of their faces testifies against
them, and their sin they make known like Sodom, without concealing it:
woe to their soul! for they do themselves harm." In any case, the
prophet refers to the impudence with which their enmity against God was
shamelessly stamped upon their faces, without even the self-condemnation
which leads in other cases to a diligent concealment of the sin. But we
cannot follow Luzzatto and Jos. Kimchi, who take haccârath as used
directly for azzuth (impudence), inasmuch as the Arabic hakara
(hakir‛a), to which Kimchi appeals, signifies to be astonished and to
stare (see at [Job 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003)). And in this
case there would be nothing strange in the substantive form, which would
be a piel formation like בּלּהה חטּאה. But it may be a hiphil formation
(Ewald, 156, a); and this is incomparably the more probable of the two,
as hiccir panim is a very common phrase. It signifies to look earnestly,
keenly, or inquiringly in the face of a person, to fix the eye upon him;
and, when used of a judge, to take the part of a person, by favouring
him unjustly ([Deu 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017); [Deu
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019)). But this latter idea, viz.,
"their acceptance of the person, or partiality" (according to [Pro
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023); [Pro
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#021)), is inadmissible here, for the
simple reason that the passage refers to the whole nation, and not
particularly to the judges. "The look of their faces" (haccârath
p'nēhem) is to be understood in an objective sense, viz., the appearance
(τὸ εἶδος, [Luk 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#029)), like the
agnitio of Jerome, id quo se agnoscendum dat vultus eorum. This was
probably the expression commonly employed in Hebrew for what we
designate by a very inappropriate foreign word, viz., physiognomy, i.e.,
the expression of the face which reveals the state of the mind. This
expression of their countenance testified against them (anah b', as in
[Isa 59:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#012)), for it was the disturbed
and distorted image of their sin, which not only could not be hidden,
but did not even wish to be; in a word, of their azzuth ([Ecc
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001)). And it did not even rest with
this open though silent display: they spoken openly of their sin (higgid
in its simplest meaning, palam facere, from nâgad, nagâda, to be open,
evident) without making any secret of it, like the Sodomites, who
publicly proclaimed their fleshly lusts (Gen 19). Jerusalem was
spiritually Sodom, as the prophet called it in [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010). By such barefaced sinning they
did themselves harm (gâmal, lit., to finish, then to carry out, to show
practically).

(Note: It may now be accepted as an established fact, that the verb
gâmal is connected with the Arabic 'gamala, to collect together,
'gamula, to be perfect, kamala, kamula id., and gâmar, to finish (see
Hupfeld on [Psa 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005), and Frst, Heb.
Lex.).)

[Isaiah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 3:10</span></span>

The prophet's meaning is evident enough. But inasmuch as it is the curse
of sin to distort the knowledge of what is most obvious and
self-evident, and even to take it entirely away, the prophet dwells
still longer upon the fact that all sinning is self-destruction and
self-murder, placing this general truth against its opposite in a
palillogical Johannic way, and calling out to his contemporaries in [Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010), [Isa
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#011) : "Say of the righteous, that it
is well with him; for they will enjoy the fruit of their doings. Woe to
the wicked! it is ill; for what his hands have wrought will be done to
him." We cannot adopt the rendering "Praise the righteous," proposed by
Vitringa and other modern commentators; for although âmar is sometimes
construed with the accusative of the object ([Psa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011); [Psa
145:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#006), [Psa
145:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#011)), it never means to praise, but
to declare (even in [Psa 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)). We
have here what was noticed from [Gen
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004) onwards - namely, the obvious
antiptsis or antiphonsis in the verbs ראה (cf., [Isa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009); [Exo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002)), ידע ([Kg1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#017)), and אמר (like λέγειν, [Joh
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#009)): dicite justum quod bonus =
dicite justum esse bonum (Ewald, 336, b). The object of sight,
knowledge, or speech, is first of all mentioned in the most general
manner; then follows the qualification, or more precise definition. טוב,
and in [Isa 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#011) רע (רע without the
pause), might both of them be the third pers. pret. of the verbs,
employed in a neuter sense: the former signifying, it is well, viz.,
with him (as in [Deu 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#030); [Jer
22:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015)); the latter, it is bad (as
in [Psa 106:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#032)). But it is evident
from [Jer 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017) that הוּא טוב and הוּא
רע may be used in the sense of καλῶς (κακῶς) ἔχει, and that the two
expressions are here thought of in this way, so that there is no לו to
be supplied in either case. The form of the first favours this; and in
the second the accentuation fluctuates between אוי tiphchah לרשׁע
munach, and the former with merka, the latter tiphchah. At the same
time, the latter mode of accentuation, which is favourable to the
personal rendering of רע, is supported by editions of some worth, such
as Brescia 1494, Pesaro 1516, Venice 1515, 1521, and is justly preferred
by Luzzatto and Br. The summary assertions, The righteous is well, the
wicked ill, are both sustained by their eventual fate, in the light of
which the previous misfortune of the righteous appears as good fortune,
and the previous good fortune of the wicked as misfortune. With an
allusion to this great difference in their eventual fate, the word
"say," which belongs to both clauses, summons to an acknowledgment of
the good fortune of the one and the misfortune of the other. O that
Judah and Jerusalem would acknowledge their to their own salvation
before it was too late! For the state of the poor nation was already
miserable enough, and very near to destruction.

[Isaiah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 3:12</span></span>

"My people, its oppressors are boys, and women rule over it; my people,
thy leaders are misleaders, who swallow up the way of thy paths." It is
not probable that me‛olel signifies maltreaters or triflers, by the side
of the parallel nâshim; moreover, the idea of despotic treatment is
already contained in nogesaiv. We expect to find children where there
are women. And this is one meaning of me‛olel. It does not mean a
suckling, however, as Ewald supposes (160, a), more especially as it
occurs in connection with yonek ([Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007); [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011)), and therefore cannot have
precisely the same meaning; but, like עולל and עולל (the former of which
may be contracted from meolēl), it refers to the boy as playful and
wanton (Lascivum, protervum). Bttcher renders it correctly, pueri,
lusores, though meolēl is not in itself a collective form, as he
supposes; but the singular is used collectively, or perhaps better
still, the predicate is intended to apply to every individual included
in the plural notion of the subject (compare [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008); [Isa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#004), and Ges. 146, 4): the oppressors
of the people, every one without exception, were (even though advanced
in years) mere boys or youths in their mode of thinking and acting, and
made all subject to them the football of their capricious humour. Here
again the person of the king is allowed to fall into the background. but
the female rule, referred to afterwards, points us to the court. And
this must really have been the case when Ahaz, a young rake, came to the
throne at the age of twenty (according to the lxx twenty-five), possibly
towards the close of the reign of Jotham. With the deepest anguish the
prophet repeats the expression "my people," as he passes in his address
to his people from the rulers to the preachers: for the meassherim or
leaders are prophets ([Mic 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005)); but
what prophets! Instead of leading the people in a straight path, they
lead them astray ([Isa 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015), cf., [Kg2
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#009)). This they did, as we may gather
from the history of this crowd of prophets, either by acting in
subservience to the ungodly interests of the court with dynastic or
demagogical servility, or by flattering the worst desires of the people.
Thus the way of the path of the people, i.e., the highway or road by
whose ramifying paths the people were to reach the appointed goal, had
been swallowed up by them, i.e., taken away from the sight and feet of
the people, so that they could not find it and walk therein (cf., [Isa
25:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007), where the verb is used in
another connection). What is swallowed up is invisible, has disappeared,
without a grace being left behind. The same idea is applied in [Job
39:27](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#027) to a galloping horse, which is
said to swallow the road, inasmuch as it leaves piece after piece behind
it in its rapid course. It is stated here with regard to the prophets,
that they swallow up the road appointed by Jehovah, as the one in which
His people were to walk, just as a criminal swallows a piece of paper
which bears witness against him, and so hides it in his own stomach.
Thus the way of salvation pointed out by the law was no longer to be
either heard of or seen. The prophets, who ought to have preached it,
said mum, mum, and kept it swallowed. It had completely perished, as it
were, in the erroneous preaching of the false prophets.

[Isaiah 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 3:13</span></span>

This was how it stood. There was but little to be expected from the
exhortations of the prophet; so that he had to come back again and again
to the proclamation of judgment. The judgment of the world comes again
before his mind. - "Jehovah has appeared to plead, and stands up to
judge the nations." When Jehovah, weary with His long-suffering, rises
up from His heavenly throne, this is described as "standing up" (kum,
[Isa 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019), [Isa
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021); [Isa
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#010)); and when He assumes the
judgment-seat in the sight of all the world, this is called "sitting
down" (yashab, [Psa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005), [Joe
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012)); when, having come down from
heaven ([Mic 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002).), He comes forward
as accuser, this is called "standing" (nizzab or amad, [Psa
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001) : amad is coming forward and
standing, as the opposite of sitting; nizzab, standing, with the
subordinate idea of being firm, resolute, ready). This pleading (ribh,
[Jer 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#031)) is also judging (din),
because His accusation, which is incontrovertible, contains the sentence
in itself; and His sentence, which executes itself irresistibly, is of
itself the infliction of punishment. Thus does he stand in the midst of
the nations at once accuser, judge, and executioner ([Psa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008)). But among the nations it is more
especially against Israel that He contends; and in Israel it is more
especially against the leaders of the poor misguided and neglected
people that He sets Himself.

[Isaiah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 3:14</span></span>

"Jehovah will proceed to judgment with the elders of His people, and its
princes. And ye, ye have eaten up the vineyard; prey of the suffering is
in your houses. What mean ye that ye crush my people, and grind the face
of the suffering? Thus saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts." The words of
God Himself commence with "and ye" (v'attem). The sentence to which this
(et vos = at vos) is the antithesis is wanting, just as in [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006), where the words of God commence
with "and I" (va'ani, et ego = ast ego). the tacit clause may easily be
supplied, viz., I have set you over my vineyard, but he have consumed
the vineyard. The only question is, whether the sentence is to be
regarded as suppressed by Jehovah Himself, or by the prophet. Most
certainly by Jehovah Himself. The majesty with which He appeared before
the rulers of His people as, even without words, a practical and
undeniable proof that their majesty was only a shadow of His, and their
office His trust. But their office consisted in the fact that Jehovah
had committed His people to their care. The vineyard of Jehovah was His
people - a self-evident figure, which the prophet dresses up in the form
of a parable in chapter 5. Jehovah had appointed them as gardeners and
keepers of this vineyard, but they themselves have become the very
beasts that they ought to have warded off. בּער is applied to the beasts
which completely devour the blades of a corn-field or the grapes of a
vineyard ([Exo 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004)). This change was
perfectly obvious. The possessions stolen from their unhappy countrymen,
which were still in their houses, were the tangible proof of their
plundering of the vineyard. "The suffering:" ani (depressus, the
crushed) is introduced as explanatory of haccerem, the prey, because
depression and misery were the ordinary fate of the congregation which
God called His vineyard. It was ecclesia pressa, but woe to the
oppressors! In the question "what mean ye?" (mallâcem) the madness and
wickedness of their deeds are implied. מה and לכם are fused into one
word here, as if it were a prefix (as in [Exo
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002); [Eze
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#006); [Mal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013); vid., Ges. 20, 2). The Keri
helps to make it clear by resolving the chethibh. The word mallâcem
ought, strictly speaking, to be followed by chi: "What is there to you
that ye crush my people?" as in [Isa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#001), [Isa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#016); but the words rush forwards (as
in [Jon 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#006)), because they are an
explosion of wrath. For this reason the expressions relating to the
behaviour of the rulers are the strongest that can possibly be employed.
דּכּא (crush) is also to be met with in [Pro
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#022); but "grind the face" (tâchan
p'ne) is a strong metaphor without a parallel. The former signifies "to
pound," the latter "to grind," as the millstone grinds the corn. They
grind the faces of those who are already bowed down, thrusting them back
with such unmerciful severity, that they stand as it were annihilated,
and their faces become as white as flour, or as the Germans would say,
cheese-white, chalk-white, as pale as death, from oppression and
despair. Thus the language supplied to a certain extent appropriate
figures, with which to describe the conduct of the rulers of Israel; but
it contained no words that could exhaust the immeasurable wickedness of
their conduct: hence the magnitude of their sin is set before them in
the form of a question, "What is to you?" i.e., What indescribable
wickedness is this which you are committing? The prophet hears this said
by Jehovah, the majestic Judge, whom he here describes as Adonai Elohim
Zebaoth (according to the Masoretic pointing). This triplex name of God,
which we find in the prophetic books, viz., frequently in Amos and also
in [Jer 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019), occurs for the first
time in the Elohistic Psalm, [Psa
69:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007). This scene of judgment is indeed
depicted throughout in the colours of the Psalms, and more especially
recals the (Elohistic) Psalm of Asaph ([Psa
82:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)).

[Isaiah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 3:16</span></span>

But notwithstanding the dramatic vividness with which the prophet
pictures to himself this scene of judgment, he is obliged to break off
at the very beginning of his description, because another word of
Jehovah comes upon him. This applies to the women of Jerusalem, whose
authority, at the time when Isaiah prophesied, was no less influential
than that of their husbands who had forgotten their calling. "Jehovah
hath spoken: Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk about
with extended throat, and blinking with the eyes, walk about with
tripping gait, and tinkle with their foot-ornaments: the Lord of all
makes the crown of the daughters of Zion scabbed, and Jehovah will
uncover their shame." Their inward pride (gâbah, as in [Eze
16:50](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#050); cf., [Zep
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011)) shows itself outwardly. They
walk with extended throat, i.e., bending the neck back, trying to make
themselves taller than they are, because they think themselves so great.
The Keri substitutes the more usual form, נטוּית; but Isaiah in all
probability intentionally made use of the rarer and ruder form netuvoth,
since such a form really existed ([Sa1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018)), as well as the singular nâtu
for nâtui ([Job 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022); [Job
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025) : Ges. 75, Anm. 5). They also
went winking the eyes (mesakkeroth, for which we frequently find the
erratum mesakkeroth), i.e., casting voluptuous and amatory glances with
affected innocence (νεύματα ὀφθαλμῶν, lxx). "Winking:" sâkar is not used
in the sense of fucare (Targ. b. Sabbath 62b, Jome 9b, Luther) - which
is all the more inappropriate, because blackening the eyelids with
powder of antimony was regarded in the East of the Old Testament as
indispensable to female beauty - but in the sense of nictare (lxx,
Vulg., Syr., syn. remaz, cf., sekar, Syr. to squint; Targ. = shâzaph,
[Job 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#009)). Compare also the talmudic
saying: God did not create woman out of Adam's ear, that she might be no
eavesdropper (tsaithânith), nor out of Adam's eyes, that she might be no
winker (sakrânith).

(Note: Also b. Sota 47b: "Since women have multiplied with extended
necks and winking eyes, the number of cases has also multiplied in which
it has been necessary to resort to the curse water ([Num
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#018))." In fact, this increased to
such an extent, that Johanan ben Zakkai, the pupil of Hillel, abolished
the ordeal (divine-verdict) of the Sota (the woman suspected of
adultery) altogether. The people of his time were altogether an
adulterous generation.)

The third was, that they walked incedendo et trepidando. The second inf.
abs. is in this case, as in most others, the one which gives the
distinct tone, whilst the other serves to keep before the eye the
occurrence indicated in its finite verb (Ges. 131, 3). They walk about
tripping (tâphop, a wide-spread onomato-poetic word), i.e., taking short
steps, just putting the heel of one foot against the toe of the other
(as the Talmud explains it). Luther renders it, "they walk along and
waggle" (schwnzen, i.e., Clunibus agitatis). The rendering is suitable,
but incorrect. They could only take short steps, because of the chains
by which the costly foot-rings (achâsim ) worn above their ankles were
connected together. These chains, which were probably ornamented with
bells, as is sometimes the case now in the East, they used to tinkle as
they walked: they made an ankle-tinkling with their feet, setting their
feet down in such a manner that these ankle-rings knocked against each
other. The writing beraglēhem (masc.) for beraglēhen (fem.) is probably
not an unintentional synallage gen.: they were not modest virgines, but
cold, masculine viragines, so that they themselves were a synallage
generis. Nevertheless they tripped along. Tripping is a child's step.
Nevertheless they tripped along. Tripping is a child's step. Although
well versed in sin and old in years, the women of Jerusalem tried to
maintain a youthful, childlike appearance. They therefore tripped along
with short, childish steps. The women of the Mohammedan East still take
pleasure in such coquettish tinklings, although they are forbidden by
the Koran, just as the women of Jerusalem did in the days of Isaiah. The
attractive influence of natural charms, especially when heightened by
luxurious art, is very great; but the prophet is blind to all this
splendour, and seeing nothing but the corruption within, foretells to
these rich and distinguished women a foul and by no means aesthetic
fate. The Sovereign Ruler of all would smite the crown of their head,
from which long hair was now flowing, with scab (v'sippach, a
progressive preterite with Vav apodosis, a denom. verb from sappachath,
the scurf which adheres to the skin: see at [Hab
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)); and Jehovah would uncover their
nakedness, by giving them up to violation and abuse at the hands of
coarse and barbarous foes - the greatest possible disgrace in the eyes
of a woman, who covers herself as carefully as she can in the presence
of any stranger ([Isa 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#003); [Nah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005); [Jer
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022); [Eze
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037)).

[Isaiah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 3:18</span></span>

The prophet then proceeds to describe still further how the Lord would
take away the whole of their toilet as plunder. "On that day the Lord
will put away the show of the ankle-clasps, and of the head-bands, and
of the crescents; the ear-rings, and the arm-chains, and the light
veils; the diadems, and the stepping-chains, and the girdles, and the
smelling-bottles, and the amulets; the finger-rings, and the nose-rings;
the gala-dresses, and the sleeve-frocks, and the wrappers, and the
pockets; the hand-mirrors, and the Sindu-cloths, and the turbans, and
the gauze mantles." The fullest explanation of all these articles of
female attire is to be found in N. W. Schrder's work, entitled
Commentarius de vestitu mulierum Hebraearum ad Jes. [Isa
3:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016), Ludg. Batav 1745 (a quarto
volume), and in that of Ant. Theod. Hartmann, consisting of three octavo
volumes, and entitled Die Hebrerin am Putztische und als Braut (The
Jewess at the Toilet-table, and as Bride, 1809-10); to which we may also
add, Saalschtz, Archaeologie, chapter iii., where he treats of the
dresses of men and women. It was not usually Isaiah's custom to enter
into such minute particulars. Of all the prophets, Ezekiel was the one
most addicted to this, as we may see, for example, from Ezek 16. And
even in other prophecies against the women we find nothing of the kind
again ([Isa 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009).; [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001).). But in this instance, the
enumeration of the female ornaments is connected with that of the state
props in [Isa 3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001), and that of the
lofty and exalted in [Isa 2:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013), so
as to form a trilogy, and has its own special explanation in that
boundless love of ornament which had become prevalent in the time of
Uzziah-Jotham. It was the prophet's intention to produce a ludicrous,
but yet serious impression, as to the immeasurable luxury which really
existed; and in the prophetic address, his design throughout is to bring
out the glaring contrast between the titanic, massive, worldly glory, in
all its varied forms, and that true, spiritual, and majestically simple
glory, whose reality is manifested from within outwards. In fact, the
theme of the whole address is the way of universal judgment leading on
from the false glory to the true. The general idea of tiphereth (show:
rendered "bravery" in Eng. ver.) which stands at the head and includes
the whole, points to the contrast presented by a totally different
tiphereth which follows in [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002).
In explaining each particular word, we must be content with what is most
necessary, and comparatively the most certain. "Ankle-clasps" (acâsim):
these were rings of gold, silver, or ivory, worn round the ankles; hence
the denom. verb (icces) in [Isa 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016),
to make a tinkling sound with these rings. "Head-bands," or "frontlets"
(shebisim, from shâbas = shâbatz: plectere), were plaited bands of gold
or silver thread worn below the hair-net, and reaching from one ear to
the other. There is some force, however, in the explanation which has
been very commonly adopted since the time of Schrder, namely, that they
were sun-like balls (= shemisim), which were worn as ornaments round the
neck, from the Arabic ‛sumeisa (‛subeisa), a little sun. The "crescents"
(saharonim) were little pendants of this kind, fastened round the neck
and hanging down upon the breast (in [Jdg
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#021) we meet with them as ornaments
hung round the camels' necks). Such ornaments are still worn by Arabian
girls, who generally have several different kinds of them; the hilâl, or
new moon, being a symbol of increasing good fortune, and as such the
most approved charm against the evil eye. "Ear-rings" (netiphoth,
ear-drops): we meet with these in [Jdg
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#026), as an ornament worn by
Midianitish kings. Hence the Arabic munattafe, a woman adorned with
ear-rings. "Arm-chains:" sheroth, from shâra, to twist. According to the
Targum, these were chains worn upon the arm, or spangles upon the wrist,
answering to the spangles upon the ankles. "Fluttering veils" (re'âloth,
from râ'al, to hang loose): these were more expensive than the ordinary
veils worn by girls, which were called tza'iph.

"Diadems" (pe'erim) are only mentioned in other parts of the Scriptures
as being worn by men (e.g., by priests, bride-grooms, or persons of high
rank). "Stepping-chains:" tze'âdoth, from tze'âdah, a step; hence the
chain worn to shorten and give elegance to the step. "Girdles:"
kisshurim, from kâshar (Cingere), dress girdles, such as were worn by
brides upon their wedding-day (compare [Jer
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#032) with [Isa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018)); the word is erroneously
rendered hair-pins (kalmasmezayyah) in the Targum. "Smelling-bottles:"
botte hannephesh, holders of scent (nephesh, the breath of an aroma).
"Amulets:" lechashim (from lâchash, to work by incantations), gems or
metal plates with an inscription upon them, which were worn as a
protection as well as an ornament. "Finger-rings:" tabbâ'oth, from tâba,
to impress or seal, signet-rings worn upon the finger, corresponding to
the Chothâm worn by men upon the breast suspended by a cord.
"Nose-rings" (nizmê hâaph) were fastened in the central division of the
nose, and hung down over the mouth: they have been ornaments in common
use in the East from the time of the patriarchs ([Gen
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#022)) down to the present day.
"Gala-dresses" (machalâtsoth) are dresses not usually worn, but taken
off when at home. "Sleeve-frocks" (ma'atâphâh): the second tunic, worn
above the ordinary one, the Roman stola. "Wrappers" (mitpâchoth, from
tâphach, expandere), broad cloths wrapped round the body, such as Ruth
wore when she crept in to Boaz in her best attire ([Rut
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#015)). "Pockets" (Charitim) were for
holding money ([Kg2 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023)), which was
generally carried by men in the girdle, or in a purse (Cis).
"Hand-mirrors" (gilyonim): the Septuagint renders this διαφανῆ λακωνικὰ,
sc. ἱμάτια, Lacedaemonian gauze or transparent dresses, which showed the
nakedness rather than concealed it (from gâlâh, retegere); but the
better rendering is mirrors with handles, polished metal plates (from
gâlâh, polire), as gillâyon is used elsewhere to signify a smooth table.
"Sindu-cloths" (sedinim), veils or coverings of the finest linen, viz.,
of Sindu or Hindu cloth (σινδόνες) - Sindu, the land of Indus, being the
earlier name of India.

(Note: The Mishna (Kelim xxiv 13) mentions three different sedinin:
night dresses, curtains, and embroidery. The sindon is frequently
referred to as a covering wrapped round the person; and in b. Menachoth
41a, it is stated that the sindom is the summer dress, the sarbal
(cloak) the winter dress, which may help to explain [Mar
14:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#051).)

"Turbans" (tseniphoth, from tsânaph, Convolvere), the head-dress
composed of twisted cloths of different colours. "Gauze mantles"
(redidim, from râdad, extendere, tenuem facere), delicate veil-like
mantles thrown over the rest of the clothes. Stockings and handkerchiefs
are not mentioned: the former were first introduced into Hither Asia
from Media long after Isaiah's time, and a Jerusalem lady no more
thought of suing the latter than a Grecian or Roman lady did. Even the
veil (burko) now commonly worn, which conceals the whole of the face
with the exception of the eyes, did not form part of the attire of an
Israelitish woman in the olden time.

(Note: Rashi, however, makes a different statement (Sabbath 65a), viz.,
that "Israelitish women in Arabia go out with veils which conceal the
face, and those in Media with their mantles fastened about the mouth.")

The prophet enumerates twenty-one different ornaments: three sevens of a
very bad kind, especially for the husbands of these state-dolls. There
is no particular order observed in the enumeration, either from head to
foot, or from the inner to the outer clothing; but they are arranged as
much ad libitum as the dress itself.

[Isaiah 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 3:24</span></span>

When Jehovah took away all this glory, with which the women of Jerusalem
were adorned, they would be turned into wretched-looking prisoners,
disfigured by ill-treatment and dirt. - "And instead of balmy scent
there will be mouldiness, and instead of the sash a rope, and instead of
artistic ringlets a baldness, and instead of the dress-cloak a frock of
sackcloth, branding instead of beauty." Mouldiness, or mother (mak, as
in [Isa 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024), the dust of things that
have moulded away), with which they would be covered, and which they
would be obliged to breathe, would take the place of the bosem, i.e.,
the scent of the balsam shrub (bâsâm), and of sweet-scented pomade in
general; and nipâh that of the beautifully embroidered girdle ([Pro
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#024)). The meaning of this word is
neither "a wound," as the Targums and Talmud render it, nor "rags," as
given by Knobel, ed. 1 (from nâkaph, percutere, perforare), but the rope
thrown over them as prisoners (from kâphâh = kâvâh, Contorquere: lxx,
Vulg., Syr.).

(Note: Credner (Joel, p. 147) renders the word "tatters," from nâkaph,
to rub in pieces; but the word has no such meaning, whereas the meaning
vulnus, lit., percussio, is admissible (see at [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026)), but does not suit the
antithesis. Luzzatto connects it with n'kaph, to bind (from which the
makkeph derives its name), and understands it as referring to the
dressing applied to wounds, to lint into which the girdle was torn. The
most plausible derivation is from kâphâh, which is really employed in
post-biblical usage to signify not only to congeal and wrinkle, but also
to thicken (Sabbath 21a, l'hakpoth: "Make the wick thicker, that it may
burn the brighter"). It is probably radically akin to the Arabic nukbe
(explained in Lamachzari as equivalent to the Persian mijân-bend, a
girdle), which is apparently used to denote the coarse girdle worn by
peasants or by Arab women of the wandering tribes, resembling a rope of
goat's hair, as distinguished from the artistic and costly girdle worn
by women of the upper classes in the towns.)

Baldness takes the place of artistic ringlets (מקשׁה מעשׂה, not מעשׂה,
so that it is in apposition: cf., [Isa
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020); Ges. 113; Ewald, 287, b). The
reference is not to golden ornaments for the head, as the Sept.
rendering gives it, although miksheh is used elsewhere to signify
embossed or carved work in metal or wood; but here we are evidently to
understand by the "artificial twists" either curls made with the
curling-tongs, or the hair plaited and twisted up in knots, which they
would be obliged to cut off in accordance with the mourning customs
([Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002); [Isa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012)), or which would fall off in
consequence of grief. A frock of sackcloth (machagoreth sak), i.e., a
smock of coarse haircloth worn next to the skin, such as Layard found
depicted upon a bas-relief at Kouyunjik, would take the place of the
pethigil, i.e., the dress-cloak (either from pâthag, to be wide or full,
with the substantive termination ı̄l, or else composed of pethi, breadth,
and gil, festive rejoicing); and branding the place of beauty. Branding
(Ci = Cevi, from Câvâh, καἰειν), the mark burnt upon the forehead by
their conquerors: Ci is a substantive,

(Note: It is so understood in b. Sabbath 62b, with an allusion to the
proverb, "The end of beauty is burning" (viz., inflammation). In Arabia,
the application of the Cey with a red-hot iron (mikwâh) plays a very
important part in the medical treatment of both man and beast. You meet
with many men who have been burned not only on their legs and arms, but
in their faces as well, and, as a rule, the finest horses are disfigured
by the Cey. - Wetzstein.)

not a particle, as the Targum and others render it, and as the makkeph
might make it appear. There is something very effective in the inverted
order of the words in the last clause of the five. In this five-fold
reverse would shame and mourning take the place of proud, voluptuous
rejoicing.

[Isaiah 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 3:25</span></span>

The prophet now passes over to a direct address to Jerusalem itself,
since the "daughters of Zion" and the daughter of Zion in her present
degenerate condition. The daughter of Zion loses her sons, and
consequently the daughters of Zion their husbands. - "Thy men will fall
by the sword, and thy might in war." The plural methim (the singular of
which only occurs in the form methu, with the connecting vowel ū as a
component part of the proper names) is used as a prose word in the
Pentateuch; but in the later literature it is a poetic archaism. "Thy
might" is used interchangeably with "thy men," the possessors of the
might being really intended, like robur and robora in Latin (compare
[Jer 49:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#035)).

[Isaiah 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 3:26</span></span>

What the prophet here foretells to the daughter of Zion he sees in [Isa
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#026) fulfilled upon her: "Then will
her gates lament and mourn, and desolate is she, sits down upon the
ground." The gates, where the husbands of the daughters of Zion, who
have now fallen in war, sued at one time to gather together in such
numbers, are turned into a state of desolation, in which they may, as it
were, be heard complaining, and seen to mourn ([Isa
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#031); [Jer
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002); [Lam
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004)); and the daughter of Zion herself
is utterly vacated, thoroughly emptied, completely deprived of all her
former population; and in this state of the most mournful widowhood or
orphanage, brought down from her lofty seat ([Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)) and princely glory ([Jer
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018)), she sits down upon the ground,
just as Judaea is represented as doing upon Roman medals that were
struck after the destruction of Jerusalem, where she is introduced as a
woman thoroughly broken down, and sitting under a palm-tree in an
attitude of despair, with a warrior standing in front of her, the
inscription upon the medal being Judaea capta, or devicta. The
Septuagint rendering is quite in accordance with the sense, viz., καὶ
καταλειφθἠση μόνη καὶ εἰς την̀ γῆν ἐδαφισθήση (cf., [Luk
19:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044)), except that תּשׁב is not the
second person, but the third, and נקּתה the third pers. pret. niph. for
נקּתה - a pausal form which is frequently met with in connection with
the smaller distinctive accents, such as silluk and athnach (here it
occurs with tiphchah, as, for example, in [Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008)). The clause "sits down upon the
ground" is appended ἀσυνδἔτως - a frequent construction in cases where
one of two verbs defines the other in a manner which is generally
expressed adverbially (vid., [Ch1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#002), and the inverted order of the
words in [Jer 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005); cf., [Isa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006)): Zion sits upon the earth in a
state of utter depopulation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 4](isa004)

</div>
