<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa061)  [Next](isa063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 62](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001)

[Isaiah 62:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 62:1</span></span>

Nearly all the more recent commentators regard the prophet himself as
speaking here. Having given himself up to praying to Jehovah and
preaching to the people, he will not rest or hold his peace till the
salvation, which has begun to be realized, has been brought fully out to
the light of day. It is, however, really Jehovah who commences thus:
"For Zion's sake I shall not be silent, and for Jerusalem's sake I shall
not rest, till her righteousness breaks forth like morning brightness,
and her salvation like a blazing torch. And nations will see they
righteousness, and all kings thy glory; and men will call thee by a new
name, which the mouth of Jehovah will determine. And thou wilt be an
adorning coronet in the hand of Jehovah, and a royal diadem in the lap
of thy God." It is evident that Jehovah is the speaker here, both from
[Isa 62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006) and also from the expression
used; for châshâh is the word commonly employed in such utterances of
Jehovah concerning Himself, to denote His leaving things in their
existing state without interposing ([Isa
65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006); [Isa
57:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#011); [Isa
64:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#011)). Moreover, the arguments which
may be adduced to prove that the author of chapters 40-66 is not the
speaker in [Isa 61:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001), also prove
that it is not he who is continuing to speak of himself in [Isa
62:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001) Jehovah, having now begun to
speak and move on behalf of Zion, will "for Zion's sake," i.e., just
because it is Zion, His own church, neither be silent nor give Himself
rest, till He has gloriously executed His work of grace. Zion is now in
the shade, but the time will come when her righteousness will go forth
as nōgah, the light which bursts through the night ([Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019); [Isa
59:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009); here the morning sunlight, [Pro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018); compare shachar, the morning
red, [Isa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)); or till her salvation
is like a torch which blazes. יבער belongs to כלפּיד (mercha) in the
form of an attributive clause = בּער, although it might also be assumed
that יבער stands by attraction for תבער (cf., [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011); Ewald, 317, c). The verb בּער,
which is generally applied to wrath (e.g., [Isa
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027)), is here used in connection
with salvation, which has wrath towards the enemies of Zion as its
obverse side: Zion's tsedeq (righteousness) shall become like the
morning sunlight, before which even the last twilight has vanished; and
Zion's yeshū‛âh is like a nightly torch, which sets fire to its own
material, and everything that comes near it. The force of the
conjunction עד (until) does not extend beyond [Isa
62:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001). From [Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002) onwards, the condition of things
in the object indicated by עד is more fully described. The eyes of the
nations will be directed to the righteousness of Zion, the impress of
which is now their common property; the eyes of all kings to her glory,
with which the glory of none of them, nor even of all together, can
possibly compare. And because this state of Zion is a new one, which has
never existed before, her old name is not sufficient to indicate her
nature. She is called by a new name; and who could determine this new
name? He who makes the church righteous and glorious, He, and He alone,
is able to utter a name answering to her new nature, just as it was He
who called Abram Abraham, and Jacob Israel. The mouth of Jehovah will
determine it (נקב, to pierce, to mark, to designate in a signal and
distinguishing manner, nuncupare; cf., [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001); [Num
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017)). It is only in imagery that
prophecy here sees what Zion will be in the future: she will be "a crown
of glory," "a diadem," or rather a tiara (tsenı̄ph; Chethib tsenūph =
mitsnepheth, the head-dress of the high priest, [Exo
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#004); [Zac
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005); and that of the king, [Eze
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#031)) "of regal dignity," in the hand
of her God (for want of a synonym of "hand," we have adopted the
rendering "in the lap" the second time that it occurs). Meier renders
יהוה בּיד (בּכף) Jovae sub praesidio, as though it did not form part of
the figure. But it is a main feature in the figure, that Jehovah holds
the crown in His hand. Zion is not the ancient crown which the Eternal
wears upon His head, but the crown wrought out in time, which He holds
in His hand, because He is seen in Zion by all creation. The whole
history of salvation is the history of the taking of the kingdom, and
the perfecting of the kingdom by Jehovah; in other words, the history of
the working out of this crown.

[Isaiah 62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 62:4</span></span>

Zion will be once more the beloved of God, and her home the bride of her
children. "Men will no more call thee 'Forsaken one;' and thy land they
will no more call 'Desert:' but men will name thee 'My delight in her,'
and thy home 'Married one:' for Jehovah hath delight in thee, and thy
land is married. For the young man marrieth the maiden, thy children
will marry thee; and as the bridegroom rejoiceth in the bride, thy God
will rejoice in thee." The prophecy mentions new names, which will now
take the place of the old ones; but these names indicate what Zion
appears to be, not her true nature which is brought to the light. In the
explanatory clause לך stands at the head, because the name of Zion is
given first in distinction from the name of her land. Zion has hitherto
been called ‛ăzūbhâh, forsaken by Jehovah, who formerly loved her; but
she now receives instead the name of chephtsı̄-bhâh (really the name of a
woman, viz., the wife of Hezekiah, and mother of Manasseh, [Kg2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)), for she is now the object of
true affection on the part of Jehovah. With the rejoicing of a
bridegroom in his bride (the accusative is used here in the same sense
as in גדלה שׂמחה שׂמח; Ges. 138, 1) will her God rejoice in her, turning
to her again with a love as strong and deep as the first love of a
bridal pair. And the land of Zion's abode, the fatherland of her
children, was hitherto called shemâmâh; it was turned into a desert by
the heathen, and the connection that existed between it and the children
of the land was severed; but now it shall be called be‛ūlâh, for it will
be newly married. A young man marries a virgin, thy children will marry
thee: the figure and the fact are placed side by side in the form of an
emblematical proverb, the particle of comparison being omitted (see
Herzog's Cyclopaedia, xiv 696, and Ges. 155, 2, h). The church in its
relation to Jehovah is a weak but beloved woman, which has Him for its
Lord and Husband ([Isa 54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005)); but in
relation to her home she is the totality of those who are lords or
possessors (ba‛alē, [Sa2 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002)) of the
land, and who call the land their own as it were by right of marriage.
Out of the loving relation in which the church stands to its God, there
flows its relation of authority over every earthly thing of which it
stands in need. In some MSS there is a break here.

[Isaiah 62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 62:6</span></span>

Watchmen stationed upon the walls of Zion (says the third strophe) do
not forsake Jehovah till He has fulfilled all His promise. "Upon thy
walls, O Jerusalem, have I stationed watchmen; all the day and all the
night continually they are not silent. O ye who remember Jehovah, leave
yourselves no rest! And give Him no rest, till He raise up, and till He
set Jerusalem for a praise in the earth." As the phrase hiphqı̄d ‛al
signifies to make a person an overseer (president) over anything, it
seems as though we ought to render the sentence before us, "I have set
watchmen over thy walls." But hiphqı̄d by itself may also mean "to
appoint" ([Kg2 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#023)), and therefore
עלח־ומתיך may indicate the place of appointment (lxx ἐπὶ τῶν τειχέων
σου, upon thy walls: ̔Ιερουσαλήμ κατέστησα φύλακας). Those who are
stationed upon the walls are no doubt keepers of the walls; not,
however, as persons whose exclusive duty it is to keep the walls, but as
those who have committed to them the guarding of the city both within
and without ([Sol 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007)). The
appointment of such watchmen presupposes the existence of the city,
which is thus to be watched from the walls. It is therefore inadmissible
to think of the walls of Jerusalem as still lying in ruins, as the
majority of commentators have done, and to understand by the watchmen
pious Israelites, who pray for their restoration, or (according to b.
Menachoth 87a; cf., [Zac 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012)) angelic
intercessors. The walls intended are those of the city, which, though
once destroyed, is actually imperishable ([Isa
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#016)) and has now been raised up
again. And who else could the watchmen stationed upon the walls really
be, but prophets who are called tsōphı̄m (e.g., [Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008)), and whose calling, according to
Ezek 33, is that of watchmen? And if prophets are meant, who else can
the person appointing them be but Jehovah Himself? The idea that the
author of these prophecies is speaking of himself, as having appointed
the shōmerı̄m, must therefore be rejected. Jehovah gives to the restored
Jerusalem faithful prophets, whom He stations upon the walls of the
city, that they may see far and wide, and be heard afar off. And from
those walls does their warning cry on behalf of the holy city committed
to their care ascent day and night to Jehovah, and their testimony go
round about to the world. For after Jerusalem has been restored and
re-peopled, the further end to be attained is this, that Jehovah should
build up the newly founded city within (cōnēn the consequence of bânâh,
[Num 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027), and ‛âsâh, [Isa
45:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#018); [Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006); cf., [Isa
54:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#014) and [Psa
87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005)), and help it to attain the
central post of honour in relation to those without, which He has
destined for it. Such prophets of the times succeeding the captivity
(nebhı̄'ı̄m 'achărōnı̄m; cf., [Zac 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004))
were Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. Haggai stands upon the walls of
Jerusalem, and proclaims the glory of the second temple as surpassing
that of the first. Zechariah points from Joshua and Zerubbabel onwards
to the sprout of Jehovah, who is priest and prince in one person, and
builds the true temple of God. Malachi predicts the coming of the Lord
to His temple, and the rising of the Sun of righteousness. Under the
eyes of these prophets the city of God rose up again, and they stand
upon its pinnacles, and look thence into the glorious future that awaits
it, and hasten its approach through the word of their testimony. Such
prophets, who carry the good of their people day and night upon their
anxious praying hearts, does Jehovah give to the Jerusalem after the
captivity, which is one in the prophet's view with the Jerusalem of the
last days; and in so lively a manner does the prophet here call them up
before his own mind, that he exclaims to them, "Ye who remind Jehovah,
to finish gloriously the gracious work which He has begun," give
yourselves to rest (dŏmi from dâmâh = dâmam, to grow dumb, i.e., to
cease speaking or working, in distinction from châshâh, to be silent,
i.e., not to speak or work), and allow Him no rest till He puts
Jerusalem in the right state, and so glorifies it, that it shall be
recognised and extolled as glorious over all the earth. Prophecy here
sees the final glory of the church as one that gradually unfolds itself,
and that not without human instrumentality. The prophets of the last
times, with their zeal in prayer, and in the exercise of their calling
as witnesses, form a striking contrast to the blind, dumb, indolent,
sleepy hirelings of the prophet's own time ([Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010)).

[Isaiah 62:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 62:8</span></span>

The following strophe expresses one side of the divine promise, on which
the hope of that lofty and universally acknowledged glory of Jerusalem,
for whose completion the watchers upon its walls so ceaselessly exert
themselves, is founded. "Jehovah hath sworn by His right hand, and by
His powerful arm, Surely I no more give thy corn for food to thine
enemies; and foreigners will to drink thy must, for which thou hast
laboured hard. No, they that gather it in shall eat it, and praise
Jehovah; and they that store it, shall drink it in the courts of my
sanctuary." The church will no more succumb to the tyranny of a worldly
power. Peace undisturbed, and unrestricted freedom, reign there. With
praise to Jehovah are the fruits of the land enjoyed by those who raised
and reaped them. יגעתּ (with an auxiliary pathach, as in [Isa
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012), [Isa
47:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#015)) is applied to the cultivation
of the soil, and includes the service of the heathen who are
incorporated in Israel ([Isa 61:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#005));
whilst אסּף (whence מאספיו with ס raphatum) or אסף (poel, whence the
reading מאספיו, cf., [Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005),
meloshnı̄; [Psa 109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010), ve-dorshū, for
which in some codd. and editions we find מאספיו, an intermediate form
between piel and poel; see at [Psa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004)) and קבּץ stand in the same
relation to one another as condere (horreo) and colligere (cf., [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)). The expression bechatsrōth
qodshı̄, in the courts of my sanctuary, cannot imply that the produce of
the harvest will never be consumed anywhere else than there (which is
inconceivable), but only that their enjoyment of the harvest-produce
will be consecrated by festal meals of worship, with an allusion to the
legal regulation that two-tenths (ma‛ăsēr shēnı̄) should be eaten in a
holy place (liphnē Jehovah) by the original possessor and his family,
with the addition of the Levites and the poor ([Deu
14:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022) : see Saalschtz, Mosaisches
Recht, cap. 42). Such thoughts, as that all Israel will then be a
priestly nation, or that all Jerusalem will be holy, are not implied in
this promise. All that it affirms is, that the enjoyment of the
harvest-blessing will continue henceforth undisturbed, and be
accompanied with the grateful worship of the giver, and therefore,
because sanctified by thanksgiving, will become an act of worship in
itself. This is what Jehovah has sworn "by His right hand," which He
only lifts up with truth, and "by His powerful arm," which carries out
what it promises without the possibility of resistance. The Talmud (b.
Nazir 3b) understand by עזו זרוע the left arm, after [Dan
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007); but the ו of ובזרוע is
epexegetical.

[Isaiah 62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 62:10</span></span>

The concluding strophe goes back to the standpoint of the captivity. "Go
forth, go forth through the gates, clear the way of the people. Cast up,
cast up the road, clear it of stones; lift up a banner above the
nations! Behold, Jehovah hath caused tidings to sound to the end of the
earth. Say to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh;
behold, His reward is with Him, and His recompense before Him. And men
will call them the holy people, the redeemed of Jehovah; and men will
call thee, Striven after, A city that will not be forsaken." We cannot
adopt the rendering proposed by Gesenius, "Go ye into the gates,"
whether of Jerusalem or of the temple, since the reading would then be
שׁערים בּאוּ ([Gen 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#010)) or בשּׁערים
([Jer 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002)). For although בּ עבר may
under certain circumstances be applied to entrance into a city ([Jdg
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#026)), yet it generally denotes either
passing through a land ([Isa 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021);
[Isa 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#010); [Gen
41:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#046); [Lev
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006), etc.), or through a nation ([Sa2
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#014)), or through a certain place
([Isa 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#028)); so that the phrase
בּשּׁער עבר, which does not occur anywhere else (for in [Mic
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013), which refers, however, to the
exodus of the people out of the gates of the cities of the captivity,
שׁער ויּעברוּ do not belong together), must refer to passing through the
gate; and the cry בשׁערים עברוּ means just the same as מבּבל צאוּ ("Go
ye forth from Babylon") in [Isa 48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020);
[Isa 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011).

The call to go out of Babylon forms the conclusion of the prophecy here,
just as it does in [Isa 48:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020); [Isa
52:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011). It is addressed to the
exiles; but who are they to whom the command is given, "Throw up a way,"
- a summons repeatedly found in all the three books of these prophecies
([Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003); [Isa
57:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014))? They cannot be the heathen,
for this is contradicted by the conclusion of the charge, "Lift ye up a
banner above the nations;" nor can we adopt what seems to us a useless
fancy on the part of Stier, viz., that [Isa
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010) is addressed to the watchmen on
the walls of Zion. We have no hesitation, therefore, in concluding that
they are the very same persons who are to march through the gates of
Babylon. The vanguard (or pioneers) of those who are coming out are here
summoned to open the way by which the people are to march, to throw up
the road (viz., by casting up an embankment, hamsillâh, as in [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016); [Isa
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#011); maslūl, [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)), to clear it of stones (siqqēl,
as in [Isa 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002); cf., [Hos
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#012), shikkēl mē'âdâm), and lift up a
banner above the nations (one rising so high as to be visible far and
wide), that the diaspora of all places may join those who are returning
home with the friendly help of the nations ([Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); [Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022)). For Jehovah hath caused
tidings to be heard to the end of the earth, i.e., as we may see from
what follows, the tidings of their liberation; in other words, looking
at the historical fulfilment, the proclamation of Cyrus, which he caused
to be issued throughout his empire at the instigation of Jehovah ([Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)). Hitzig regards השׁמיע as
expressing what had actually occurred at the time when the prophet
uttered his predictions; and in reality the standpoint of the prophets
was so far a variable one, that the fulfilment of what was predicted did
draw nearer and nearer to it ἐν πνεύματι. But as hinnēh throughout the
book of Isaiah, even when followed by a perfect, invariably points to
something future, all that can be said is, that the divine announcement
of the time of redemption, as having now arrived, stands out before the
soul of the prophet with all the certainty of a historical fact. The
conclusion which Knobel draws from the expression "to the end of the
earth," as to the Babylonian standpoint of the prophet, is a false one.
In his opinion, "the end of the earth" in such passages as [Psa
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008); [Zac
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010) ('aphsē-'ârets), and [Isa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016) (kenaph hâ'ârets), signifies the
western extremity of the orbis orientalis, that is to say, the region of
the Mediterranean, more especially Palestine; whereas it was rather a
term applied to the remotest lands which bounded the geographical
horizon (compare [Isa 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010); [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020), with [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008); [Psa
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028), and other passages). The words
that follow ("Say ye," etc.) might be taken as a command issued on the
ground of the divine hishimiă‛ ("the Lord hath proclaimed"); but
hishimiă‛ itself is a word that needs to be supplemented, so that what
follows is the divine proclamation: Men everywhere, i.e., as far as the
earth or the dispersion of Israel extends, are to say to the daughter of
Zion - that is to say, to the church which has its home in Zion, but is
now in foreign lands - that "its salvation cometh," i.e., that Jehovah,
its Saviour, is coming to bestow a rich reward upon His church, which
has passed through sever punishment, but has been so salutarily refined.
Those to whom the words "Say ye," etc., are addressed, are not only the
prophets of Israel, but all the mourners of Zion, who become
mebhasserı̄m, just because they respond to this appeal (compare the
meaning of this "Say ye to the daughter of Zion" with [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009) in [Mat
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#005)). The whole of the next clause,
"Behold, His reward," etc., is a repetition of the prophet's own words
in [Isa 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010). It is a question
whether the words "and they shall call thee," etc., contain the gospel
which is to be proclaimed according to the will of Jehovah to the end of
the earth (see [Isa 48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020)), or whether
they are a continuation of the prophecy which commences with "Behold,
Jehovah hath proclaimed." The latter is the more probable, as the
address here passes again into an objective promise. The realization of
the gospel, which Jehovah causes to be preached, leads men to call those
who are now still in exile "the holy people," "the redeemed" (lit.
ransomed, [Isa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010); like pedūyē in
[Isa 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010)). "And thee" - thus does
the prophecy close by returning to a direct address to Zion-Jerusalem -
"thee will men call derūshâh," sought assiduously, i.e., one whose
welfare men, and still more Jehovah, are zealously concerned to promote
(compare the opposite in [Jer 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017)) -
"a city that will not be forsaken," i.e., in which men gladly settle,
and which will never be without inhabitants again (the antithesis to
‛ăzūbhâh in [Isa 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015)), possibly also
in the sense that the gracious presence of God will never be withdrawn
from it again (the antithesis to ‛ăzūbhâh in [Isa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004)). נעזבה is the third pers. pr.,
like nuchâmâh in [Isa 54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011) : the
perfect as expressing the abstract present (Ges. 126, 3).

The following prophecy anticipates the question, how Israel can possibly
rejoice in the recovered possession of its inheritance, if it is still
to be surrounded by such malicious neighbours as the Edomites.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 63](isa063)

</div>
