<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa016)  [Next](isa018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 17:0</span></span>

The Oracle Concerning Damascus and Israel - [Isa
17:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

From the Philistines on the west, and the Moabites on the east, the
prophecy relating to the neighbouring nations now turns, without any
chronological order, to the people of Damascene Syria on the north. The
curse pronounced on them, however, falls upon the kingdom of Israel
also, because it has allied itself with heathen Damascus, in opposition
to its own brother tribe to the south, as well as to the Davidic
government; and by this unnatural alliance with a zâr, or stranger, had
become a zâr itself. From the period of Hezekiah's reign, to which the
massa Moab belongs, at least so far as its epilogue is concerned, we are
here carried back to the reign of Ahaz, and indeed far beyond "the year
that Ahaz died" ([Isa 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028)), to the
very border of the reigns of Jotham and Ahaz - namely, to the time when
the league for the destruction of Judah had only just been concluded. At
the time when Isaiah incorporated this oracle in his collection, the
threats against the kingdoms of Damascus and Israel had long been
fulfilled. Assyria had punished both of them. And Assyria itself had
also been punished, as the fourth turn in the oracle indicates.
Consequently the oracle stands here as a memorial of the truthfulness of
the prophecy; and it answers a further purpose still, viz., to furnish a
rich prophetic consolation for the church of all times, when persecuted
by the world, and sighing under the oppression of the kingdom of the
world.

[Isaiah 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 17:1</span></span>

The first turn: "Behold, Damascus must (be taken) away out of the number
of the cities, and will be a heap of fallen ruins. The cities of Aroer
are forsaken, they are given up to flocks, they lie there without any
one scaring them away. And the fortress of Ephraim is abolished, and the
kingdom of Damascus; and it happens to those that are left of Aram as to
the glory of the sons of Israel, saith Jehovah of hosts." "Behold,"
etc.: hinnēh followed by a participle indicates here, as it does
everywhere else, something very near at hand. Damascus is removed מעיר
(= עיר מהיות, cf., [Kg1 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013)), i.e.,
out of the sphere of existence as a city. It becomes מעי, a heap of
ruins. The word is used intentionally instead of עי, to sound as much as
possible like מעיר: a mutilated city, so to speak. It is just the same
with Israel, which has made itself an appendage of Damascus. The "cities
of Aroer" (gen. appos. Ges. 114, 3) represent the land to the east of
the Jordan: there the judgment upon Israel (executed by Tiglath-pileser)
first began. There were two Aroers: an old Amoritish city allotted to
the tribe of Reuben, viz., "Aroer on the Arnon" ([Deu
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036); [Deu
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012), etc.); and an old Ammonitish
one, allotted to the tribe of Gad, viz., "Aroer before Rabbah" (Rabbath,
Ammon, [Jos 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025)). The ruins of the
former are Arair, on the lofty northern bank of the Mugib; but the
situation of the latter has not yet been determined with certainty (see
Comm. on [Jos 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025)). The "cities of
Aroer" are these two Aroers, and the rest of the cities similar to it on
the east of the Jordan; just as "the Orions" in [Isa
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010) are Orion and other similar
stars. We meet here again with a significant play upon the sound in the
expression ‛ârē ‛Aro‛ēr (cities of Aroer): the name of Aroer was
ominous, and what its name indicated would happen to the cities in its
circuit. ערער means "to lay bare," to pull down ([Jer
51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058)); and ערער, ערירי signifies a
stark-naked condition, a state of desolation and solitude. After [Isa
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001) has threatened Damascus in
particular, and [Isa 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#002) has done the
same to Israel, [Isa 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#003) comprehends
them both. Ephraim loses the fortified cities which once served it as
defences, and Damascus loses its rank as a kingdom. Those that are left
of Aram, who do not fall in the war, become like the proud citizens of
the kingdom of Israel, i.e., they are carried away into captivity. All
this was fulfilled under Tiglath-pileser. The accentuation connects ארם
שׁאר (the remnant of Aram) with the first half of the verse; but the
meaning remains the same, as the subject to יהיוּ is in any case the
Aramaeans.

[Isaiah 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 17:4</span></span>

Second turn: "And it comes to pass in that day, the glory of Jacob
wastes away, and the fat of his flesh grows thin. And it will be as when
a reaper grasps the stalks of wheat, and his arm mows off the ears; and
it will be as with one who gathers together ears in the valley of
Rephaim. Yet a gleaning remains from it, as at the olive-beating: two,
three berries high up at the top; four, five in its, the fruit tree's,
branches, saith Jehovah the God of Israel. At that day will man look up
to his Creator, and his eyes will look to the Holy One of Israel. And he
will not look to the altars, the work of his hands; and what his fingers
have made he will not regard, neither the Astartes nor the sun-gods."
This second turn does not speak of Damascus, but simply of Israel, and
in fact of all Israel, the range of vision widening out from Israel in
the more restricted sense, so as to embrace the whole. It will all
disappear, with the exception of a small remnant; but the latter will
return. Thus "a remnant will return," the law of Israel's history, which
is here shown first of all in its threatening aspect, and then in its
more promising one. The reputation and prosperity to which the two
kingdoms were raised by Jeroboam II and Uzziah would pass away. Israel
was ripe for judgment, like a field of corn for the harvest; and it
would be as when a reaper grasps the stalks that have shot up, and cuts
off the ears. קציר is not used elliptically for קציר אישׁ (Gesenius),
nor is it a definition of time (Luzzatto), nor an accusative of the
object (Knobel), but a noun formed like נביא, פליל, פריץ, and used in
the sense of reaper (kōtzēr in other cases).

(Note: Instead of kâtzar (to cut off, or shorten), they now say kâratz
in the whole of the land to the east of the Jordan, which gives the idea
of sawing off - a much more suitable one where the Syrian sickle is
used.)

The figure suggested here is more fully expanded in John 4 and Rev 14.
Hardly a single one will escape the judgment: just as in the broad plain
of Rephaim, which slopes off to the south-west of Jerusalem as far as
Bethlehem, where it is covered with rich fields of wheat, the collectors
of ears leave only one or two ears lying scattered here and there.

Nevertheless a gleaning of Israel ("in it," viz., in Jacob, [Isa
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004); [Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)) will be left, just as when the
branches of the olive tree, which have been already cleared with the
hand, are still further shaken with a stick, there still remain a few
olives upon the highest branch (two, three; cf., [Kg2
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#032)), or concealed under the foliage
of the branches. "Its, the fruit tree's, branches:" this is an elegant
expression, as, for example, in [Pro
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#013); the carrying over of the ה to
the second word is very natural in both passages (see Ges. 121, b). This
small remnant will turn with stedfast gaze to the living God, as is
becoming in man as such (hâ'âdâm), and not regard the idols as worthy of
any look at all, at least of any reverential look. As hammânim are here
images of the sun-god חמן בעל, which is well known from the Phoenician
monuments,

(Note: See Levy, Phnizisches Wrterbuch (1864), p. 19; and Otto Strauss
on Nahum, p. xxii. ss.)

'ashērim (for which we find, though more rarely, 'ashēroth) apparently
signifies images of the moon-goddess. And the combination of "Baal,
Asherah, and all the host of heaven" in [Kg2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004), as well as the surname "queen of
heaven" in [Jer 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018); [Jer
44:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#018), appears to require this
(Knobel). But the latest researches have proved that 'Ashērâh is rather
the Semitic Aphrodite, and therefore the planet Venus, which was called
the "little luck" (es-sa‛d el-as'gar)

(Note: See Krehl, Religion der vorislamischen Araber (1863), p. 11.)

by the Arabs, in distinction from Musteri (Jupiter),

(Note: This was the tutelar deity of Damascus; see Comm. on Job,
Appendix.)

or "the great luck." And with this the name 'Asherah the "lucky" (i.e.,
the source of luck or prosperity) and the similar surname given to the
Assyrian Istar agree;

(Note: "Ishtar," says Rawlinson in his Five Great Monarchies of the
Ancient Eastern World, - a work which challenges criticism through its
dazzling results - "Ishtar is the goddess who rejoices mankind, and her
most common epithet is Amra, 'the fortunate' or 'the happy.' But
otherwise her epithets are vague and general, insomuch that she is often
scarcely distinguishable from Beltis (the wife of Bel-Nimrod)." Vid.,
vol. i. p. 175 (1862).)

for 'Asherah is the very same goddess as 'Ashtoreth, whose name is
thoroughly Arian, and apparently signifies the star (Ved. stir = star;
Zend. stare; Neo-Pers. sitâre, used chiefly for the morning star),
although Rawlinson (without being able to suggest any more acceptable
interpretation) speaks of this view as "not worthy of much attention."

(Note: The planet Venus, according to a Midrash relating to [Gen
6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001), is 'Istehar transferred to the
sky; and this is the same as Zuhare (see Geiger, Was hat Muhammed, etc.
1833, pp. 107-109).)

Thus Asherim is used to signify the bosquets (shrubberies) or trees
dedicated to the Semitic Aphrodite ([Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021); compare the verbs used to
signify their removal, גדע, כרת, נתשׁ); but here it probably refers to
her statues or images

(Note: The plural Ashtaroth, Hathors, which occurs upon Assyrian and
Egyptian monuments, has a different meaning.)

([Kg2 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007); compare the miphletzeth in
[Kg1 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013), which is used to denote an
obscene exhibition). For these images of the sun-god and of the goddess
of the morning star, the remnant of Israel, that has been purified by
the smelting furnace of judgment, has no longer any eye. Its looks are
exclusively directed to the one true God of man. The promise, which here
begins to dawn at the close of the second turn, is hidden again in the
third, though only to break forth again in the fourth with double or
triple intensity.

[Isaiah 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 17:9</span></span>

Third turn: "In that day will his fortified cities be like the ruins of
the forest and of the mountain top, which they cleared before the sons
of Israel: and there arises a waste place. For thou hast forgotten the
God of thy salvation, and hast not thought of the Rock of thy
stronghold, therefore thou plantedst charming plantations, and didst set
them with strange vines. In the day that thou plantedst, thou didst make
a fence; and with the morning dawn thou madest thy sowing to blossom: a
harvest heap in the day of deep wounds and deadly sorrow of heart." The
statement in [Isa 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#003), "The fortress
of Ephraim is abolished," is repeated in [Isa
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009) in a more descriptive manner. The
fate of the strongly fortified cities of Ephraim would be the same as
that of the old Canaanitish castles, which were still to be discerned in
their antiquated remains, either in the depths of forests or high up on
the mountains. The word ‛azubâh, which the early translators quite
misunderstood, signifies, both here and in [Isa
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#012), desolate places that have gone
to ruin. They also misunderstood והאמיר הסהרשׁ. The Septuagint renders
it, by a bold conjecture, οἱ Αμοῤῥηαῖοι καὶ οὶ Εὐαῖοι; but this is at
once proved to be false by the inversion of the names of the two
peoples, which was very properly thought to be necessary. האמיר
undoubtedly signifies the top of a tree, which is quite unsuitable here.
But as even this meaning points back to אמר, extollere, efferre (see at
[Psa 94:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#004)), it may also mean the
mountain-top. The name hâ'emori (the Amorites: those who dwell high up
in the mountains) proves the possibility of this; and the prophet had
this name in his mind, and was guided by it in his choice of a word. The
subject of עזבוּ is self-evident. And the reason why only the ruins in
forests and on mountains are mentioned is, that other places, which were
situated on the different lines of traffic, merely changed their
inhabitants when the land was taken by Israel. The reason why the fate
of Ephraim's fortified castles was the same as that of the Amoritish
castles, which were then lying in ruins, was that Ephraim, as stated in
[Isa 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010), had turned away from its
true rocky stronghold, namely from Jehovah. It was a consequence of this
estrangement from God, that Ephraim planted נעמנים נטעי, plantations of
the nature of pleasant things, or pleasant plantations (compare on [Psa
78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049), and Ewald, 287, ab), i.e.,
cultivated all kinds of sensual accompaniments to its worship, in
accordance with its heathen propensities; and sowed, or rather (as
zemōrâh is the layer of a vine) "set," this garden-ground, to which the
suffix ennu refers, with strange grapes, by forming an alliance with a
zâr (a stranger), namely the king of Damascus. On the very day of the
planting, Ephraim fenced it carefully (this is the meaning of the
pilpel, sigsēg from שׂוּג = סוּג, not "to raise," as no such verb as
שׂוּג = שׂגה, סגא, can be shown to exist), that is to say, he ensured
the perpetuity of these sensuous modes of worship as a state religion,
with all the shrewdness of a Jeroboam (see [Amo
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#013)). And the very next morning he
had brought into blossom what he had sown: the foreign layer had shot up
like a hot-house plant, i.e., the alliance had speedily grown into a
hearty agreement, and had already produced one blossom at any rate,
viz., the plan of a joint attack upon Judah. But this plantation, which
was so flattering and promising for Israel, and which had succeeded so
rapidly, and to all appearance so happily, was a harvest heap for the
day of the judgment. Nearly all modern expositors have taken nēd as the
third person (after the form mēth, Ges. 72, Anm. 1), and render it "the
harvest flees;" but the third person of נוּד would be נד, like the
participle in [Gen 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012); whereas the
meaning cumulus (a heap), which it has elsewhere as a substantive, is
quite appropriate, and the statement of the prophet resembles that of
the apostle in [Rom 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005). The day of
the judgment is called "the day of נחלה" (or, according to another
reading, נחלה), not, however, as equivalent to nachal, a stream
(Luzzatto, in giorno di fiumana), as in [Psa
124:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#004) (the tone upon the last syllable
proves this), nor in the sense of "in the day of possession," as
Rosenmller and others suppose, since this necessarily gives to נד the
former objectionable and (by the side of קציר) improbable verbal sense;
but as the feminine of nachleh, written briefly for maccâh nachlâh ([Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017)), i.e., inasmuch as it inflicts
grievous and mortal wounds. Ephraim's plantation is a harvest heap for
that day (compare kâtzir, the harvest of punishment, in [Hos
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#011) and [Jer
51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033)); and the hope set upon this
plantation is changed into אנוּשׁ כּאב, a desperate and incurable
heartfelt sorrow ([Jer 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015)). The
organic connection between [Isa
17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012), which follow, and the oracle
concerning Damascus and Israel, has also been either entirely
misunderstood, or not thoroughly appreciated. The connection is the
following: As the prophet sets before himself the manner in which the
sin of Ephraim is punished by Asshur, as the latter sweeps over the Holy
Land, the promise which already began to dawn in the second turn bursts
completely through: the world-power is the instrument of punishment in
the hands of Jehovah, but not for ever.

[Isaiah 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 17:12</span></span>

Fourth turn: "Woe to the raoring of many nations: like the roaring of
seas they roar; and to the rumbling of nations, like the rumbling of
mighty waters they rumble! Nations, like the rumbling of many waters
they rumble; and He threatens it: then it flies far away, and is chased
like chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a cloud of dust
before the gale. At eventide, behold consternation; and before the
morning dawn it is destroyed: this the portion of our plunderers, and
the lot of our robbers." It is the destruction of Asshur that the
prophet is predicting here (as in [Isa
14:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024); [Isa
29:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#005), etc.), though not of Asshur as
Asshur, but of Asshur as the imperial kingdom, which embraced a
multitude of nations ([Isa 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006); [Isa
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009), [Isa
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010); [Isa
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#026); [Isa
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#007), [Isa
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#008)) all gathered together under the
rule of one will, to make a common attack upon the church of God. The
connection between this fourth turn and the third is precisely the same
as between [Isa 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009), [Isa
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010), and [Isa
8:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006). The exclamation of woe (hoi) is
an expression of pain, as in [Isa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001); and this is followed by a
proclamation of the judgment of wrath. The description of the rolling
wave of nations is as pictorial as the well-known illi inter sese, etc.,
of the Cyclops in Virgil. "It spreads and stretches out, as if it would
never cease to roll, and roar, and surge, and sweep onward in its
course" (Drechsler). In the expression "it" (bo) in [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013), the many surging nations are
kneaded together, as it were, into one mass. It costs God simply a
threatening word; and this mass all flies apart (mimmerchâk like
mērâchōk, [Isa 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#007)), and falls into
dust, and whirls about in all directions, like the chaff of
threshing-floors in high situations, or like dust whirled up by the
storm. The judgment commences in the evening, and rages through the
night; and before the morning dawns, the army of nations raised by the
imperial power is all destroyed (compare [Isa
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#007), [Isa
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#008), and the fulfilment in [Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)). The fact that the oracle
concerning Damascus in its fourth stage takes so comprehensive and, so
far as Israel is concerned, so promising a form, may be explained on the
ground that Syria was the forerunner of Asshur in the attack upon
Israel, and that the alliance between Israel and Syria became the
occasion of the complications with Asshur. If the substance of the massâ
Dammesek (the oracle concerning Damascus) had been restricted to the
prophecy contained in the name Mahershalal, the element of promise so
characteristic of the prophecies against the nations of the world would
be entirely wanting. But the shout of triumph, "This is the portion,"
etc., supplied a terminal point, beyond which the massa could not go
without the sacrifice of its unity. We are therefore warranted in
regarding [Isa 18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001) as an
independent prophecy, notwithstanding its commencement, which apparently
forms a continuation of the fourth strophe of [Isa
17:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 18](isa018)

</div>
