<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa027)  [Next](isa029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 28:0</span></span>

Book of Woes or Historical Discourses Relating to Asshur and the
Egyptian Alliance - Isaiah 28-33 part v

These chapters carry us to the earliest years of Hezekiah's reign,
probably to the second and third; as Samaria has not yet been destroyed.
They run parallel to the book of Micah, which also takes its start from
the destruction of Samaria, and are as faithful a mirror of the
condition of the people under Hezekiah, as chapters 7-12 were of their
condition under Ahaz. The time of Ahaz was characterized by a spiritless
submission to the Assyrian yoke; that of Hezekiah by a casual striving
after liberty. The people tried to throw off the yoke of Assyria; not
with confidence in Jehovah, however, but in reliance upon the help of
Egypt. This Egypticizing policy is traced step by step by Isaiah, in
chapters 28-32. The gradual rise of these addresses may be seen from the
fact, that they follow the gradual growth of the alliance with Egypt
through all its stages, until it is fully concluded. By the side of this
casual ground of trust, which Jehovah will sweep away, the prophet
exhibits the precious corner-stone in Zion as the true, firm ground of
confidence. We might therefore call these chapters (Isaiah 28-33) "the
book of the precious corner-stone," just as we called chapters 7-12 "the
book of Immanuel." But the prophecy in [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016) does not determine and mould the
whole of this section, in the same manner in which the other section is
moulded and governed by the prophecy of the Son of the Virgin. We
therefore prefer to call this cycle of prophecy "the book of woes;" for
censure and threatening are uttered here in repeated utterances of
"woe," not against Israel only, but more especially against Judah and
Jerusalem, until at last, in chapter 33, the "hoi concerning Jerusalem"
is changed into a "hoi concerning Asshur." All the independent and
self-contained addresses in this cycle of prophecy commence with hoi
("woe:" chapters 28, 29, 30, 31-32, 33). The section which does not
begin with hoi (viz., [Isa 32:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009)) is
the last and dependent part of the long address commencing with [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001). On the other hand, [Isa
29:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015) also commences with hoi,
though it does not form a distinct address in itself, since chapter 29
forms a complete whole. The subdivisions of the sections, therefore,
have not a uniform commencement throughout; but the separate and
independent addresses all commence with hoi. The climax of these
prophecies of woe is chapter 30. Up to this point the exclamation of woe
gradually ascends, but in chapters 31-32 it begins to fall; and in
chapter 33 (which contains an epilogue that was only added in the
fourteenth year of Hezekiah's reign) it has changed into the very
opposite. The prophet begins with hoi, but it is a woe concerning the
devastator. This utmost woe, however, was not fulfilled at the point of
time when the fulfilment of "the utmost" predicted in chapters 28-32 was
apparently close at hand; but Jerusalem, though threatened with
destruction, was miraculously saved. Yet the prophet had not merely to
look on, as Jonah had. He himself predicted this change in the purpose
of God, inasmuch as the direction of the "woe" in his mouth is altered,
like that of the wrath of God, which turns from Jerusalem to Asshur, and
destroys it.

[Isaiah 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 28:1</span></span>

Isaiah, like Micah, commences with the fall of the proud and intoxicated
Samaria. "Woe to the proud crown of the drunken of Ephraim, and to the
fading flower of its splendid ornament, which is upon the head of the
luxuriant valley of those slain with wine." The allusion is to Samaria,
which is called (1.) "the pride-crown of the drunken of Ephraim," i.e.,
the crown of which the intoxicated and blinded Ephraimites were proud
([Isa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009); [Isa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014)), and (2.) "the fading flower"
(on the expression itself, compare [Isa
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030); [Isa
40:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)) "of the ornament of his
splendour," i.e., the flower now fading, which had once been the
ornament with which they made a show. This flower stood "upon the head
of the valley of fatnesses of those slain with wine" (cf., [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008)), i.e., of the valley so
exuberant with fruitfulness, belonging to the Ephraimites, who were
thoroughly enslaved by wine. Samaria stood upon a beautiful swelling
hill, which commanded the whole country round in a most regal way ([Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001); [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)), in the centre of a large basin,
of about two hours' journey in diameter, shut in by a gigantic circle of
still loftier mountains ([Amo 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)).
The situation was commanding; the hill terraced up to the very top; and
the surrounding country splendid and fruitful (Ritter, Erdkunde, xvi.
660, 661). The expression used by the prophet is intentionally
bombastic. He heaps genitives upon genitives, as in [Isa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012); [Isa
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017). The words are linked together
in pairs. Shemânı̄m (fatnesses) has the absolute form, although it is
annexed to the following word, the logical relation overruling the
syntactical usage (compare [Isa 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013);
[Ch1 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#013)). The sesquipedalia verba
are intended to produce the impression of excessive worldly luxuriance
and pleasure, upon which the woe is pronounced. The epithet nōbhēl
(fading: possibly a genitive, as in [Isa
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#004)), which is introduced here into
the midst of this picture of splendour, indicates that all this
splendour is not only destined to fade, but is beginning to fade
already.

[Isaiah 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 28:2</span></span>

In the next three vv. the hoi is expanded. "Behold, the Lord holds a
strong and mighty thing like a hailstorm, a pestilent tempest; like a
storm of mighty overflowing waters, He casts down to the earth with
almighty hand. With feet they tread down the proud crown of the drunken
of Ephraim. And it happens to the fading flower of its splendid
ornament, which is upon the head of the luxuriant valley, as to an early
fig before it is harvest, which whoever sees it looks at, and it is no
sooner in his hand than he swallows it." "A strong and mighty thing:"
ואמּי חזק we have rendered in the neuter (with the lxx and Targum)
rather than in the masculine, as Luther does, although the strong and
mighty thing which the Lord holds in readiness is no doubt the Assyrian.
He is simply the medium of punishment in the hand of the Lord, which is
called yâd absolutely, because it is absolute in power - as it were, the
hand of all hands. This hand hurls Samaria to the ground (on the
expression itself, compare [Isa 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#012);
[Isa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#005)), so that they tread the
proud crown to pieces with their feet (tērâmasnâh, the more pathetic
plural form, instead of the singular tērâmēs; Ges. 47, Anm. 3, and
Caspari on [Oba 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013)). The noun sa‛ar,
which is used elsewhere in the sense of shuddering, signifies here, like
סערה, an awful tempest; and when connected with קטב, a tempest
accompanied with a pestilential blast, spreading miasma. Such
destructive power is held by the absolute hand. It is soon all over then
with the splendid flower that has already begun to fade נבל ציצת, like
הקּטן כּלי in [Isa 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#024)). It happens
to it as to a bikkūrâh (according to the Masora, written with mappik
here, as distinguished from [Hos 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010),
equivalent to kebhikkūrâthâh; see [Job
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#009), "like an early fig of this
valley;" according to others, it is simply euphonic). The gathering of
figs takes place about August. Now, if any one sees a fig as early as
June, he fixes his eyes upon it, and hardly touches it with his hand
before he swallows it, and that without waiting to masticate it long.
Like such a dainty bit will the luxuriant Samaria vanish. The fact that
Shalmanassar, or his successor Sargon, did not conquer Samaria till
after the lapse of three years ([Kg2
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#010)), does not detract from the
truth of the prophecy; it is enough that both the thirst of the
conqueror and the utter destruction of Samaria answered to it.

[Isaiah 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 28:5</span></span>

The threat is now followed by a promise. This is essentially the same in
character as [Isa 4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002). The place of
the false glory thus overthrown is now filled by a glory that is divine
and true. "In that day will Jehovah of hosts be the adorning crown and
the splendid diadem to the remnant of His people; and the spirit of
justice to them that sit on the judgment-seat, and heroic strength to
them that drive back war at the gate." "The remnant of His people" (שׁאר
with a fixed kametz, as in [Isa 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017))
is not Judah, as distinguished from Ephraim that had utterly perished;
but Judah and the remaining portion of Ephraim, as distinguished from
the portion which had perished. After the perishable thin in which they
gloried had been swept away, the eternal person of Jehovah Himself would
be the ornament and pride of His people. He, the Lord of the seven
spirits ([Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)), would be to this
remnant of His people the spirit of right and heroic strength. There
would be an end to unjust judging and powerless submission. The judges
are called "those who sit ‛al-hammishpât" in the sense of "on the seat
of judgment" ([Psa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005); [Psa
122:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#005)); the warriors are called "those
who press back milchâmâh shâ‛râh" (war at the gate), i.e., either war
that has reached their own gate ([Isa
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#007)), or war which they drive back as
far as the gate of the enemy ([Sa2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#023); 1 Macc. 5:22). The promise in
this last passage corresponds to [Mic
5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004). The athnach in [Isa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#006) ought to stand at hammishpât; the
second clause of the v. may be completed from the first, ולגבוּרה being
equivalent to גבורה ולרוח, and משיבי to למישבי. We might regard 2 Chron
30 as a fulfilment of what is predicted in [Isa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#006), if the feast of passover there
described really fell in the age succeeding the fall of Samaria; for
this feast of passover did furnish a representation and awaken a
consciousness of that national unity which had been interrupted from the
time of Rehoboam. But if we read the account in the Chronicles with
unprejudiced minds, it is impossible to shut our eyes to the fact that
this feast of passover took place in the second month of the first year
of Hezekiah's reign, and therefore not after the depopulation of the
northern kingdom by Shalmanassar, but after the previous and partial
depopulation by Tiglath-pileser. In fact, the fulfilment cannot be
looked for at all in the space between the sixth and fourteenth years of
Hezekiah, since the condition of Judah during that time does not answer
at all to the promises given above. The prophet here foretells what
might be hoped for, when Asshur had not only humbled Ephraim, but Judah
also. The address consists of two connected halves, the promising
beginnings of which point to one and the same future, and lay hold of
one another.

[Isaiah 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 28:7</span></span>

With the words, "and they also," the prophet commences the second half
of the address, and passes from Ephraim to Judah. "And they also reel
with wine, and are giddy with meth; priest and prophet reel with meth,
are swallowed up by wine: they are giddy with meth, reel when seeing
visions, stagger when pronouncing judgment. For all tables are full of
filthy vomit, without any more place." The Judaeans are not less
overcome with wine than the Ephraimites, and especially the rulers of
Judah. In wicked violation of the law of God, which prohibited the
priests from drinking strong drink when performing priestly service, and
that on pain of death ([Lev 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009), cf.,
[Eze 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#021)), they were intoxicated
even in the midst of their prophetic visions (הראה, literally "the thing
seeing," then the act of seeing; equivalent to ראי, like חזה in [Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015) = חזוּת; Olshausen, 176, c), and
when passing judicial sentences. In the same way Micah also charges the
prophets and priests with being drunkards ([Mic
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001)., cf., [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011)). Isaiah's indignation is
manifested in the fact, that in the words which he uses he imitates the
staggering and stumbling of the topers; like the well-known passage, Sta
pes sta mi pes stas pes ne labere mi pes. Observe, for example, the
threefold repetition of shâgu - tâghu, shâgu - tâghu, shâgu - pâqu. The
hereditary priests and the four prophets represent the whole of the
official personages. The preterites imply that drunkenness had become
the fixed habit of the holders of these offices. The preposition בּ
indicates the cause ("through," as in [Sa2
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#028) and [Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010)), and min the effect proceeding
from the cause (in consequence of wine). In v. 8 we can hear them vomit.
We have the same combination of the and צ in the verb kotzen, Gothic
kozan. All the tables of the carousal are full, without there being any
further room (cf., [Isa 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008));
everything swims with vomit. The prophet paints from nature, here
without idealizing. He receives their conduct as it were in a mirror,
and then in the severest tones holds up this mirror before them, adults
though they were.

[Isaiah 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 28:9</span></span>

"Whom then would he teach knowledge? And to whom make preaching
intelligible? To those weaned from the milk? To those removed from the
breast? For precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line,
line upon line, a little here, a little there!" They sneer at the
prophet, that intolerable moralist. They are of age, and free; and he
does not need to bring knowledge to them (da‛ath as in [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009)), or make them understand the
proclamation. They know of old to what he would lead. Are they little
children that have just been weaned (on the constructives, see [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002); [Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011); [Isa
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018); Ges. 114, 1), and who must let
themselves be tutored? For the things he preaches are nothing but
endless petty teazings. The short words (tsâv, as in [Hos
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011)), together with the diminutive
זעיר (equivalent to the Arabic sugayyir, mean, from sagı̄r, small), are
intended to throw ridicule upon the smallness and vexatious character of
the prophet's interminable and uninterrupted chidings, as ל (= על, אל;
comp. יסף ל, [Isa 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#015)) implies that
they are; just as the philosophers in [Act
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018) call Paul a σπερμολόγος, a
collector of seeds, i.e., a dealer in trifles. And in the repetition of
the short words we may hear the heavy babbling language of the drunken
scoffers.

[Isaiah 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 28:11</span></span>

The prophet takes the ki ("for") out of their mouths, and carries it on
in his own way. It was quite right that their ungodliness should show
itself in such a way as this, for it would meet with an appropriate
punishment. "For through men stammering in speech, and through a strange
tongue, will He speak to this people. He who said to them, There is
rest, give rest to weary ones, and there is refreshing! But they would
not hear. Therefore the word of Jehovah becomes to them precept upon
precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, a little
here, a little there, that they may go and stumble backwards, and be
wrecked to pieces, and be snared and taken." Jehovah would speak to the
scoffing people of stammering tongue a language of the same kind, since
He would speak to them by a people that stammered in their estimation,
i.e., who talked as barbarians (cf., βαρβαρίζειν and balbutire; see [Isa
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#019), compared with [Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049)). The Assyrian Semitic had the
same sound in the ear of an Israelite, as Low Saxon (a provincial
dialect) in the ear of an educated German; in addition to which, it was
plentifully mixed up with Iranian, and possibly also with Tatar
elements. This people would practically interpret the will of Jehovah in
its own patios to the despisers of the prophet. Jehovah had directed
them, through His prophets, after the judgments which they had
experienced with sufficient severity ([Isa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005).), into the true way to rest and
refreshing ([Jer 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016)), and had
exhorted them to give rest to the nation, which had suffered so much
under Ahaz through the calamities of war (2 Chron 28), and not to drag
it into another way by goading it on to rise against Assyria, or impose
a new burden in addition to the tribute to Assyria by purchasing the
help of Egypt. But they would not hearken (אבוּא = אבוּ, [Isa
30:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015); Ges. 23, 3, Anm. 3). Their
policy was a very different one from being still, or believing and
waiting. And therefore the word of Jehovah, which they regarded as en
endless series of trivial commands, would be turned in their case into
an endless series of painful sufferings. To those who thought themselves
so free, and lived so free, it would become a stone on which they would
go to pieces, a net in which they would be snared, a trap in which they
would be caught (compare [Isa
8:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)).

[Isaiah 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 28:14</span></span>

The prophet now directly attacks the great men of Jerusalem, and holds
up a Messianic prophecy before their eyes, which turns its dark side to
them, as chapter 7 did to Ahaz. "Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, ye
scornful lords, rulers of this people which is in Jerusalem! For ye say,
We have made a covenant with death, and with Hades have we come to an
agreement. The swelling scourge, when it cometh hither, will do us no
harm; for we have made a lie our shelter, and in deceit have we hidden
ourselves. Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold, I am He who
hath laid in Zion a stone, a stone of trial, a precious corner-stone of
well-founded founding; whoever believes will not have to move. And I
make justice the line, and righteousness the level; and hail sweeps away
the refuge of lies, and the hiding-place is washed away by waters." With
lâkhēn (therefore) the announcement of punishment is once more
suspended; and in [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016) it is
resumed again, the exposition of the sin being inserted between, before
the punishment is declared. Their sin is lâtsōn, and this free-thinking
scorn rests upon a proud and insolent self-confidence, which imagines
that there is no necessity to fear death and hell; and this
self-confidence has for its secret reserve the alliance to be secretly
entered into with Egypt against Assyria. What the prophet makes them say
here, they do not indeed say exactly in this form; but this is the
essential substance of the carnally devised thoughts and words of the
rulers of the people of Jerusalem, as manifest to the Searcher of
hearts. Jerusalem, the city of Jehovah, and such princes as these, who
either proudly ignore Jehovah, or throw Him off as useless, what a
contrast! Chōzeh, and châzūth in [Isa
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018), signify an agreement, either as
a decision or completion (from the radical meaning of the verb châzâh),
or as a choice, beneplacitum (like the Arabic ray), or as a record,
i.e., the means of selecting (like the talmudic châzı̄th, a countersign,
a ra'ăyâh, a proof or argument: Luzzatto). In shōt shōtēph ("the
swelling scourge," chethib שׁיט), the comparison of Asshur to a flood
([Isa 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#002), [Isa
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#008), [Isa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007)), and the comparison of it to a
whip or scourge, are mixed together; and this is all the more allowable,
because a whip, when smacked, really does move in waving lines (compare
[Jer 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006), where shâtaph is applied to
the galloping of a war-horse). The chethib עבר in [Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015) (for which the keri reads יעבר,
according to [Isa 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#019)) is to be read
עבר (granting that it shall have passed, or that it passes); and there
is no necessity for any emendation. The Egyptian alliance for which they
are suing, when designated according to its true ethical nature, is
sheqer (lie) and kâzâb (falsehood); compare [Kg2
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004) (where we ought perhaps to read
sheqer for qesher, according to the lxx), and more especially [Eze
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015)., from which it is obvious that
the true prophets regarded self-willed rebellion even against heathen
rule as a reprehensible breach of faith.

The lâkhēn (therefore), which is resumed in [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016), is apparently followed as
strangely as in [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), by a
promise instead of a threat. But this is only apparently the case. It is
unquestionably a promise; but as the last clause, "he that believeth
will not flee," i.e., will stand firm, clearly indicates, it is a
promise for believers alone. For those to whom the prophet is speaking
here the promise is a threat, a savour of death unto death. Just as on a
former occasion, when Ahaz refused to ask for a sign, the prophet
announced to him a sign of Jehovah's own selection; so here Jehovah
opposes to the false ground of confidence on which the leaders relied,
the foundation stone laid in Zion, which would bear the believing in
immoveable safety, but on which the unbelieving would be broken to
pieces ([Mat 21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044)). This stone is
called 'ebhen boochan, a stone of proving, i.e., a proved and
self-proving stone. Then follow other epithets in a series commencing
anew with pinnath = 'ebhen pinnath (compare [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)): angulus h. e. lapis angularis
pretiositatis fundationis fundatae. It is a corner-stone, valuable in
itself (on yiqrath, compare [Kg1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#017)), and affording the strongest
foundation and inviolable security to all that is built upon it (mūsâd a
substantive in form like mūsâr, and mūssâd a hophal participle in the
form of those of the verba contracta pe yod). This stone was not the
Davidic sovereignty, but the true seed of David which appeared in Jesus
([Rom 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033); [Pe1
2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006)). The figure of a stone is not
opposed to the personal reference, since the prophet in [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014) speaks even of Jehovah Himself
under the figure of a stone. The majestically unique description renders
it quite impossible that Hezekiah can be intended. Micah, whose book
forms the side piece of this cycle of prophecy, also predicted, under
similar historical circumstances, the birth of the Messiah in Bethlehem
Ephratah ([Mic 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)). What Micah
expresses in the words, "His goings forth are from of old," is indicated
here in the preterite yissad connected with hineni (the construction is
similar to that in [Oba 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002); [Eze
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#007); compare [Isa
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#002) above, and [Jer
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#015); [Jer
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019)). It denotes that which has been
determined by Jehovah, and therefore is as good as accomplished. What is
historically realized has had an eternal existence, and indeed an ideal
pre-existence even in the heart of history itself ([Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011); [Isa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001); [Isa
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#026)). Ever since there had been a
Davidic government at all, this stone had lain in Zion. The Davidic
monarchy not only had in this its culminating point, but the ground of
its continuance also. It was not only the Omega, but also the Alpha.
Whatever escaped from wrath, even under the Old Testament, stood upon
this stone. This (as the prophet predicts in יסהישׁ לא המּאמין יחישׁ׃
the fut. kal) would be the stronghold of faith in the midst of the
approaching Assyrian calamities (cf., [Isa
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)); and faith would be the condition
of life ([Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)). But against
unbelievers Jehovah would proceed according to His punitive justice. He
would make this (justice and righteousness, mishpât and tsedâqâh) a
norm, i.e., a line and level. A different turn, however, is given to
qâv, with a play upon [Isa 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010), [Isa
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011). What Jehovah is about to do is
depicted as a building which He is carrying out, and which He will carry
out, so far as the despisers are concerned, on no other plan than that
of strict retribution. His punitive justice comes like a hailstorm and
like a flood (cf., [Isa 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#002); [Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)). The hail smites the refuge of
lies of the great men of Jerusalem, and clears it away (יעה, hence יע, a
shovel); and the flood buries their hiding-place in the waters, and
carries it away (the accentuation should be סתר tifchah, מים mercha).

[Isaiah 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 28:18</span></span>

And the whip which Jehovah swings will not be satisfied with one stroke,
but will rain strokes. "And your covenant with death is struck out, and
your agreement with Hades will not stand; the swelling scourge, when it
comes, ye will become a thing trodden down to it. As often as it passes
it takes you: for every morning it passes, by day and by night; and it
is nothing but shuddering to hear such preaching. For the bed is too
short to stretch in, and the covering too tight when a man wraps himself
in it." Although berı̄th is feminine, the predicate to it is placed
before it in the masculine form (Ges. 144). The covenant is thought of
as a document; for khuppar (for obliterari (just as the kal is used in
[Gen 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#014) in the sense of oblinere; or
in [Pro 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#020), the Targum, and the
Syriac, in the sense of abstergere; and in the Talmud frequently in the
sense of wiping off = qinnēăch, or wiping out = mâchaq - which meanings
all go back, along with the meaning negare, to the primary meaning,
tegere, obducere). The covenant will be "struck out," as you strike out
a wrong word, by crossing it over with ink and rendering it illegible.
They fancy that they have fortified themselves against death and Hades;
but Jehovah gives to both of these unlimited power over them. When the
swelling scourge shall come, they will become to it as mirmâs, i.e.,
they will be overwhelmed by it, and their corpses become like dirt of
the streets ([Isa 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006); [Isa
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005)); והייתם has the mercha upon the
penult., according to the older editions and the smaller Masora on [Lev
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#026), the tone being drawn back on
account of the following לו. The strokes of the scourge come
incessantly, and every stroke sweeps them, i.e., many of them, away.
מדּי (from דּי, construct דּי, sufficiency, abundance) followed by the
infinitive, quotiescunque irruet; lâqach, auferre, as in [Jer
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015), and in the idiom lâqach
nephesh. These scourgings without end - what a painful lecture Jehovah
is reading them! This is the thought expressed in the concluding words:
for the meaning cannot be, that "even (raq as in [Psa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006)) the report (of such a fate) is
alarming," as Grotius and others explain it; or the report is nothing
but alarming, as Gussetius and others interpret it, since in that case
שׁמועה שׁמע (cf., [Isa 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#005)) would
have been quite sufficient, instead of שׁמוּעה הבין. There is no doubt
that the expression points back to the scornful question addressed by
the debauchees to the prophet in [Isa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009), "To whom will he make preaching
intelligible?" i.e., to whom will he preach the word of God in an
intelligible manner? (as if they did not possess bı̄nâh without this;
שׁמוּעה, ἀκοή, as in [Isa 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)). As
[Isa 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011) affirmed that Jehovah would
take up the word against them, the drunken stammerers, through a
stammering people; so here the scourging without end is called the
shemū‛âh, or sermon, which Jehovah preaches to them. At the same time,
the word hâbhı̄n is not causative here, as in [Isa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009), viz., "to give to understand,"
but signifies simply "to understand," or have an inward perception. To
receive into one's comprehension such a sermon as that which was now
being delivered to them, was raq-zevâ‛âh, nothing but shaking or
shuddering (raq as in [Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005)); זוּע
(from which comes זועה, or by transposition זעוה) is applied to inward
shaking as well as to outward tossing to and fro. Jerome renders it
"tantummodo sola vexatio intellectum dabit auditui," and Luther follows
him thus: "but the vexation teaches to take heed to the word," as if the
reading were תּבין. The alarming character of the lecture is depicted in
[Isa 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#020), in a figure which was
probably proverbial. The situation into which they are brought is like a
bed too short for a man to stretch himself in (min as in [Kg2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001)), and like a covering which,
according to the measure of the man who covers himself up in it (or
perhaps still better in a temporal sense, "when a man covers or wraps
himself up in it," cf., [Isa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004)), is
too narrow or too tight. So would it be in their case with the Egyptian
treaty, in which they fancied that there were rest and safety for them.
They would have to acknowledge its insufficiency. They had made
themselves a bed, and procured bed-clothes; but how mistaken they had
been in the measure, how miserably and ridiculously they had
miscalculated!

[Isaiah 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 28:21</span></span>

It would be with them as it was with the Philistines when David turned
their army into water at Baal-perazim ([Sa2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020); [Ch1
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#011)), or when on another occasion he
drove them before him from Gibeon to Gezer ([Ch1
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#013).). "For Jehovah will rise up as
in the mountain of Perazim, and be wroth as in the valley at Gibeon to
work His work; astonishing is His work; and to act His act: strange is
His act." The Targum wrongly supposes the first historical reminiscence
to refer to the earthquake in the time of Uzziah, and the second to
Joshua's victory over the Amorites. The allusion really is to the two
shameful defeats which David inflicted upon the Philistines. There was a
very good reason why victories over the Philistines especially should
serve as similes. The same fate awaited the Philistines at the hands of
the Assyrians, as predicted by the prophet in [Isa
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028). (cf., [Isa
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001)). And the strangeness and
verity of Jehovah's work were just this, that it would fare no better
with the magnates of Judah at the hand of Asshur, than it had with the
Philistines at the hand of David on both those occasions. The very same
thing would now happen to the people of the house of David as formerly
to its foes. Jehovah would have to act in opposition to His gracious
purpose. He would have to act towards His own people as He once acted
towards their foes. This was the most paradoxical thing of all that they
would have to experience.

[Isaiah 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 28:22</span></span>

But the possibility of repentance was still open to them, and at least a
modification of what had been threatened was attainable. "And now drive
ye not mockeries, lest your fetters be strengthened; for I have heard
from the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, a judgment of destruction, and an
irrevocable one, upon the whole earth." It is assumed that they are
already in fetters, namely, the fetters of Asshur ([Nah
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#013)). Out of these fetters they
wanted to escape by a breach of faith, and with the help of Egypt
without Jehovah, and consequently they mocked at the warnings of the
prophet. He therefore appeals to them at any rate to stop their mocking,
lest they should fall out of the bondage in which they now ere, into one
that would bind them still more closely, and lest the judgment should
become even more severe than it would otherwise be. For it was coming
without fail. It might be modified, and with thorough repentance they
might even escape; but that it would come, and that upon the whole
earth, had been revealed to the prophet by Jehovah of hosts. This was
the shemū‛âh which the prophet had heard from Jehovah, and which he gave
them to hear and understand, though hitherto he had only been scoffed at
by their wine-bibbing tongues.

[Isaiah 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 28:23</span></span>

The address of the prophet is here apparently closed. But an essential
ingredient is still wanting to the second half, to make it correspond to
the first. There is still wanting the fringe of promise coinciding with
[Isa 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#005), [Isa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#006). The prophet has not only to
alarm the scoffers, that if possible he may pluck some of them out of
the fire through fear ([Jdg 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023)); he
has also to comfort believers, who yield themselves as disciples to him
and to the word of God ([Isa 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)). He
does this here in a very peculiar manner. He has several times assumed
the tone of the mashal, more especially in chapter 26; but here the
consolation is dressed up in a longer parabolical address, which sets
forth in figures drawn from husbandry the disciplinary and saving wisdom
of God. Isaiah here proves himself a master of the mashal. In the usual
tone of a mashal song, he first of all claims the attention of his
audience as a teacher of wisdom. V. 23 "Lend me your ear, and hear my
voice; attend, and hear my address!" Attention is all the more needful,
that the prophet leaves his hearers to interpret and apply the parable
themselves. The work of a husbandman is very manifold, as he tills,
sows, and plants his field. Vv. 24-26 "Does the ploughman plough
continually to sow? to furrow and to harrow his land? Is it not so: when
he levels the surface thereof, he scatters black poppy seed, and strews
cummin, and puts in wheat in rows, and barley in the appointed piece,
and spelt on its border? And He has instructed him how to act rightly:
his God teaches it him." The ploughing (chârash) which opens the soil,
i.e., turns it up in furrows, and the harrowing (siddēd) which breaks
the clods, take place to prepare for the sowing, and therefore not
interminably, but only so long as it necessary to prepare the soil to
receive the seed. When the seed-furrows have been drawn in the levelled
surface of the ground (shivvâh), then the sowing and planting begin; and
this also takes place in various ways, according to the different kinds
of fruit. Qetsach is the black poppy (nigella sativa, Arab. habbe soda,
so called from its black seeds), belonging to the ranunculaceae. Kammōn
was the cummin (cuminum cyminum) with larger aromatic seeds, Ar. kammūn,
neither of them our common carraway (Kmmel, carum). The wheat he sows
carefully in rows (sōrâh, ordo; ad ordinem, as it is translated by
Jerome), i.e., he does not scatter it about carelessly, like the other
two, but lays the grains carefully in the furrows, because otherwise
when they sprang up they would get massed together, and choke one
another. Nismân, like sōrâh, is an acc. loci: the barley is sown in a
piece of the field specially marked off for it, or specially furnished
with signs (sı̄mânı̄m); and kussemeth, the spelt (ζειά, also mentioned by
Homer, Od. iv 604, between wheat and barley), along the edge of it, so
that spelt forms the rim of the barley field. It is by a divine instinct
that the husbandman acts in this manner; for God, who established
agriculture at the creation (i.e., Jehovah, not Osiris), has also given
men understanding. This is the meaning of v'yisserō lammishpât: and (as
we may see from all this) He (his God: the subject is given afterwards
in the second clause) has led him ([Pro
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001)) to the right (this is the
rendering adopted by Kimchi, whilst other commentators have been misled
by [Jer 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011), and last of all Malbim
Luzzatto, "Cosi Dio con giustizia corregge;" he would have done better,
however, to say, con moderazione).

[Isaiah 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 28:27</span></span>

Again, the labour of the husbandman is just as manifold after the
reaping has been done. "For the black poppy is not threshed with a
threshing sledge, nor is a cart wheel rolled over cummin; but black
poppy is knocked out with a stick, and cummin with a staff. Is bread
corn crushed? No; he does not go on threshing it for ever, and drive the
wheel of his cart and his horses over it: he does not crush it. This
also, it goeth forth from Jehovah of hosts: He gives wonderful
intelligence, high understanding." Ki (for) introduces another proof
that the husbandman is instructed by God, from what he still further
does. He does not use the threshing machine (chârūts, syn. mōrag, Ar.
naureg, nōreg), or the threshing cart (agâlâh: see Winer's
Real-Wrterbuch, art. Dreschen), which would entirely destroy the more
tender kinds of fruit, but knocks them out with a staff (baculo excutit:
see at [Isa 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012)). The sentence
lechem yūdâq is to be accentuated as an interrogative: Is bread corn
crushed? Oh no, he does not crush it. This would be the case if he were
to cause the wheel (i.e., the wheels, gilgal, constr. to galgal) of the
threshing cart with the horses harnessed in front to rattle over it with
all their might (hâmam, to set in noisy violent motion). Lechem, like
the Greek sitos, is corn from which bread is made ([Isa
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#023); [Psa
104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)). אדושׁ is metaplastic (as if
from אדשׁ) for דושׁ (see Ewald, 312, b). Instead of וּפרשׁיו, the
pointing ought to be וּפרשׁיו (from פרשׁ with kametz before the tone =
Arab. faras, as distinguished from פרשׁ with a fixed kametz, equivalent
to farras, a rider): "his horses," here the threshing horses, which were
preferred to asses and oxen.Even in this treatment of the fruit when
reaped, there is an evidence of the wonderful intelligence (הפלא), as
written הפלא) and exalted understanding (on תּוּשׁהיה, from ושׁי, see at
[Job 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#003)) imparted by God. The
expression is one of such grandeur, that we perceive at once that the
prophet has in his mind the wisdom of God in a higher sphere. The wise,
divinely inspired course adopted by the husbandman in the treatment of
the field and fruit, is a type of the wise course adopted by the divine
Teacher Himself in the treatment of His nation. Israel is Jehovah's
field. The punishments and chastisements of Jehovah are the ploughshare
and harrow, with which He forcibly breaks up, turns over, and furrows
this field. But this does not last for ever. When the field has been
thus loosened, smoothed, and rendered fertile once more, the painful
process of ploughing is followed by a beneficent sowing and planting in
a multiform and wisely ordered fulness of grace. Again, Israel is
Jehovah's child of the threshing-floor (see [Isa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010)). He threshes it; but He does
not thresh it only: He also knocks; and when He threshes, He does not
continue threshing for ever, i.e., as Caspari has well explained it, "He
does not punish all the members of the nation with the same severity;
and those whom He punishes with greater severity than others He does not
punish incessantly, but as soon as His end is attained, and the husks of
sin are separated from those that have been punished, and the punishment
ceases, and only the worst in the nation, who are nothing but husks, and
the husks on the nation itself, are swept away by the punishments"
(compare [Isa 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025); [Isa
29:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#020)). This is the solemn lesson
and affectionate consolation hidden behind the veil of the parable.
Jehovah punishes, but it is in order that He may be able to bless. He
sifts, but He does not destroy. He does not thresh His own people, but
He knocks them; and even when He threshes, they may console themselves
in the face of the approaching period of judgment, that they are never
crushed or injured.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 29](isa029)

</div>
