<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa062)  [Next](isa064) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 63:0</span></span>

Sixth Prophecy - [Isa 63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)

Judgment Upon Edom and Upon the Whole World that Is Hostile to the
Church

Just as the Ammonites had been characterized by a thirst for extending
their territory as well as by cruelty, and the Moabites by boasting and
a slanderous disposition, so were the Edomites, although the
brother-nation to Israel, characterised from time immemorial by fierce,
implacable, bloodthirsty hatred towards Israel, upon which they fell in
the most ruthless and malicious manner, whenever it was surrounded by
danger or had suffered defeat. The knavish way in which they acted in
the time of Joram, when Jerusalem was surprised and plundered by
Philistines and Arabians ([Ch2
21:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016)), has been depicted by
Obadiah. A large part of the inhabitants of Jerusalem were then taken
prisoners, and sold by the conquerors, some to the Phoenicians and some
to the Greeks ([Oba 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020); [Joe
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)); to the latter through the
medium of the Edomites, who were in possession of the port and
commercial city of Elath on the Elanitic Gulf ([Amo
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006)). Under the rule of the very same
Joram the Edomites had made themselves independent of the house of David
([Kg2 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020); [Ch2
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#010)), and a great massacre took
place among the Judaeans settled in Idumaea; an act of wickedness for
which Joel threatens them with the judgment of God ([Joe
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019)), and which was regarded as not
yet expiated even in the time of Uzziah, notwithstanding the fact that
Amaziah had chastised them ([Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007)), and Uzziah had wrested Elath
from them ([Kg2 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#022)). "Thus saith
Jehovah," was the prophecy of Amos ([Amo
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011)) in the first half of Uzziah's
reign, "for three transgressions of Edom, ad for four, I will not take
it back, because he pursued his brother with the sword, and stifled his
compassion, so that his anger tears in pieces for ever, and he keeps his
fierce wrath eternally: And I let fire loose upon Teman, and it devours
the palaces of Bozrah." So also at the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Chaldeans, and the carrying away of the people, Edom took the side of
the Chaldeans, rejoiced over Israel's defeat, and flattered itself that
it should eventually rule over the territory that had hitherto belonged
to Israel. They availed themselves of this opportunity to slake their
thirst for revenge upon Israel, placing themselves at the service of its
enemies, delivering up fugitive Judaeans or else massacring them, and
really obtaining possession of the southern portion of Judaea, viz.,
Hebron (1 Macc. 5:65; cf., Josephus, Wars of the Jews, iv 9, 7). With a
retrospective glance at these, the latest manifestations of eternal
enmity, Edom is threatened with divine vengeance by Jeremiah in the
prophecy contained in Jer 49:7-22, which is taken for the most part from
Obadiah; also in the Lamentations ([Lam
4:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021)), as well as by Ezekiel ([Eze
25:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012), and especially [Eze
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001)), and by the author of [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), which looks back upon the
time of the captivity. Edom is not always an emblematical name for the
imperial power of the world: this is evident enough from [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), from Isaiah 21, and also from
Isaiah 34 in connection with chapter 13, where the judgment upon Edom is
represented as a different one from the judgment upon Babylon. Babylon
and Edom are always to be taken literally, so far as the primary meaning
of the prophecy is concerned; but they are also representative, Babylon
standing for the violent and tyrannical world-power, and Edom for the
world as cherishing hostility and manifesting hostility to Israel as
Israel, i.e., as the people of God. Babylon had no other interest, so
far as Israel was concerned, than to subjugate it like other kingdoms,
and destroy every possibility of its ever rising again. But Edom, which
dwelt in Israel's immediate neighbourhood, and sprang from the same
ancestral house, hated Israel with hereditary mortal hatred, although it
knew the God of Israel better than Babylon ever did, because it knew
that Israel had deprived it of its birthright, viz., the chieftainship.
If Israel should have such a people as this, and such neighbouring
nations generally round about it, after it had been delivered from the
tyranny of the mistress of the world, its peace would still be
incessantly threatened. Not only must Babylon fall, but Edom also must
be trodden down, before Israel could be redeemed, or be regarded as
perfectly redeemed. The prophecy against Edom which follows here is
therefore a well-chosen side-piece to the prophecy against Babel in [Isa
47:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001), at the point of time to which
the prophet has been transported.

[Isaiah 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 63:1</span></span>

This is the smallest of all the twenty-seven prophecies. In its dramatic
style it resembles [Psa 24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001); in
its visionary and emblematical character it resembles the tetralogy in
Isaiah 21:1-22:14. The attention of the seer is attracted by a strange
and lofty form coming from Edom, or more strictly from Bozrah; not the
place in Auranitis or Hauran ([Jer
48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024)) which is memorable in church
history, but the place in Edomitis or Gebal, between Petra and the Dead
Sea, which still exists as a village in ruins under the diminutive name
of el-Busaire. "Who is this that cometh from Edom, in deep red clothes
from Bozrah? This, glorious in his apparel, bending to and fro in the
fulness of his strength?" The verb châmats means to be sharp or bitter;
but here, where it can only refer to colour, it means to be glaring, and
as the Syriac shows, in which it is generally applied to blushing from
shame or reverential awe, to be a staring red (ὀξέως). The question,
what is it that makes the clothes of this new-comer so strikingly red?
is answered afterwards. But apart from the colour, they are splendid in
their general arrangement and character. The person seen approaching is
בּלבוּשׁו הדוּר (cf., Arab. ḥdr and hdr, to rush up, to shoot up
luxuriantly, ahdar used for a swollen body), and possibly through the
medium of hâdâr (which may signify primarily a swelling, or pad, ὄγκος,
and secondarily pomp or splendour), "to honour or adorn;" so that hâdūr
signifies adorned, grand (as in [Gen
24:65](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#065); Targ. II lxx ὡραῖος), splendid.
The verb tsâ‛âh, to bend or stoop, we have already met with in [Isa
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014). Here it is used to denote a
gesture of proud self-consciousness, partly with or without the idea of
the proud bending back of the head (or bending forward to listen), and
partly with that of swaying to and fro, i.e., the walk of a proud man
swinging to and fro upon the hips. The latter is the sense in which we
understand tsō‛eh here, viz., as a syn. of the Arabic mutamâli, to bend
proudly from one side to the other (Vitringa: se huc illuc motitans).
The person seen here produces the impression of great and abundant
strength; and his walk indicates the corresponding pride of
self-consciousness.

"Who is this?" asks the seer of a third person. But the answer comes
from the person himself, though only seen in the distance, and therefore
with a voice that could be heard afar off. "I am he that speaketh in
righteousness, mighty to aid." Hitzig, Knobel, and others, take
righteousness as the object of the speaking; and this is grammatically
possible (בּ = περί, e.g., [Deu 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007)).
But our prophet uses בצדק in [Isa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006); [Isa
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#013), and בצדקה in an adverbial
sense: "strictly according to the rule of truth (more especially that of
the counsel of mercy or plan of salvation) and right." The person
approaching says that he is great in word and deed ([Jer
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019)). He speaks in righteousness; in
the zeal of his holiness threatening judgment to the oppressors, and
promising salvation to the oppressed; and what he threatens and
promises, he carries out with mighty power. He is great (רב, not רב; S.
ὑπερμαχῶν, Jer. propugnator) to aid the oppressed against their
oppressors. This alone might lead us to surmise, that it is God from
whose mouth of righteousness ([Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)) the consolation of redemption
proceeds, and whose holy omnipotent arm ([Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010); [Isa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#016)) carries out the act of
redemption.

[Isaiah 63:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 63:2</span></span>

The seer surmises this also, and now inquires still further, whence the
strange red colour of his apparel, which does not look like the purple
of a king's talar or the scarlet of a chlamys. "Whence the red on thine
apparel, and thy clothes like those of a wine-presser?" מדּוּע inquires
the reason and cause; למּה, in its primary sense, the object or purpose.
The seer asks, "Why is there red ('âdōm, neuter, like rabh in [Isa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007)) to thine apparel?" The Lamed,
which might be omitted (wherefore is thy garment red?), implies that the
red was not its original colour, but something added (cf., [Jer
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012), and lâmō in [Isa
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#016); [Isa
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)). This comes out still more
distinctly in the second half of the question: "and (why are) thy
clothes like those of one who treads (wine) in the wine-press" (begath
with a pausal not lengthened, like baz in [Isa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)), i.e., saturated and stained as
if with the juice of purple grapes?

[Isaiah 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 63:3</span></span>

The person replies: "I have trodden the wine-trough alone, and of the
nations no one was with me: and I trode them in my wrath, and trampled
them down in my fury; and their life-sap spirted upon my clothes, and
all my raiment was stained. For a day of vengeance was in my heart, and
the year of my redemption was come. And I looked round, and there was no
helper; and I wondered there was no supporter: then mine own arm helped
me; and my fury, it became my support. And I trode down nations in my
wrath, and made them drunk in my fury, and made their life-blood run
down to the earth." He had indeed trodden the wine-press (pūrâh = gath,
or, if distinct from this, the pressing-trough as distinguished from the
pressing-house or pressing-place; according to Frst, something hollowed
out; but according to the traditional interpretation from pūr = pârar,
to crush, press, both different from yeqebh: see at [Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)), and he alone; so that the juice
of the grapes had saturated and coloured his clothes, and his only. When
he adds, that of the nations no one was with him, it follows that the
press which he trode was so great, that he might have needed the
assistance of whole nations. And when he continues thus: And I trod them
in my wrath, etc., the enigma is at once explained. It was to the
nations themselves that the knife was applied. They were cut off like
grapes and put into the wine-press ([Joe
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013)); and this heroic figure, of
which there was no longer any doubt that it was Jehovah Himself, had
trodden them down in the impulse and strength of His wrath. The red upon
the clothes was the life-blood of the nations, which had spirted upon
them, and with which, as He trode this wine-press, He had soiled all His
garments. Nētsach, according to the more recently accepted derivation
from nâtsach, signifies, according to the traditional idea, which is
favoured by [Lam 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018), vigor, the
vital strength and life-blood, regarded as the sap of life. ויז (compare
the historical tense ויּז in [Kg2
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#033)) is the future used as an
imperfect, and it spirted, from nâzâh (see at [Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015)). אגאלתּי (from גּאל = גּעל,
[Isa 59:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003)) is the perfect hiphil with
an Aramaean inflexion (compare the same Aramaism in [Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006); [Ch2
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#035); and הלאני, which is half like
it, in [Job 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#007)); the Hebrew form
would be הגאלתּי.

(Note: The Babylonian MSS have אגאלתי with chirek, since the Babylonian
(Assyrian) system of punctuation has no seghol.)

AE and A regard the form as a mixture of the perfect and future, but
this is a mistake. This work of wrath had been executed by Jehovah,
because He had in His heart a day of vengeance, which could not be
delayed, and because the year (see at [Isa
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002)) of His promised redemption had
arrived. גּאּלי (this is the proper reading, not גּאוּלי, as some codd.
have it; and this was the reading which Rashi had before him in his
comm. on [Lam 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#006)) is the plural of
the passive participle used as an abstract noun (compare היּים vivi,
vitales, or rather viva, vitalia = vita). And He only had accomplished
this work of wrath. [Isa 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005) is the
expansion of לבדּי, and almost a verbal repetition of [Isa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#016). The meaning is, that no one
joined Him with conscious free-will, to render help to the God of
judgment and salvation in His purposes. The church that was devoted to
Him was itself the object of the redemption, and the great mass of those
who were estranged from Him the object of the judgment. Thus He found
Himself alone, neither human co-operation nor the natural course of
events helping the accomplishment of His purposes. And consequently He
renounced all human help, and broke through the steady course of
development by a marvellous act of His own. He trode down nations in His
wrath, and intoxicated them in His fury, and caused their life-blood to
flow down to the ground. The Targum adopts the rendering "et triturabo
eos," as if the reading were ואשׁבּרם, which we find in Sonc. 1488, and
certain other editions, as well as in some codd. Many agree with
Cappellus in preferring this reading; and in itself it is not
inadmissible (see [Lam 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#015)). But the
lxx and all the other ancient versions, the Masora (which distinguishes
ואשׁכרם with כ, as only met with once, from ואשׁברם morf , with ב in
[Deu 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#017)), and the great majority of
the MSS, support the traditional reading. There is nothing surprising in
the transition to the figure of the cup of wrath, which is a very common
one with Isaiah. Moreover, all that is intended is, that Jehovah caused
the nations to feel the full force of this His fury, by trampling them
down in His fury.

Even in this short ad highly poetical passage we see a desire to
emblematize, just as in the emblematic cycle of prophetical
night-visions in Isaiah 21:1-22:14. For not only is the name of Edom
made covertly into an emblem of its future fate, אדם becoming אדם upon
the apparel of Jehovah the avenger, when the blood of the people,
stained with blood-guiltiness towards the people of God, is spirted out,
but the name of Bozrah also; for bâtsar means to cut off bunches of
grapes (vindemiare), and botsrâh becomes bâtsı̄r, i.e., a vintage, which
Jehovah treads in His wrath, when He punishes the Edomitish nation as
well as all the rest of the nations, which in their hostility towards
Him and His people have taken pleasure in the carrying away of Israel
and the destruction of Jerusalem, and have lent their assistance in
accomplishing them. Knobel supposes that the judgment referred to is the
defeat which Cyrus inflicted upon the nations under Croesus and their
allies; but it can neither be shown that this defeat affected the
Edomites, nor can we understand why Jehovah should appear as if coming
from Edom-Bozrah, after inflicting this judgment, to which [Isa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002). refers. Knobel himself also
observes, that Edom was still an independent kingdom, and hostile to the
Persians (Diod. xv 2) not only under the reign of Cambyses (Herod. iii.
5ff.), but even later than that (Diod. xiii. 46). But at the time of
Malachi, who lived under Artaxerxes Longimanus, if not under his
successor Darius Nothus, a judgment of devastation was inflicted upon
Edom ([Mal 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)), from which it never
recovered. The Chaldeans, as Caspari has shown (Obad. p. 142), cannot
have executed it, since the Edomites appear throughout as their
accomplices, and as still maintaining their independence even under the
first Persian kings; nor can any historical support be found to the
conjecture, that it occurred in the wars between the Persians and the
Egyptians (Hitzig and Khler, Mal. p. 35). What the prophet's eye really
saw was fulfilled in the time of the Maccabaeans, when Judas inflicted a
total defeat upon them, John Hyrcanus compelled them to become Jews, and
Alexander Jannai completed their subjection; and in the time of the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, when Simon of Gerasa avenged
their cruel conduct in Jerusalem in combination with the Zelots, by
ruthlessly turning their well-cultivated land into a horrible desert,
just as it would have been left by a swarm of locusts (Jos. Wars of the
Jews, iv 9, 7).

The New Testament counterpart of this passage in Isaiah is the
destruction of Antichrist and his army ([Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011).). He who effects this
destruction is called the Faithful and True, the Logos of God; and the
seer beholds Him sitting upon a white horse, with eyes of flaming fire,
and many diadems upon His head, wearing a blood-stained garment, like
the person seen by the prophet here. The vision of John is evidently
formed upon the basis of that of Isaiah; for when it is said of the
Logos that He rules the nations with a staff of iron, this points to
[Psa 2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001); and when it is still
further said that He treads the wine-press of the wrath of Almighty God,
this points back to Isaiah 63. The reference throughout is not to the
first coming of the Lord, when He laid the foundation of His kingdom by
suffering and dying, but to His final coming, when He will bring His
regal sway to a victorious issue. Nevertheless [Isa
63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001) has always been a favourite
passage for reading in Passion week. It is no doubt true that the
Christian cannot read this prophecy without thinking of the Saviour
streaming with blood, who trode the wine-press of wrath for us without
the help of angels and men, i.e., who conquered wrath for us. But the
prophecy does not relate to this. The blood upon the garment of the
divine Hero is not His own, but that of His enemies; and His treading of
the wine-press is not the conquest of wrath, but the manifestation of
wrath. This section can only be properly used as a lesson for Passion
week so far as this, that Jehovah, who here appears to the Old Testament
seer, was certainly He who became man in His Christ, in the historical
fulfilment of His purposes; and behind the first advent to bring
salvation there stood with warning form the final coming to judgment,
which will take vengeance upon that Edom, to whom the red
lentil-judgment of worldly lust and power was dearer than the red
life-blood of that loving Servant of Jehovah who offered Himself for the
sin of the whole world.

There follows now in Isaiah 63:7-64:11 a prayer commencing with the
thanksgiving as it looks back to the past, and closing with a prayer for
help as it turns to the present. Hitzig and Knobel connect this closely
with [Isa 63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), assuming that
through the great event which had occurred, viz., the overthrow of Edom,
and of the nations hostile to the people of God as such, by which the
exiles were brought one step nearer to freedom, the prophet was led to
praise Jehovah for all His previous goodness to Israel. There is
nothing, however, to indicate this connection, which is in itself a very
loose one. The prayer which follows is chiefly an entreaty, and an
entreaty appended to [Isa 63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), but
without any retrospective allusion to it: it is rather a prayer in
general for the realization of the redemption already promised. Ewald is
right in regarding Isaiah 63:7-66:24 as an appendix to this whole book
of consolation, since the traces of the same prophet are unmistakeable;
but the whole style of the description is obviously different, and the
historical circumstances must have been still further developed in the
meantime.

The three prophecies which follow are the finale of the whole. The
announcement of the prophet, which has reached its highest point in the
majestic vision in [Isa 63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), is now
drawing to an end. It is standing close upon the threshold of all that
has been promised, and nothing remains but the fulfilment of the
promise, which he has held up like a jewel on every side. And now, just
as in the finale of a poetical composition, all the melodies and
movements that have been struck before are gathered up into one
effective close; and first of all, as in Hab, into a prayer, which
forms, as it were, the lyrical echo of the preaching that has gone
before.

[Isaiah 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 63:7</span></span>

The prophet, as the leader of the prayers of the church, here passes
into the expanded style of the tephillah. [Isa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007) "I will celebrate the mercies of
Jehovah, the praises of Jehovah, as is seemly for all that Jehovah hath
shown us, and the great goodness towards the house of Israel, which He
hath shown them according to His pity, and the riches of His mercies."
The speaker is the prophet, in the name of the church, or, what is the
same thing, the church in which the prophet includes himself. The prayer
commences with thanksgiving, according to the fundamental rule in [Psa
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023). The church brings to its own
remembrance, as the subject of praise in the presence of God, all the
words and deeds by which Jehovah has displayed His mercy and secured
glory to Himself. חסדי (this is the correct pointing, with ד protected
by gaya; cf., כּדכד in [Isa 54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012)) are
the many thoughts of mercy and acts of mercy into which the grace of
God, i.e., His one purpose of grace and His one work of grace, had been
divided. They are just so many tehillōth, self-glorifications of God,
and impulses to His glorification. On כּעל, as is seemly, see at [Isa
59:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#018). There is no reason for assuming
that ורב־טוּב is equivalent to רב־טוב וּכעל, as Hitzig and Knobel do.
רב־טוב commences the second object to אזכּיר, in which what follows is
unfolded as a parallel to the first. Rabh, the much, is a neuter formed
into a substantive, as in [Psa 145:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#007);
rōbh, plurality or multiplicity, is an infinitive used as a substantive.
Tūbh is God's benignant goodness; rachămı̄m, His deepest sympathizing
tenderness; chesed (root חס, used of violent emotion; cf., Syr. chăsad,
chăsam, aemulari; Arab. ḥss, to be tender, full of compassion), grace
which condescends to and comes to meet a sinful creature. After this
introit, the prayer itself commences with a retrospective glance at the
time of the giving of law, when the relation of a child, in which Israel
stood to Jehovah, was solemnly proclaimed and legally regulated. [Isa
63:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#008) "He said, They are my people,
children who will not lie; and He became their Saviour." אך is used here
in its primary affirmative sense. ישׁקּרוּ is the future of hope. When
He made them His people, His children, He expected from them a grateful
return of His covenant grace in covenant fidelity; and whenever they
needed help from above, He became their Saviour (mōshı̄ă‛). We can
recognise the ring of [Exo 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002) here,
just as in [Isa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002). Mōshı̄ă‛) is a
favourite word in chapters 40-66 (compare, however, [Isa
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#020) also).

[Isaiah 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 63:9</span></span>

The next v. commemorates the way in which He proved Himself a Saviour in
heart and action. "In all their affliction He was afflicted, and the
Angel of His face brought them salvation. In His love and in His pity He
redeemed them, and lifted them up, and bare them all the days of the
olden time." This is one of the fifteen passages in which the chethib
has לא, the keri לו. It is only with difficulty that we can obtain any
meaning from the chethib: "in all the affliction which He brought upon
them He did not afflict, viz., according to their desert" (Targ., Jer.,
Rashi); or better still, as tsâr must in this case be derived from tsūr,
and tsăr is only met with in an intransitive sense, "In all their
distress there was no distress" (Saad.), with which J. D. Michaelis
compares [Co2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008), "troubled on every
side, yet not distressed." The oxymoron is perceptible enough, but the
להם (צר לא), which is indispensable to this expression, is wanting. Even
with the explanation, "In all their affliction He was not an enemy,
viz., Jehovah, to them" (Dderlein), or "No man persecuted them without
the angel immediately," etc. (Cocceius and Rosenmller), we miss להם or
אתם. There are other still more twisted and jejune attempts to explain
the passage with לא, which are not worth the space they occupy. Even in
the older translators did not know how to deal with the לא in the text.
The Sept. takes tsăr as equivalent to tsı̄r, a messenger, and renders the
passage according to its own peculiar interpunctuation: οὐ πρέσβυς οὐδὲ
ἄγγελος ἀλλ ̓ αὐτὸς ἔσωσεν αὐτούς (neither a messenger nor an angel, but
His face, i.e., He Himself helped them: [Exo
33:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#014); [Sa2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#011)). Everything forces to the
conclusion that the keri לו is to be preferred. The Masora actually does
reckon this as one of the fifteen passages in which לו is to be read for
לא.

(Note: There are fifteen passages in which the keri substitutes לו for
לא. See Masora magna on [Lev 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021)
(Psalter, ii. 60). If we add [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005); [Ch1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020); [Sa1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#016), there are eighteen (Comm. on
Job, at [Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015)). But the first two
of these are not reckoned, because they are doubtful; and in the third,
instead of לּו being substituted for לא, לא is substituted for לו (Ges.
Thes. 735, b). [Sa2 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#007) also is not a
case in point, for there the keri is לוּ for לא.)

Jerome was also acquainted with this explanation. He says: "Where we
have rendered it, 'In all their affliction He was not afflicted,' which
is expressed in Hebrew by lo, the adverb of negation, we might read
ipse; so that the sense would be, 'In all their affliction He, i.e.,
God, was afflicted.' " If we take the sentence in this way, "In all
oppression there was oppression to Him," it yields a forcible thought in
perfect accordance with the Scripture (compare e.g., [Jdg
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016)), an expression in harmony with
the usage of the language (compare tsar-lı̄, [Sa2
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#026)), and a construction suited to
the contents (לו = ipsi). There is nothing to surprise us in the fact
that God should be said to feel the sufferings of His people as His own
sufferings; for the question whether God can feel pain is answered by
the Scriptures in the affirmative. He can as surely as everything
originates in Him, with the exception of sin, which is a free act and
only originates in Him so far as the possibility is concerned, but not
in its actuality. Just as a man can feel pain, and yet in his
personality keep himself superior to it, so God feels pain without His
own happiness being thereby destroyed. And so did He suffer with His
people; their affliction was reflected in His own life in Himself, and
shared Him inwardly. But because He, the all-knowing, all-feeling One,
is also the almighty will, He sent the angel of His face, and brought
them salvation. "The angel of His face," says Knobel, "is the pillar of
cloud and fire, in which Jehovah was present with His people in the
march through the desert, with His protection, instruction, and
guidance, the helpful presence of God in the pillar of cloud and fire."
But where do we ever read of this, that it brought Israel salvation in
the pressure of great dangers? Only on one occasion ([Exo
14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)) does it cover the Israelites
from their pursuers; but in that very instance a distinction is
expressly made between the angel of God and the pillar of cloud.

Consequently the cloud and the angel were two distinct media of the
manifestation of the presence of God. They differed in two respects. The
cloud was a material medium - the evil, the sign, and the site of the
revealed presence of God. The angel, on the other hand, was a personal
medium, a ministering spirit (λειτουργικὸν πνεῦμα), in which the name of
Jehovah was indwelling for the purpose of His own self-attestation in
connection with the historical preparation for the coming of salvation
([Exo 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021)). He was the mediator of
the preparatory work of God in both word and deed under the Old
Testament, and the manifestation of that redeeming might and grace which
realized in Israel the covenant promises given to Abraham (Gen 15). A
second distinction consisted in the fact that the cloud was a mode of
divine manifestation which was always visible; whereas, although the
angel of God did sometimes appear in human shape both in the time of the
patriarchs and also in that of Joshua ([Jos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013).), it never appeared in such a
form during the history of the exodus, and therefore is only to be
regarded as a mode of divine revelation which was chiefly discernible in
its effects, and belonged to the sphere of invisibility: so that in any
case, if we search in the history of the people that was brought out of
Egypt for the fulfilment of such promises as [Exo
23:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020), we are forced to the
conclusion that the cloud was the medium of the settled presence of God
in His angel in the midst of Israel, although it is never so expressed
in the thorah. This mediatorial angel is called "the angel of His face,"
as being the representative of God, for "the face of God" is His
self-revealing presence (even though only revealed to the mental eye);
and consequently the presence of God, which led Israel to Canaan, is
called directly "His face" in [Deu
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037), apart from the angelic mediation
to be understood; and "my face" in [Exo
33:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#014), by the side of "my angel" in
[Exo 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034), and the angel in [Exo
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#002), appears as something
incomparably higher than the presence of God through the mediation of
that one angel, whose personality is completely hidden by his
mediatorial instrumentality. The genitive פניו, therefore, is not to be
taken objectively in the sense of "the angel who sees His face," but as
explanatory, "the angel who is His face, or in whom His face is
manifested." The הוּא which follows does not point back to the angel,
but to Jehovah, who reveals Himself thus. But although the angel is
regarded as a distinct being from Jehovah, it is also regarded as one
that is completely hidden before Him, whose name is in him. He redeemed
them by virtue of His love and of His chemlâh, i.e., of His forgiving
gentleness (Arabic, with the letters transposed, chilm; compare,
however, chamūl, gentle-hearted), and lifted them up, and carried them
(נשּׂא the consequence of נטּל, which is similar in sense, and more
Aramaean; cf., tollere root tal, and ferre root bhar, perf. tuli) all
the days of the olden time.

The prayer passes now quite into the tone of Ps 78 and 106, and begins
to describe how, in spite of Jehovah's grace, Israel fell again and
again away from Jehovah, and yet was always rescued again by virtue of
His grace. For it is impossible that it should leap at once in והמּה to
the people who caused the captivity, and ויּזכּר have for its subject
the penitential church of the exiles which was longing for redemption
(Ewald). The train of thought is rather this: From the proofs of grace
which the Israel of the olden time had experienced, the prophet passes
to that disobedience to Jehovah into which it fell, to that punishment
of Jehovah which it thereby brought upon itself, and to that longing for
the renewal of the old Mosaic period of redemption, which seized it in
the midst of its state of punishment. But instead of saying that Jehovah
did not leave this longing unsatisfied, and responded to the penitence
of Israel with ever fresh help, the prophet passes at once from the
desire of the old Israel for redemption, to the prayer of the existing
Israel for redemption, suppressing the intermediate thought, that Israel
was even now in such a state of punishment and longing.

[Isaiah 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 63:10</span></span>

Israel's ingratitude. "But they resisted and vexed His Holy Spirit: then
He turned to be their enemy; He made war upon them." Not only has
ועצּבוּ (to cause cutting pain) קדשׁו את־רוּח as its object, but מרוּ
has the same (on the primary meaning, see at [Isa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008)). In other cases, the object of
merōth (hamrōth) is Jehovah, or His word, His promise, His providence,
hence Jehovah himself in the revelations of His nature in word and deed;
here it is the spirit of holiness, which is distinguished from Him as a
personal existence. For just as the angel who is His face, i.e., the
representation of His nature, is designated as a person both by His name
and also by the redeeming activity ascribed to Him; so also is the
Spirit of holiness, by the fact that He can be grieved, and therefore
can feel grief (compare [Eph 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030),
"Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God"). Hence Jehovah, and the angel of
His face, and the Spirit of His holiness, are distinguished as three
persons, but so that the two latter derive their existence from the
first, which is the absolute ground of the Deity, and of everything that
is divine. Now, if we consider that the angel of Jehovah was indeed an
angel, but that he was the angelic anticipation of the appearance of God
the Mediator "in the flesh," and served to foreshadow Him "who, as the
image of the invisible God" ([Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)), as "the reflection of His glory
and the stamp of His nature" ([Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)), is not merely a temporary medium
of self-manifestation, but the perfect personal self-manifestation of
the divine pânı̄m, we have here an unmistakeable indication of the
mystery of the triune nature of God the One, which was revealed in
history in the New Testament work of redemption. The subject to ויּהפך
is Jehovah, whose Holy Spirit they troubled. He who proved Himself to be
their Father (cf., [Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)), became,
through the reaction of His holiness, the very reverse of what He wished
to be. He turned to be their enemy; הוּא, He, the most fearful of all
foes, made war against them. This is the way in which we explain [Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010), although with this explanation
it would have to be accentuated differently, viz., ויהפך mahpach, להם
pashta, לאויב zakeph, הוא tiphchah, נלחם־בם silluk. The accentuation as
we find it takes נלחם־בם הוא as an attributive clause: "to an enemy, who
made war against them."

[Isaiah 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 63:11</span></span>

Israel being brought to a right mind in the midst of this state of
punishment, longed fro the better past to return. "Then His people
remembered the days of the olden time, of Moses: Where is He who brought
them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock? where is He who
put the spirit of His holiness in the midst of them; who caused the arm
of His majesty to go at the right of Moses; who split the waters before
them, to make Himself an everlasting name: who caused them to pass
through abysses of the deep, like the horse upon the plain, without
their stumbling? Like the cattle which goeth down into the valley, the
Spirit of Jehovah brought them to rest: thus hast Thou led Thy people,
to make Thyself a majestic name." According to the accentuation before
us, [Isa 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011) should be rendered
thus: "Then He (viz., Jehovah) remembered the days of the olden time,
the Moses of His people" (lxx, Targ., Syr., Jerome). But apart from the
strange expression "the Moses of His people," which might perhaps be
regarded as possible, because the proper name mōsheh might suggest the
thought of its real meaning in Hebrew, viz., extrahens = liberator, but
which the Syriac rejects by introducing the reading ‛abhdō (Moses, His
servant), we have only to look at the questions of evidently human
longing which follow, to see that Jehovah cannot be the subject to
ויּזכּר (remembered), by which these reminiscences are introduced. It is
the people which begins its inquiries with איּה, just as in [Jer
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006) (cf., [Isa
51:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009)), and recals "the days of
olden time," according to the admonition in [Deu
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007). Consequently, in spite of the
accents, such Jewish commentators as Saad. and Rashi regard "his people"
(‛ammō) as the subject; whereas others, such as AE, Kimchi, and
Abravanel, take account of the accents, and make the people the
suppressed subject of the verb "remembered," by rendering it thus, "Then
it remembered the days of olden time, (the days) of Moses (and) His
people," or in some similar way. But with all modifications the
rendering is forced and lame. The best way of keeping to the accents is
that suggested by Stier, "Then men (indef. man, the French on)
remembered the days of old, the Moses of His people."

But why did the prophet not say ויּזכּרוּ, as the proper sequel to [Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)? We prefer to adopt the
following rendering and accentuation: Then remembered (zakeph gadol) the
days-of-old (mercha) of Moses (tiphchah) His people. The object stands
before the subject, as for example in [Kg2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#013) (compare the inversions in [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022) extr., [Isa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#002) init.); and mosheh is a genitive
governing the composite "days of old" (for this form of the construct
state, compare [Isa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001) and [Rut
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001)). The retrospect commences with
"Where is He who led them up?" etc. The suffix of המּעלם (for המעלם,
like רדם in [Psa 68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028), and therefore
with the verbal force predominant) refers to the ancestors; and although
the word is determined by the suffix, it has the article as equivalent
to a demonstrative pronoun (ille qui sursum duxit, eduxit eos). "The
shepherd of his flock" is added as a more precise definition, not
dependent upon vayyizkōr, as even the accents prove. את is rendered
emphatic by yethib, since here it signifies un cum. The Targum takes it
in the sense of instar pastoris gregis sui; but though עם is sometimes
used in this way, את never is. Both the lxx and Targum read רעה; Jerome,
on the other hand, adopts the reading רעי, and this is the Masoretic
reading, for the Masora in [Gen 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#003)
reckons four רעה, without including the present passage. Kimchi and
Abravanel also support this reading, and Norzi very properly gives it
the preference. The shepherds of the flock of Jehovah are Moses and
Aaron, together with Miriam (Ps. 77:21; [Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004)). With these (i.e., in their
company or under their guidance) Jehovah led His people up out of Egypt
through the Red Sea. With the reading רעי, the question whether beqirbô
refers to Moses or Israel falls to the ground. Into the heart of His
people ([Neh 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#020)) Jehovah put the
spirit of His holiness: it was present in the midst of Israel, inasmuch
as Moses, Aaron, Miriam, the Seventy, and the prophets in the camp
possessed it, and inasmuch as Joshua inherited it as the successor of
Moses, and all the people might become possessed of it. The majestic
might of Jehovah, which manifested itself majestically, is called the
"arm of His majesty;" an anthropomorphism to which the expression "who
caused it to march at the right hand of Moses" compels us to give an
interpretation worthy of God. Stier will not allow that תּפארתּו זרע is
to be taken as the object, and exclaims, "What a marvellous figure of
speech, an arm walking at a person's right hand!" But the arm which is
visible in its deeds belongs to the God who is invisible in His own
nature; and the meaning is, that the active power of Moses was not left
to itself, but he overwhelming omnipotence of God went by its side, and
endowed it with superhuman strength. It was by virtue of this that the
elevated staff and extended hand of Moses divided the Red Sea ([Exo
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016)). בּוקע has mahpach attached to
the ב, and therefore the tone drawn back upon the penultimate, and
metheg with the tsere, that it may not be slipped over in the
pronunciation. The clause וגו לעשׂות affirms that the absolute purpose
of God is in Himself. But He is holy love, and whilst willing for
Himself, He wills at the same time the salvation of His creatures. He
makes to Himself an "everlasting name," by glorifying Himself in such
memorable miracles of redemption, as that performed in the deliverance
of His people out of Egypt. According to the general order of the
passage, [Isa 63:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#013) apparently refers
to the passage through the Jordan; but the psalmist, in [Psa
106:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009) (cf., [Psa
77:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#017)), understood it as referring to
the passage through the Red Sea. The prayer dwells upon this chief
miracle, of which the other was only an after-play. "As the horse
gallops over the plain," so did they pass through the depths of the sea
יכּשׁלוּ לא (a circumstantial minor clause), i.e., without stumbling.
Then follows another beautiful figure: "like the beast that goeth down
into the valley," not "as the beast goeth down into the valley," the
Spirit of Jehovah brought it (Israel) to rest, viz., to the menūchâh of
the Canaan flowing with milk and honey ([Deu
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#009); [Psa
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011)), where it rested and was
refreshed after the long and wearisome march through the sandy desert,
like a flock that had descended from the bare mountains to the brooks
and meadows of the valley. The Spirit of God is represented as the
leader here (as in [Psa 143:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010)), viz.,
through the medium of those who stood, enlightened and instigated by
Him, at the head of the wandering people. The following כּן is no more a
correlate of the foregoing particle of comparison than in [Isa
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014). It is a recapitulation, and
refers to the whole description as far back as [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009), passing with נהגתּ into the
direct tone of prayer.

[Isaiah 63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 63:15</span></span>

The way is prepared for the petitions for redemption which follow,
outwardly by the change in [Isa 63:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#014),
from a mere description to a direct address, and inwardly by the
thought, that Israel is at the present time in such a condition, as to
cause it to look back with longing eyes to the time of the Mosaic
redemption. "Look from heaven and see, from the habitation of Thy
holiness and majesty! Where is Thy zeal and Thy display of might? The
pressure of Thy bowels and Thy compassions are restrained towards me."
On the relation between הבּיט, to look up, to open the eyes, and ראה, to
fix the eye upon a thing. It is very rarely that we meet with the words
in the reverse order, והביט ראה (vid., [Hab
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005); [Lam
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#011)). In the second clause of [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015), instead of misshâmayim (from
heaven), we have "from the dwelling-place (mizzebhul) of Thy holiness
and majesty." The all-holy and all-glorious One, who once revealed
Himself so gloriously in the history of Israel, has now withdrawn into
His own heaven, where He is only revealed to the spirits. The object of
the looking and seeing, as apparent from what follows, is the present
helpless condition of the people in their sufferings, to which there
does not seem likely to be any end. There are no traces now of the
kin'âh (zeal) with which Jehovah used to strive on behalf of His people,
and against their oppressors ([Isa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011)), or of the former displays of
His gebhūrâh (וּגבוּרתך, as it is correctly written in Ven. 1521, is a
defective plural). In [Isa 63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015) we
have not a continued question ("the sounding of Thy bowels and Thy
mercies, which are restrained towards me?"), as Hitzig and Knobel
suppose. The words 'ēlai hith'appâqū have not the appearance of an
attributive clause, either according to the new strong thought
expressed, or according to the order of the words (with אלי written
first). On strepitus viscerum, as the effect and sign of deep sympathy,
see at [Isa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011). רחמים and מעים, or
rather מעים (from מעה, of the form רעה) both signify primarily σπλἀγχνα,
strictly speaking the soft inward parts of the body; the latter from the
root מע, to be pulpy or soft, the former from the root חר, to be slack,
loose, or soft. המון, as the plural of the predicate shows, does not
govern רחמיך also. It is presupposed that the love of Jehovah urges Him
towards His people, to relieve their misery; but His compassion and
sympathy apparently put constraint upon themselves (hith'appēq as in
[Isa 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014), lit., se superare, from
'âphaq, root פק), to abstain from working on behalf of Israel.

[Isaiah 63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 63:16</span></span>

The prayer for help, and the lamentation over its absence, are now
justified in [Isa 63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016) : "For Thou
art our Father; for Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knoweth us
not. Thou, O Jehovah, art our Father; our Redeemer is from olden time
Thy name." Jehovah is Israel's Father ([Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)). His creative might, and the
gracious counsels of His love, have called it into being: אבינוּ has not
yet the deep and unrestricted sense of the New Testament "Our Father."
The second kı̄ introduces the reason for this confession that Jehovah was
Israel's Father, and could therefore look for paternal care and help
from Him alone. Even the dearest and most honourable men, the
forefathers of the nation, could not help it. Abraham and Jacob-Israel
had been taken away from this world, and were unable to interfere on
their own account in the history of their people. ידע and הכּיר suggest
the idea of participating notice and regard, as in [Deu
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009) and [Rut
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#010), [Rut
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#019). יכּירנוּ has the vowel â (pausal
for a, [Isa 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)) in the place of ē,
to rhyme with ידענוּ (see Ges. 60, Anm. 2). In the concluding clause,
according to the accents, מעולם גּאלנוּ are connected together; but the
more correct accentuation is גאלנו tiphchah, מעולם mercha, and we have
rendered it so. From the very earliest time the acts of Jehovah towards
Israel had been such that Israel could call Him גאלנו.

[Isaiah 63:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 63:17</span></span>

But the in the existing state of things there was a contrast which put
their faith to a severe test. "O Jehovah, why leadest Thou us astray
from Thy ways, hardenest our heart, so as not to fear Thee? Return for
Thy servants' sake, the tribes of Thine inheritance." When men have
scornfully and obstinately rejected the grace of God, God withdraws it
from them judicially, gives them up to their wanderings, and makes their
heart incapable of faith (hiqshı̄ăch, which only occurs again in [Job
39:16](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#016), is here equivalent to hiqshâh
in [Psa 95:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008); [Deu
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#030)). The history of Israel from [Isa
6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001) onwards has been the history of
such a gradual judgment of hardening, and such a curse, eating deeper
and deeper, and spreading its influence wider and wider round. The great
mass are lost, but not without the possibility of deliverance for the
better part of the nation, which now appeals to the mercy of God, and
sighs for deliverance from this ban. Two reasons are assigned for this
petition for the return of the gracious presence of God: first, that
there are still "servants of Jehovah" to be found, as this prayer itself
actually proves; and secondly, that the divine election of grace cannot
perish.

[Isaiah 63:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 63:18</span></span>

But the existing condition of Israel looks like a withdrawal of this
grace; and it is impossible that these contrasts should cease, unless
Jehovah comes down from heaven as the deliverer of His people. [Isa
63:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#008), [Isa
63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019) ([Isa
64:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001)). "For a little time Thy holy
people was in possession. Our adversaries have trodden down Thy
sanctuary. We have become such as He who is from everlasting has not
ruled over, upon whom Thy name was not called. O that Thou wouldst rend
the heaven, come down, the mountains would shake before thy
countenance." It is very natural to try whether yâreshū may not have
tsârēnū for its subject (cf., [Jer
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#002)); but all the attempts made to
explain the words on this supposition, show that lammits‛âr is at
variance with the idea that yâreshū refers to the foes. Compare, for
example, Jerome's rendering "quasi nihilum (i.e., ad nihil et absque
allo labore) possederunt populum sanctum tuum;" that of Cocceius,
"propemodum ad haereditatem;" and that of Stier, "for a little they
possess entirely Thy holy nation." Mits‛âr is the harsher form for
miz‛âr, which the prophet uses in [Isa
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#025); [Isa
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014); [Isa
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#017) for a contemptibly small space
of time; and as ל is commonly used to denote the time to which, towards
which, within which, and through which, anything occurs (cf., [Ch2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#017); [Ch2
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017); Ewald, 217, d), lammits‛âr may
signify for a (lit. the well-known) short time (per breve tempus; like
εἰς ἐπ ̓κατ ̓ ἐνιαυτόν, a year long). If miqdâsh could mean the holy
land, as Hitzig and others suppose, miqdâshekhâ might be the common
object of both sentences (Ewald, 351, p. 838). But miqdash Jehovah (the
sanctuary of Jehovah) is the place of His abode and worship; and "taking
possession of the temple" is hardly an admissible expression. On the
other hand, yârash hâ'ârets, to take possession of the (holy) land, is
so common a phrase (e.g., [Isa 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021);
[Isa 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009); [Psa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)), that with the words "Thy holy
people possessed for a little (time)" we naturally supply the holy land
as the object. The order of the words in the two clauses is chiastic.
The two strikingly different subjects touch one another as the two inner
members. Of the perfects, the first expresses the more remote past, the
second the nearer past, as in [Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010). The two clauses of the v. rhyme
- the holiest thing in the possession of the people, which was holy
according to the choice and calling of Jehovah, being brought into the
greatest prominence; bōsēs = πατεῖν, [Luk
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024); [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002). Hahn's objection, that the time
between the conquest of the land and the Chaldean catastrophe could not
be called mits‛âr (a little while), may be answered, from the fact that
a time which is long in itself shrinks up when looked back upon or
recalled, and that as an actual fact from the time of David and Solomon,
when Israel really rejoiced in the possession of the land, the coming
catastrophe began to be foreboded by many significant preludes.

The lamentation in [Isa 63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019) proceeds
from the same feeling which caused the better portion of the past to
vanish before the long continuance of the mournful present. Hitzig
renders היינוּ "we were;" Hahn, "we shall be;" but here, where the
speaker is not looking back, as in [Isa
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#017), at a state of things which has
come to an end, but rather at one which is still going on, it signifies
"we have become." The passage is rendered correctly in S.: ἐγενήθημεν
(or better, γεγόναμεν) ὡς ἀπ ̓αἰῶνος ὧν οὐκ ἐξουσίασας οὐδὲ ἐπικλήθη τὸ
ὄνομά σου αὐτοῖς. The virtual predicate to hâyı̄nū commences with
mē‛ōlâm: "we have become such (or like such persons) as," etc.; which
would be fully expressed by אשׁר כּעם, or merely כּעשׁר, or without
אשׁר, and simply by transposing the words, וגו משׁלתּ כּלא (cf., [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)): compare the virtual subject
אהבו יהוה in [Isa 48:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#014), and the
virtual object בשׁמי יקרא in [Isa
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025) (Ewald, 333, b). Every form of
"as if" is intentionally omitted. The relation in which Jehovah placed
Himself to Israel, viz., as its King, and as to His own people called by
His name, appears not only as though it had been dissolved, but as
though it had never existed at all. The existing state of Israel is a
complete practical denial of any such relation. Deeper tones than these
no lamentation could possibly utter, and hence the immediate utterance
of the sigh which goes up to heaven: "O that Thou wouldst rend heaven!"
It is extremely awkward to begin a fresh chapter with כּקדח ("as when
the melting fire burneth"); at the same time, the Masoretic division of
the vv. is unassailable.

(Note: In the Hebrew Bibles, [Isa
64:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001) commences at the second v. of
our version; and the first v. is attached to [Isa
63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019) of the previous chapter. - Tr.)

For [Isa 63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019) ([Isa
64:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001)) could not be attached to [Isa
64:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001), since this v. would be
immensely overladen; moreover, this sigh really belongs to [Isa
63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019) ([Isa
63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019)), and ascends out of the depth
of the lamentation uttered there. On utinam discideris = discinderes,
see at [Isa 48:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#018). The wish
presupposes that the gracious presence of God had been withdrawn from
Israel, and that Israel felt itself to be separated from the world
beyond by a thick party-wall, resembling an impenetrable black cloud.
The closing member of the optative clause is generally rendered (utinam)
a facie tua montes diffluerent (e.g., Rosenmller after the lxx
τακήσονται), or more correctly, defluerent (Jerome), as nâzal means to
flow down, not to melt. The meaning therefore would be, "O that they
might flow down, as it were to the ground melting in the fire" (Hitzig).
The form nâzollu cannot be directly derived from nâzal, if taken in this
sense; for it is a pure fancy that nâzōllū may be a modification of the
pausal נזלוּ with ō for ā, and the so-called dagesh affectuosum). Stier
invents a verb med. o. נזל. The more probable supposition is, that it is
a niphal formed from zâlāl = nâzal (Ewald, 193, c). But zâlal signifies
to hang down slack, to sway to and fro (hence zōlēl, lightly esteemed,
and zalzallı̄m, [Isa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#005), pliable
branches), like zūl in [Isa 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006), to
shake, to pour down;

(Note: Just as the Greek has in addition to σαλ-εὐειν the much simpler
and more root-like σεἰ-ειν; so the Semitic has, besides זל, the roots
זא, זע: compare the Arabic סלסל, זאזע, זעזע, all three denoting restless
motion.)

and nâzōllu, if derived from this, yields the appropriate sense
concuterentur (compare the Arabic zalzala, which is commonly applied to
an earthquake). The nearest niphal form would be נזלּוּ (or resolved,
נזלוּ, [Jdg 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#005)); but instead of the a
of the second syllable, the niphal of the verbs ע has sometimes o, like
the verb ע ו (e.g., נגלּוּ, [Isa 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004);
Ges. 67, Anm. 5).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 64](isa064)

</div>
