<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg001)  [Next](jdg003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001)

[Judges 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 2:1</span></span>

The Angel of the Lord at Bochim. - To the cursory survey of the attitude
which the tribes of Israel assumed towards the Canaanites who still
remained in their inheritances, there is appended an account of the
appearance of the angel of the Lord, who announced to the people the
punishment of God for their breach of the covenant, of which they had
been guilty through their failure to exterminate the Canaanites. This
theophany is most intimately connected with the facts grouped together
in Judg 1, since the design and significance of the historical survey
given there are only to be learned from the reproof of the angel; and
since both of them have the same aphoristic character, being restricted
to the essential facts without entering minutely into any of the
attendant details, very much is left in obscurity. This applies more
particularly to the statement in [Jdg
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001), "Then the angel of Jehovah came
up from Gilgal to Bochim." The "angel of Jehovah" is not a prophet, or
some other earthly messenger of Jehovah, either Phinehas or Joshua, as
the Targums, the Rabbins, Bertheau, and others assume, but the angel of
the Lord who is of one essence with God. In the simple historical
narrative a prophet is never called Maleach Jehovah. The prophets are
always called either נביא or נביא אישׁ, as in [Jdg
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#008), or else "man of God," as in [Kg1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#022); [Kg1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001), etc.; and [Hag
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013) and [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001) cannot be adduced as proofs to the
contrary, because in both these passages the purely appellative meaning
of the word Maleach is established beyond all question by the context
itself. Moreover, no prophet ever identifies himself so entirely with
God as the angel of Jehovah does here. The prophets always distinguish
between themselves and Jehovah, by introducing their words with the
declaration "thus saith Jehovah," as the prophet mentioned in [Jdg
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#008) is said to have done. On the other
hand, it is affirmed that no angel mentioned in the historical books is
ever said to have addressed the whole nation, or to have passed from one
place to another. But even if it had been a prophet who was speaking, we
could not possibly understand his speaking to the whole nation, or "to
all the children of Israel," as signifying that he spoke directly to the
600,000 men of Israel, but simply as an address delivered to the whole
nation in the persons of its heads or representatives. Thus Joshua spoke
to "all the people" ([Jos 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)),
though only the elders of Israel and its heads were assembled round him
([Jos 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)). And so an angel, or "the
angel of the Lord," might also speak to the heads of the nation, when
his message had reference to all the people. And there was nothing in
the fact of his coming up from Gilgal to Bochim that was at all at
variance with the nature of the angel. When the angel of the Lord
appeared to Gideon, it is stated in [Jdg
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011) that he came and sat under the
terebinth at Ophra; and in the same way the appearance of the angel of
the Lord at Bochim might just as naturally be described as coming up to
Bochim. The only thing that strikes us as peculiar is his coming up
"from Gilgal." This statement must be intimately connected with the
mission of the angel, and therefore must contain something more than a
simply literal notice concerning his travelling from one place to
another. We are not to conclude, however, that the angel of the Lord
came from Gilgal, because this town was the gathering-place of the
congregation in Joshua's time. Apart altogether from the question
discussed in [Jos 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#034) as to the
situation of Gilgal in the different passages of the book of Joshua,
such a view as this is overthrown by the circumstance that after the
erection of the tabernacle at Shiloh, and during the division of the
land, it was not Gilgal but Shiloh which formed the gathering-place of
the congregation when the casting of the lots was finished ([Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001), [Jos
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010)).

We cannot agree with H. Witsius, therefore, who says in his Miscell. ss.
(i. p. 170, ed. 1736) that "he came from that place, where he had
remained for a long time to guard the camp, and where he was thought to
be tarrying still;" but must rather assume that his coming up from
Gilgal is closely connected with the appearance of the angel-prince, as
described in [Jos 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013), to announce to
Joshua the fall of Jericho after the circumcision of the people at
Gilgal. Just as on that occasion, when Israel had just entered into the
true covenant relation to the Lord by circumcision, and was preparing
for the conquest of Canaan, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joshua as
the prince of the army of Jehovah, to ensure him of the taking of
Jericho; so here after the entrance of the tribes of Israel into their
inheritances, when they were beginning to make peace with the remaining
Canaanites, and instead of rooting them out were content to make them
tributary, the angel of the Lord appeared to the people, to make known
to all the children of Israel that by such intercourse with the
Canaanites they had broken the covenant of the Lord, and to foretell the
punishment which would follow this transgression of the covenant. By the
fact, therefore, that he came up from Gilgal, it is distinctly shown
that the same angel who gave the whole of Canaan into the hands of the
Israelites when Jericho fell, had appeared to them again at Bochim, to
make known to them the purposes of God in consequence of their
disobedience to the commands of the Lord. How very far it was from being
the author's intention to give simply a geographical notice, is also
evident from the fact that he merely describes the place where this
appearance occurred by the name which was given to it in consequence of
the event, viz., Bochim, i.e., weepers. The situation of this place is
altogether unknown. The rendering of the lxx, ἐπὶ τὸν Κλαυθμῶνα καὶ ἐπὶ
Βαιθὴλ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν οἶκον Ἰσραήλ, gives no clue whatever; for τὸν
Κλαυθμῶνα merely arises from a confusion of בּכים with בּכאים in [Sa2
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#023), which the lxx have also rendered
Κλαυθμών, and ἐπὶ τὸν Βαιθήλ κ.τ.λ. is an arbitrary interpolation of the
translators themselves, who supposed Bochim to be in the neighbourhood
of Bethel, "in all probability merely because they though of
Allon-bachuth, the oak of weeping, at Bethel, which is mentioned in [Gen
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008)" (Bertheau). With regard to the
piska in the middle of the verse, see the remarks on [Jos
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001). In his address the angel of the
Lord identifies himself with Jehovah (as in [Jos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014) compared with [Jos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002)), by describing himself as having
made them to go up out of Egypt and brought them into the land which He
sware unto their fathers. There is something very striking in the use of
the imperfect אעלה in the place of the perfect (cf. [Jdg
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#008)), as the substance of the address
and the continuation of it in the historical tense ואביא and ואמר
require the preterite. The imperfect is only to be explained on the
supposition that it is occasioned by the imperf. consec. which follows
immediately afterwards and reacts through its proximity. "I will not
break my covenant for ever," i.e., will keep what I promised when making
the covenant, viz., that I would endow Israel with blessings and
salvation, if they for their part would observe the covenant duties into
which they had entered (see [Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005).), and obey the commandments of
the Lord. Among these was the commandment to enter into no alliance with
the inhabitants of that land, viz., the Canaanites (see [Exo
23:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032); [Exo
34:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#012), [Exo
34:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015); [Deu
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002).; [Jos
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012)). "Destroy their altars:" taken
verbatim from [Exo 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#013); [Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005). The words "and ye have not
hearkened to my voice" recall to mind [Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005). "What have ye done" (מה־זּאת,
literally "what is this that ye have done") sc., in sparing the
Canaanites and tolerating their altars?

[Judges 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 2:3</span></span>

"And I also have said to you:" these words point to the threat already
expressed in [Num 33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055); [Jos
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013), in the event of their not
fulfilling the command of God, which threat the Lord would now fulfil.
From the passages mentioned, we may also explain the expression לצדּים
לכם והיוּ, they shall be in your sides, i.e., thorns in your sides.
לצדּים is an abbreviated expression for בּצדּיכם לצנינים in [Num
33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055), so that there is no necessity
for the conjecture that it stands for לצרים. The last clause of [Jdg
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#003) is formed after [Exo
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#033).

[Judges 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 2:4</span></span>

The people broke out into loud weeping on account of this reproof. And
since the weeping, from which the place received the name of Bochim, was
a sign of their grief on account of their sin, this grief led on to such
repentance that "they sacrificed there unto the Lord," no doubt
presenting sin-offerings and burnt-offerings, that they might obtain
mercy and the forgiveness of their sins. It does not follow from this
sacrifice, however, that the tabernacle or the ark of the covenant was
to be found at Bochim. In any place where the Lord appeared to His
people, sacrifices might be offered to Him (see [Jdg
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#020), [Jdg
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#026), [Jdg
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#028); [Jdg
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#016).; [Sa2
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#025), and the commentary of [Deu
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)). On the other hand, it does
follow from the sacrifice at Bochim, where there was no sanctuary of
Jehovah, that the person who appeared to the people was not a prophet,
nor even an ordinary angel, but the angel of the Lord, who is
essentially one with Jehovah.

[Judges 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 2:6</span></span>

The account of this development of the covenant nation, which commenced
after the death of Joshua and his contemporaries, is attached to the
book of Joshua by a simple repetition of the closing verses of that book
([Jos 24:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#028)) in [Jdg
2:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006), with a few unimportant
differences, not only to form a link between Josha and [Jdg
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011), and to resume the thread of the
history which was broken off by the summary just given of the results of
the wars between the Israelites and Canaanites (Bertheau), but rather to
bring out sharply and clearly the contrast between the age that was past
and the period of the Israelitish history that was just about to
commence. The vav consec. attached to וישׁלּח expresses the order of
thought and not of time. The apostasy of the new generation from the
Lord ([Jdg 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010).) was a necessary
consequence of the attitude of Israel to the Canaanites who were left in
the land, as described in Judg 1:1-2:5. This thought is indicated by the
vav consec. in וישׁלּח; so that the meaning of [Jdg
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006). as expressed in our ordinary
phraseology would be as follows: Now when Joshua had dismissed the
people, and the children of Israel had gone every one to his own
inheritance to take possession of the land, the people served the Lord
as long as Joshua and the elders who survived him were alive; but when
Joshua was dead, and that generation (which was contemporaneous with
him) had been gathered to its fathers, there rose up another generation
after them which knew not the Lord, and also (knew not) the work which
He had done to Israel. On the death and burial of Joshua, see at [Jos
24:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029). "Gathered unto their
fathers" corresponds to "gathered to his people" in the Pentateuch ([Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008), [Gen
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017); [Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029); [Gen
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029), [Gen
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033), etc.: see at [Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008)). They "knew not the Lord," sc.,
from seeing or experiencing His wonderful deeds, which the
contemporaries of Joshua and Moses had seen and experienced.

In the general survey of the times of the judges, commencing at [Jdg
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011), the falling away of the
Israelites from the Lord is mentioned first of all, and at the same time
it is distinctly shown how neither the chastisements inflicted upon them
by God at the hands of hostile nations, nor the sending of judges to set
them free from the hostile oppression, availed to turn them from their
idolatry ([Jdg 2:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011)). This is
followed by the determination of God to tempt and chastise the sinful
nation by not driving away the remaining Canaanites ([Jdg
2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020)); and lastly, the account
concludes with an enumeration of the tribes that still remained, and the
attitude of Israel towards them ([Jdg
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)).

[Judges 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 2:11</span></span>

Repeated Falling Away of the People from the Lord. - [Jdg
2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011). The Israelites did what was
evil in the eyes of the Lord (what was displeasing to the Lord); they
served Baalim. The plural Baalim is a general term employed to denote
all false deities, and is synonymous with the expression "other gods" in
the clause "other gods of the gods of the nations round about them" (the
Israelites). This use of the term Baalim arose from the fact that Baal
was the chief male deity of the Canaanites and all the nations of Hither
Asia, and was simply worshipped by the different nations with peculiar
modifications, and therefore designated by various distinctive epithets.
In [Jdg 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#012) this apostasy is more
minutely described as forsaking Jehovah the God of their fathers, to
whom they were indebted for the greatest blessing, viz., their
deliverance out of Egypt, and following other gods of the heathen
nations that were round about them (taken verbatim from [Deu
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#014), and [Deu
13:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#007)), and worshipping them. In this
way they provoked the Lord to anger (cf. [Deu
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#025); [Deu
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018), etc.).

[Judges 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 2:13</span></span>

Thus they forsook Jehovah, and served Baal and the Asthartes. In this
case the singular Baal is connected with the plural Ashtaroth, because
the male deities of all the Canaanitish nations, and those that bordered
upon Canaan, were in their nature one and the same deity, viz., Baal, a
sun-god, and as such the vehicle and source of physical life, and of the
generative and reproductive power of nature, which was regarded as an
effluence from its own being (see Movers, Relig. der Phnizier, pp.
184ff., and J. G. Mller in Herzog's Cyclopaedia). "Ashtaroth, from the
singular Ashtoreth, which only occurs again in [Kg1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005), [Kg1
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033), and [Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013), in connection with the Sidonian
Astharte, was the general name used to denote the leading female deity
of the Canaanitish tribes, a moon-goddess, who was worshipped as the
feminine principle of nature embodied in the pure moon-light, and its
influence upon terrestrial life. It corresponded to the Greek Aphrodite,
whose celebrated temple at Askalon is described in Herod. i. 105. In
[Jdg 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007), Asheroth is used as
equivalent to Ashtaroth, which is used here, [Jdg
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006); [Sa1
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004); [Sa1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#010). The name Asheroth

(Note: Rendered groves in the English version. - Tr.)

was transferred to the deity itself from the idols of this goddess,
which generally consisted of wooden columns, and are called Asherim in
[Exo 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#013); [Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005); [Deu
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003); [Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021). On the other hand, the word
Ashtoreth is without any traceable etymology in the Semitic dialects,
and was probably derived from Upper Asia, being connected with a Persian
word signifying a star, and synonymous with Ἀστροάρχη, the star-queen of
Sabaeism (see Ges. Thes. pp. 1083-4; Movers, p. 606; and Mller, ut
sup.).

With regard to the nature of the Baal and Astharte worship, into which
the Israelites fell not long after the death of Joshua, and in which
they continued henceforth to sink deeper and deeper, it is evident form
the more precise allusions contained in the history of Gideon, that it
did not consist of direct opposition to the worship of Jehovah, or
involve any formal rejection of Jehovah, but that it was simply an
admixture of the worship of Jehovah with the heathen or Canaanitish
nature-worship. Not only was the ephod which Gideon caused to be made in
his native town of Ophrah, and after which all Israel went a whoring
([Jdg 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#027)), an imitation of the high
priest's ephod in the worship of Jehovah; but the worship of Baal-berith
at Shechem, after which the Israelites went a whoring again when Gideon
was dead ([Jdg 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#033)), was simply a
corruption of the worship of Jehovah, in which Baal was put in the place
of Jehovah and worshipped in a similar way, as we may clearly see from
[Jdg 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#027). The worship of Jehovah
could even be outwardly continued in connection with this idolatrous
worship. Just as in the case of these nations in the midst of which the
Israelites lived, the mutual recognition of their different deities and
religions was manifested in the fact that they all called their supreme
deity by the same name, Baal, and simply adopted some other epithet by
which to define the distinctive peculiarities of each; so the Israelites
also imagined that they could worship the Baals of the powerful nations
round about them along with Jehovah their covenant God, especially if
they worshipped them in the same manner as their covenant God. This will
serve to explain the rapid and constantly repeated falling away of the
Israelites from Jehovah into Baal-worship, at the very time when the
worship of Jehovah was stedfastly continued at the tabernacle in
accordance with the commands of the law. The Israelites simply followed
the lead and example of their heathen neighbours. Just as the heathen
were tolerant with regard to the recognition of the deities of other
nations, and did not refuse to extend this recognition even to Jehovah
the God of Israel, so the Israelites were also tolerant towards the
Baals of the neighbouring nations, whose sensuous nature-worship was
more grateful to the corrupt heart of man than the spiritual
Jehovah-religion, with its solemn demands for sanctification of life.
But this syncretism, which was not only reconcilable with polytheism,
but actually rooted in its very nature, was altogether irreconcilable
with the nature of true religion. For if Jehovah is the only true God,
and there are no other gods besides or beside Him, then the purity and
holiness of His nature is not only disturbed, but altogether distorted,
by any admixture of His worship with the worship of idols or of the
objects of nature, the true God being turned into an idol, and Jehovah
degraded into Baal. Looking closely into the matter, therefore, the
mixture of the Canaanitish worship of Baal with the worship of Jehovah
was actually forsaking Jehovah and serving other gods, as the prophetic
author of this book pronounces it. It was just the same with the worship
of Baal in the kingdom of the ten tribes, which was condemned by the
prophets Hosea and Amos (see Hengstenberg, Christology, i. pp. 168ff.,
Eng. trans.).

[Judges 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 2:14</span></span>

On account of this idolatrous worship, the anger of the Lord burned
against Israel, so that He gave them up into the hands of spoilers that
spoiled them, and sold them into the hands of their enemies. שׁסים from
שׁסה, alternated with שׁסס in ישׁסּוּ, to plunder. This word is not met
with in the Pentateuch, whereas מכר, to sell, occurs in [Deu
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030), in the sense of giving
helplessly up to the foe. "They could no longer stand before their
enemies," as they had done under Joshua, and in fact as long as Israel
continued faithful to the Lord; so that now, instead of the promise
contained in [Lev 26:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#007), being
fulfilled, the threat contained in [Lev
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#017) was carried into execution.
"Whithersoever they went out," i.e., in every expedition, every attack
that they made upon their enemies, "the hand of Jehovah was against them
for evil, as He had said" ([Lev 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#017),
[Lev 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036); [Deu
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025)), and "had sworn unto them."
There is no express oath mentioned either in Lev 26 or Deut 28; it is
implied therefore in the nature of the case, or in virtute verborum, as
Seb. Schmidt affirms, inasmuch as the threats themselves were words of
the true and holy God. מאד להם ויּצר, "and it became to them very
narrow," i.e., they came into great straits.

[Judges 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 2:16</span></span>

But the Lord did not rest content with this. He did still more. "He
raised up judges who delivered them out of the hand of their
plunderers," to excite them to love in return by this manifestation of
His love and mercy, and to induce them to repent. But "they did not
hearken even to their judges," namely, so as not to fall back again into
idolatry, which the judge had endeavoured to suppress. This limitation
of the words is supported by the context, viz., by a comparison of [Jdg
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#018), [Jdg
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#019). - "But (כּי after a negative
clause) they went a whoring after other gods (for the application of
this expression to the spiritual adultery of idolatrous worship, see
[Exo 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015)), and turned quickly away
(vid., [Exo 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#008)) from the way which
their fathers walked in, to hearken to the commandments of the Lord,"
i.e., from the way of obedience to the divine commands. "They did not
so" (or what was right) sc., as their fathers under Joshua had done (cf.
[Jdg 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007)).

[Judges 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 2:18</span></span>

"And when the Lord raised them up judges, and was with the judge, and
delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the
judge (i.e., as long as the judge was living), because the Lord had
compassion upon their sighing, by reason of them that oppressed them,
and vexed them (דּחק only occurs again as a verb in [Joe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#008)): it came to pass when the judge
was dead, that they returned and acted more corruptly than their
fathers," i.e., they turned again to idolatry even more grievously than
their fathers had done under the previous judges. "They did not let fall
from their deeds," i.e., they did not cease from their evil deeds, and
"from their stiff-necked way." קשׁה, hard, is to be understood as in
[Exo 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009) and [Exo
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003), where Israel is called a
hard-necked people which did not bend under obedience to the
commandments of God.

[Judges 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 2:20</span></span>

Chastisement of the Rebellious Nation. - [Jdg
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020), [Jdg
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#021). On account of this idolatry,
which was not only constantly repeated, but continued to grow worse and
worse, the anger of the Lord burned so fiercely against Israel, that He
determined to destroy no more of the nations which Joshua had left when
he died, before the people that had broken His covenant. In order to set
forth this divine purpose most distinctly, it is thrown into the form of
a sentence uttered by God through the expression וגו ויּאמר. The Lord
said, "Because this people has transgressed my covenant, ... I also will
no longer keep my covenant promise ([Exo
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#023), [Exo
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027)., [Exo
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#010).), and will no more drive out
any of the remaining Canaanites before them" (see [Jos
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013)).

[Judges 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 2:22</span></span>

The purpose of God in this resolution was "to prove Israel through them
(the tribes that were not exterminated), whether they (the Israelites)
would keep the way of the Lord to walk therein (cf. [Deu
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)), as their fathers did keep it, or
not." נסּות למען is not dependent upon the verb עזב, as Studer supposes,
which yields no fitting sense; nor can the clause be separated from the
preceding one, as Bertheau suggests, and connected as a protasis with
[Jdg 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#023) (this would be a thoroughly
unnatural construction, for which [Isa
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#004) does not furnish any true
parallel); but the clause is attached in the simplest possible manner to
the main thought in [Jdg 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020), [Jdg
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#021), that is to say, to the words
"and He said" in [Jdg 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020) : Jehovah
said, i.e., resolved, that He would not exterminate the remaining
nations any further, to tempt Israel through them. The plural בּם, in
the place of the singular בּהּ, which the foregoing דּרך requires, is to
be regarded as a constructio ad sensum, i.e., to be attributed to the
fact, that keeping the way of God really consists in observing the
commandments of God, and that this was the thought which floated before
the writer's mind. The thought expressed in this verse, that Jehovah
would not exterminate the Canaanites before Israel any more, to try them
whether they would keep His commandments, just as He had previously
caused the people whom He brought out of Egypt to wander in the
wilderness for forty years with the very same intention ([Deu
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)), is not at variance with the
design of God, expressed in [Exo
23:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#029), and [Deu
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#022), not to exterminate the
Canaanites all at once, lest the land should become waste, and the wild
beasts multiply therein, nor yet with the motive assigned in [Jdg
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001). For the determination not to
exterminate the Canaanite sin one single year, was a different thing
from the purpose of God to suspend their gradual extermination
altogether. The former purpose had immediate regard to the well-being of
Israel; the latter, on the contrary, was primarily intended as a
chastisement for its transgression of the covenants, although even this
chastisement was intended to lead the rebellious nation to repentance,
and promote its prosperity by a true conversion to the Lord. And the
motive assigned in [Jdg 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#002) is in
perfect harmony with this intention, as our explanation of this passage
will clearly show.

[Judges 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 2:23</span></span>

In consequence of this resolution, the Lord let these tribes (those
mentioned in [Jdg 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003)) remain at rest,
i.e., quietly, in the land, without exterminating them rapidly. The
expression מהר, hastily, quickly, i.e., according to the distinct words
of the following clause, through and under Joshua, appears strange after
what has gone before. For what is threatened in [Jdg
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#021) is not the suspension of rapid
extermination, but of any further extermination. This threat, therefore,
is so far limited by the word "hastily," as to signify that the Lord
would not exterminate any more of these nations so long as Israel
persisted in its idolatry. But as soon as and whenever Israel returned
to the Lord its God in true repentance, to keep His covenant, the Lord
would recall His threat, and let the promised extermination of the
Canaanites go forward again. Had Israel not forsaken the Lord its God so
soon after Joshua's death, the Lord would have exterminated the
Canaanites who were left in the land much sooner than He did, or have
carried out their gradual extermination in a much shorter time than was
actually the case, in consequence of the continual idolatry of the
people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 3](jdg003)

</div>
