<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg020)  [Next](rut000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 21:0</span></span>

Preservation of the Tribe of Benjamin - The Remnant Provided with Wives
- Judges 21

Through the extraordinary severity with which the tribes of Israel had
carried on the war against Benjamin, this tribe had been reduced to 600
men, and thus brought very near to extermination. Such a conclusion to
the sanguinary conflict went to the heart of the congregation. For
although, when forming the resolution to punish the unparalleled
wickedness of the inhabitants of Gibeah with all the severity of the
law, they had been urged on by nothing else than the sacred duty that
was binding upon them to root out the evil from their midst, and
although the war against the whole tribe of Benjamin was justified by
the fact that they had taken the side of the culprits, and had even
received the approval of the Lord; there is no doubt that in the
performance of this resolution, and the war that was actually carried
on, feelings of personal revenge had disturbed the righteous cause in
consequence of the defeat which they had twice sustained at the hands of
the Benjaminites, and had carried away the warriors into a war of
extermination which was neither commanded by the law nor justified by
the circumstances, and had brought about the destruction of a whole
tribe from the twelve tribes of the covenant nation with the exception
of a small vanishing remnant. When the rash deed was done, the
congregation began most bitterly to repent. And with repentance there
was awakened the feeling of brotherly love, and also a sense of duty to
provide for the continuance of the tribe, which had been brought so near
to destruction, by finding wives for those who remained, in order that
the small remnant might grow into a vigorous tribe again.

[Judges 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 21:1</span></span>

The proposal to find wives for the six hundred Benjaminites who remained
was exposed to this difficulty, that the congregation had sworn at
Mizpeh (as is supplemented in [Jdg
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001) to the account in [Jdg
20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)) that no one should give his
daughter to a Benjaminite as a wife.

[Jdg 21:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#002)

After the termination of the war, the people, i.e., the people who had
assembled together for the war (see [Jdg
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#009)), went again to Bethel (see at
[Jdg 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018), [Jdg
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026)), to weep there for a day before
God at the serious loss which the war had brought upon the congregation.
Then they uttered this lamentation: "Why, O Lord God of Israel, is this
come to pass in Israel, that a tribe is missing to-day from Israel?"
This lamentation involved the wish that God might show them the way to
avert the threatened destruction of the missing tribe, and build up the
six hundred who remained. To give a practical expression to this wish,
they built an altar the next morning, and offered burnt-offerings and
supplicatory offerings upon it (see at [Jdg
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026)), knowing as they did that their
proposal would not succeed without reconciliation to the Lord, and a
return to the fellowship of His grace. There is something apparently
strange in the erection of an altar at Bethel, since sacrifices had
already been offered there during the war itself ([Jdg
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026)), and this could not have taken
place without an altar. Why it was erected again, or another one built,
is a question which cannot be answered with any certainty. It is
possible, however, that the first was not large enough for the number of
sacrifices that had to be offered now.

[Jdg 21:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005)

The congregation then resolved upon a plan, through the execution of
which a number of virgins were secured for the Benjaminites. They
determined that they would carry out the great oath, which had been
uttered when the national assembly was called against such as did not
appear, upon that one of the tribes of Israel which had not come to the
meeting of the congregation at Mizpeh. The deliberations upon this point
were opened ([Jdg 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005)) with the
question, "Who is he who did not come up to the meeting of all the
tribes of Israel, to Jehovah?" In explanation of this question, it is
observed at [Jdg 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005), "For the great
oath was uttered upon him that came not up to Jehovah to Mizpeh: he
shall be put to death." We learn from this supplementary remark, that
when important meetings of the congregation were called, all the members
were bound by an oath to appear. The meeting at Mizpeh is the one
mentioned in [Jdg 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001). The "great
oath" consisted in the threat of death in the case of any that were
disobedient. To this explanation of the question in [Jdg
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#005), the further explanation is added
in [Jdg 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#006), [Jdg
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#007), that the Israelites felt
compassion for Benjamin, and wished to avert its entire destruction by
procuring wives for such as remained. The word ויּנּחמוּ in [Jdg
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#006) is attached to the explanatory
clause in [Jdg 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005), and is to be
rendered as a pluperfect: "And the children of Israel had shown
themselves compassionate towards their brother Benjamin, and said, A
tribe is cut off from Israel to-day; what shall we do to them, to those
that remain with regard to wives, as we have sworn?" etc. (compare [Jdg
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)). The two thoughts, - (1) the
oath that those who had not come to Mizpeh should be punished with death
([Jdg 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005)), and (2) anxiety for the
preservation of this tribe which sprang from compassion towards
Benjamin, and was shown in their endeavour to provide such as remained
with wives, without violating the oath that none of them would give them
their own daughters as wives, - formed the two factors which determined
the course to be adopted by the congregation. After the statement of
these two circumstances, the question of [Jdg
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005), "Who is the one (only one) of
the tribes of Israel which," etc., is resumed and answered: "Behold,
there came no one into the camp from Jabesh in Gilead, into the
assembly." שׁבטי is used in [Jdg 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#008),
[Jdg 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005), in a more general sense, as
denoting not merely the tribes as such, but the several subdivisions of
the tribes.

[Jdg 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#009)

In order, however, to confirm the correctness of this answer, which
might possibly have been founded upon a superficial and erroneous
observation, the whole of the (assembled) people were mustered, and not
one of the inhabitants of Jabesh was found there (in the national
assembly at Bethel). The situation of Jabesh in Gilead has not yet been
ascertained. This town was closely besieged by the Ammonite Nahash, and
was relieved by Saul ([Sa1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001).), on
which account the inhabitants afterwards showed themselves grateful to
Saul ([Sa1 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008).). Josephus calls
Jabesh the metropolis of Gilead (Ant. vi. 5, 1). According to the Onom.
(s. v. Jabis), it was six Roman miles from Pella, upon the top of a
mountain towards Gerasa. Robinson (Bibl. Res. p. 320) supposes it to be
the ruins of ed Deir in the Wady Jabes.

[Jdg 21:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#010)

To punish this unlawful conduct, the congregation sent 12,000 brave
fighting men against Jabesh, with orders to smite the inhabitants of the
town with the edge of the sword, together with their wives, and
children, but also with the more precise instructions ([Jdg
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#011)), "to ban all the men, and women
who had known the lying with man" (i.e., to slay them as exposed to
death, which implied, on the other hand, that virgins who had not lain
with any man should be spared). The fighting men found 400 such virgins
in Jabesh, and brought them to the camp at Shiloh in the land of Canaan.
אותם ([Jdg 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#012)) refers to the
virgins, the masculine being used as the more common genus in the place
of the feminine. Shiloh, with the additional clause "in the land of
Canaan," which was occasioned by the antithesis Jabesh in Gilead, as in
[Jos 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#002); [Jos
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009), was the usual meeting-place of
the congregation, on account of its being the seat of the tabernacle.
The representatives of the congregation had moved thither, after the
deliberations concerning Jabesh, which were still connected with the war
against Benjamin, were concluded.

[Jdg 21:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#013)

The congregation then sent to call the Benjaminites, who had taken
refuge upon the rock Rimmon, and gave them as wives, when they returned
(sc., into their own possessions), the 400 virgins of Jabesh who had
been preserved alive. "But so they sufficed them not" (כּן, so, i.e., in
their existing number, 400: Bertheau). In this remark there is an
allusion to what follows.

[Judges 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 21:15</span></span>

Of the six hundred Benjaminites who had escaped, there still remained
two hundred to be provided with wives. To these the congregation gave
permission to take wives by force at a festival at Shiloh. The account
of this is once more introduced, with a description of the anxiety felt
by the congregation for the continuance of the tribe of Benjamin. [Jdg
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#015), [Jdg
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#016), and [Jdg
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#018) are only a repetition of [Jdg
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#006) and [Jdg
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#007), with a slight change of
expression. The "breach (perez) in the tribes of Israel" had arisen from
the almost complete extermination of Benjamin. "For out of Benjamin is
(every) woman destroyed," viz., by the ruthless slaughter of the whole
of the people of that tribe ([Jdg
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048)). Consequently the Benjaminites
who were still unmarried could not find any wives in their own tribe.
The fact that four hundred of the Benjaminites who remained were already
provided with wives is not noticed here, because it has been stated just
before, and of course none of them could give up their own wives to
others.

[Judges 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 21:17</span></span>

Still Benjamin must be preserved as a tribe. The elders therefore said,
"Possession of the saved shall be for Benjamin," i.e., the tribe-land of
Benjamin shall remain an independent possession for the Benjaminites who
have escaped the massacre, so that a tribe may not be destroyed out of
Israel. It was necessary therefore, that they should take steps to help
the remaining Benjaminites to wives. The other tribes could not give
them their daughters, on account of the oath which has already been
mentioned in [Jdg 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001) and [Jdg
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#007) and is repeated here ([Jdg
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#018)). Consequently there was hardly
any other course open, than to let the Benjaminites seize upon wives for
themselves. And the elders lent them a helping hand by offering them
this advice, that at the next yearly festival at Shiloh, at which the
daughters of Shiloh carried on dances in the open air (outside the
town), they should seize upon wives for themselves from among these
daughters, and promising them that when the thing was accomplished they
would adjust it peaceably ([Jdg
21:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019)). The "feast of Jehovah,"
which the Israelites kept from year to year, was one of the three great
annual festivals, probably one which lasted seven days, either the
passover or the feast of tabernacles-most likely the former, as the
dances of the daughters of Shiloh were apparently an imitation of the
dances of the Israelitish women at the Red Sea under the superintendence
of Miriam ([Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)). The minute
description of the situation of Shiloh ([Jdg
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019)), viz., "to the north of Bethel,
on the east of the road which rises from Bethel to Shechem, and on the
south of Lebonah" (the present village of Lubban, on the north-west of
Seilun: see Rob. Pal. iii. p. 89), serves to throw light upon the scene
which follows, i.e., to show how the situation of Shiloh was peculiarly
fitted for the carrying out of the advice given to the Benjaminites;
since, as soon as they had issued from their hiding-places in the
vineyards at Shiloh, and seized upon the dancing virgins, they could
easily escape into their own land by the neighbouring high-road which
led from Bethel to Shechem, without being arrested by the citizens of
Shiloh.

[Judges 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 21:20</span></span>

The Kethibh ויצו in the singular may be explained on the ground that one
of the elders spoke and gave the advice in the name of the others. חטף
in [Jdg 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#021) and [Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009), to seize hold of, or carry off
as prey = חתף.

[Judges 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 21:22</span></span>

"And when the fathers or brethren of the virgins carried off, come to us
to chide with us, we (the elders) will say to them (in your name),
Present them to us (אותם as in [Jdg
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#012)); for we did not receive every
one his wife through the war (with Jabesh); for ye have not given them
to them; how would ye be guilty." The words "Present them to us," etc.,
are to be understood as spoken in the name of the Benjaminites, who were
accused of the raid, to the relatives of the virgins who brought the
complaint. This explains the use of the pronoun in the first person in
חנּוּנוּ and לקחנוּ, which must not be altered therefore into the third
person.

(Note: One circumstance which is decisive against this alteration of the
text, is, that the Seventy had the Masoretic text before them, and
founded their translation upon it (ἐλεήσατε ἡμῖν αυτάς, ὅτι οὐκ ἐλάβομεν
ἀνὴρ γυναῖκα αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ). The different rendering of Jerome
given in the Vulgate - miseremini eorum! non enim rapuerunt eas jure
bellantium atque victorum - is nothing but an unfortunate and
unsuccessful attempt to get rid of the difficulties connected with the
readings in the text.)

The two clauses commencing with כּי are co-ordinate, and contain two
points serving to enforce the request, "Present them," etc. The first is
pleaded in the name of the Benjaminites; the second is adduced, as a
general ground on the part of the elders of the congregation, to pacify
the fathers and brothers making the complaint, on account of the oath
which the Israelites had taken, that none of them would give their
daughters as wives to the Benjaminites. The meaning is the following: Ye
may have your daughters with the Benjaminites who have taken them by
force, for ye have not given them voluntarily, so as to have broken your
oath by so doing. In the last clause כּעת has an unusual meaning: "at
the time" (or now), i.e., in that case, ye would have been guilty, viz.,
if ye had given them voluntarily.

[Judges 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 21:23</span></span>

The Benjaminites adopted this advice. They took to themselves wives
according to their number, i.e., two hundred (according to [Jdg
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#012), compared with [Jdg
20:47](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#047)), whom they caught from the
dancing daughters of Shiloh, and returned with them into their
inheritance, where they rebuilt the towns that had been reduced to
ashes, and dwelt therein.

[Judges 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 21:24</span></span>

In [Jdg 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#024) and [Jdg
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#025), the account of this event is
brought to a close with a twofold remark: (1) that the children of
Israel, i.e., the representatives of the congregation who were assembled
at Shiloh, separated and returned every man into his inheritance to his
tribe and family; (2) that at that time there was no king in Israel, and
every man was accustomed to do what was right in his own eyes. Whether
the fathers or brothers of the virgins who had been carried off brought
any complaint before the congregation concerning the raid that had been
committed, the writer does not state, simply because this was of no
moment so far as the history was concerned, inasmuch as, according to
[Jdg 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#022), the complaint made no
difference in the facts themselves.

(Note: "No doubt the fathers and brothers of the virgins demanded them
both from the Benjaminites themselves, and also from the elders of
Israel, or at any rate petitioned that the Benjaminites might be
punished: but the elders replied as they had said that they should; and
the persons concerned were satisfied with the answer, and so the affair
was brought to a peaceable termination." - Seb. Schmidt.)

With the closing remark in [Jdg 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#025),
however, with which the account returns to its commencement in [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001), the prophetic historian sums up
his judgment upon the history in the words, "At that time every man did
what was right in his own eyes, because there was no king in Israel," in
which the idea is implied, that under the government of a king, who
administered right and justice in the kingdom, such things could not
possibly have happened. This not only refers to the conduct of the
Israelites towards Benjamin in the war, the severity of which was not to
be justified, but also to their conduct towards the inhabitants of
Jabesh, as described in [Jdg 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005). The
congregation had no doubt a perfect right, when all the people were
summoned to deliberate upon important matters affecting the welfare of
the whole nation, to utter the "great oath" against such as failed to
appear, i.e., to threaten them with death and carry out this threat upon
such as were obstinate; but such a punishment as this could only be
justly inflicted upon persons who were really guilty, and had rebelled
against the congregation as the supreme power, and could not be extended
to women and children unless they had also committed a crime deserving
of death. But even if there were peculiar circumstances in the case
before us, which have been passed over by our author, who restricts
himself simply to points bearing upon the main purpose of the history,
but which rendered it necessary that the ban should be inflicted upon
all the inhabitants of Jabesh, it was at any rate an arbitrary exemption
to spare all the marriageable virgins, and one which could not be
justified by the object contemplated, however laudable that object might
be. This also applies to the oath taken by the people, that they would
not give any of their daughters as wives to the Benjaminites, as well as
to the advice given by the elders to the remaining two hundred, to carry
off virgins from the festival at Shiloh. However just and laudable the
moral indignation may have been, which was expressed in that oath by the
nation generally at the scandalous crime of the Gibeites, a crime
unparalleled in Israel, and at the favour shown to the culprits by the
tribe of Benjamin, the oath itself was an act of rashness, in which
there was not only an utter denial of brotherly love, but the bounds of
justice were broken through. When the elders of the nation came to a
better state of mind, they ought to have acknowledge their rashness
openly, and freed themselves and the nation from an oath that had been
taken in such sinful haste. "Wherefore they would have acted far more
uprightly, if they had seriously confessed their fault and asked
forgiveness of God, and given permission to the Benjaminites to marry
freely. In this way there would have been no necessity to cut off the
inhabitants of Jabesh from their midst by cruelty of another kind"
(Buddeus). But if they felt themselves bound in their consciences to
keep the oath inviolably, they ought to have commended the matter to the
Lord in prayer, and left it to His decision; whereas, by the advice
given to the Benjaminites, they had indeed kept the oath in the letter,
but had treated it in deed and truth as having no validity whatever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Introduction](rut000)

</div>
