<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg016)  [Next](jdg018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 17:0</span></span>

III\. Image-Worship of Micah and the Danites; Infamous Conduct of the
Inhabitants of Gibeah; Vengeance Taken upon the Tribe of Benjamin -
Judges 17-21

The death of Samson closes the body of the book of Judges, which sets
forth the history of the people of Israel under the judges in a
continuous and connected form. The two accounts, which follow in Judg
17-21, of the facts mentioned in the heading are attached to the book of
Judges in the form of appendices, as the facts in question not only
belonged to the times of the judges, and in fact to the very
commencement of those times, but furnished valuable materials for
forming a correct idea of the actual character of this portion of the
Israelitish history. The first appendix (Judg 17-18), - viz., the
account of the introduction of image-worship, or of the worship of
Jehovah under the form of a molten image, by the Ephraimite Micah, and
of the seizure of this image by the Danites, who emigrated form their
own territory when upon their march northwards, and the removal of it to
the city of Laish-Dan, which was conquered by them, - shows us how
shortly after the death of Joshua the inclination to an idolatrous
worship of Jehovah manifested itself in the nation, and how this
worship, which continued for a long time in the north of the land, was
mixed up from the very beginning with sin and unrighteousness. The
second (Judg 19-21)-viz., the account of the infamous act which the
inhabitants of Gibeah attempted to commit upon the Levite who stayed
there for the night, and which they actually did perform upon his
concubine, together with its consequences, viz., the war of vengeance
upon the tribe of Benjamin, which protected the criminals, - proves, on
the one hand, what deep roots the moral corruptions of the Canaanites
had struck among the Israelites at a very early period, and, on the
other hand, how even at that time the congregation of Israel as a whole
had kept itself free and pure, and, mindful of its calling to be the
holy nation of God, had endeavoured with all its power to root out the
corruption that had already forced its way into the midst of it.

These two occurrences have no actual connection with one another, but
they are both of them narrated in a very elaborate and circumstantial
manner; and in both of them we not only find Israel still without a king
([Jdg 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#006); [Jdg
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001), and [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001); [Jdg
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#025)), and the will of God sought by
a priest or by the high priest himself ([Jdg
18:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#005); [Jdg
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018), [Jdg
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#023), [Jdg
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#027)), but the same style of
narrative is adopted as a whole, particularly the custom of throwing
light upon the historical course of events by the introduction of
circumstantial clauses, from which we may draw the conclusion that they
were written by the same author. On the other hand, they do not contain
any such characteristic marks as could furnish a certain basis for
well-founded conjectures concerning the author, or raise Bertheau's
conjecture, that he was the same person as the author of Judg 1:1-2:5,
into a probability. For the frequent use of the perfect with ו (compare
[Jdg 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#017), [Jdg
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#033), [Jdg
20:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#037), [Jdg
20:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040), [Jdg
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048); [Jdg
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001), [Jdg
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#015), with [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008), [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016), [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021), [Jdg
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#025), etc.) can be fully explained
from the contents themselves; and the notion that the perfect is used
here more frequently for the historical imperfect with vav consec. rests
upon a misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the passages in
question. The other and not very numerous expressions, which are common
to Judg 17-21 and Judg 1, are not sufficiently characteristic to supply
the proof required, as they are also met with elsewhere: see, for
example, בּאשׁ שׁלּח ([Jdg 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008); [Jdg
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048)), which not only occurs again in
[Kg2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#012) and [Psa
74:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#007), but does not even occur in both
the appendices, בּאשׁ שׂרף being used instead in [Jdg
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027). So much, however, may
unquestionably be gathered from the exactness and circumstantiality of
the history, viz., that the first recorder of these events, whose
account was the source employed by the author of our book, cannot have
lived at a time very remote from the occurrences themselves. On the
other hand, there are not sufficient grounds for the conjecture that
these appendices were not attached to the book of the Judges till a
later age. For it can neither be maintained that the object of the first
appendix was to show how the image-worship which Jeroboam set up in his
kingdom at Bethel and Dan had a most pernicious origin, and sprang from
the image-worship of the Ephraimite Micah, which the Danites had
established at Laish, nor that the object of the second appendix was to
prove that the origin of the pre-Davidic kingdom (of Saul) was sinful
and untheocratic, i.e., opposed to the spirit and nature of the kingdom
of God, as Auberlen affirms (Theol. Stud. u. Kr. 1860). The identity of
the golden calf set up by Jeroboam at Dan with the image of Jehovah that
was stolen by the Danites from Micah the Ephraimite and set up in
Laish-Dan, is precluded by the statement in [Jdg
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031) respecting the length of time
that this image-worship continued in Dan (see the commentary on the
passage itself). At the most, therefore, we can only maintain, with O.
v. Gerlach, that "both (appendices) set forth, according to the
intention of the author, the misery which arose during the wild
unsettled period of the judges from the want of a governing, regal
authority." This is hinted at in the remark, which occurs in both
appendices, that at that time there was no king in Israel, and every one
did what was right in his own eyes ([Jdg
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#006); [Jdg
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#025)). This remark, on the other
hand, altogether excludes the time of the falling away of the ten
tribes, and the decline of the later kingdom, and is irreconcilable with
the assumption that these appendices were not added to the book of the
Judges till after the division of the kingdom, or not till the time of
the Assyrian or Babylonian captivity.

[Judges 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 17:1</span></span>

[Jdg 17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001)

A man of the mountains of Ephraim named Micah (מיכיהוּ, [Jdg
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001), [Jdg
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#004), when contracted into מיכה, [Jdg
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#005), [Jdg
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#008), etc.), who set up this worship
for himself, and "respecting whom the Scriptures do not think it worth
while to add the name of his father, or to mention the family from which
he sprang" (Berleb. Bible), had stolen 1100 shekels of silver (about
135) from his mother. This is very apparent from the words which he
spoke to his mother (v. 2): "The thousand and hundred shekels of silver
which were taken from thee (the singular לקּח refers to the silver),
about which thou cursedst and spakest of also in mine ears (i.e., didst
so utter the curse that among others I also heard it), behold, this
silver is with me; I have taken it." אלה, to swear, used to denote a
malediction or curse (cf. אלה קול, [Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)). He seems to have been impelled
to make this confession by the fear of his mother's curse. But his
mother praised him for it, - "Blessed be my son of Jehovah," - partly
because she saw in it a proof that there still existed a germ of the
fear of God, but in all probability chiefly because she was about to
dedicate the silver to Jehovah; for, when her son had given it back to
her, she said (v. 3), "I have sanctified the silver to the Lord from my
hand for my son, to make an image and molten work." The perfect
הקדּשׁתּי is not to be taken in the sense of the pluperfect, "I had
sanctified it," but is expressive of an act just performed: I have
sanctified it, I declare herewith that I do sanctify it. "And now I give
it back to thee," namely, to appropriate to thy house of God.

[Jdg 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#004)

Hereupon-namely, when her son had given her back the silver ("he
restored the silver unto his mother" is only a repetition of [Jdg
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#003), introduced as a link with which
to connect the appropriation of the silver)-the mother took 200 shekels
and gave them to the goldsmith, who made an image and molten work of
them, which were henceforth in Micah's house. The 200 shekels were not
quite the fifth part of the whole. What she did with the rest is not
stated; but from the fact that she dedicated the silver generally, i.e.,
the whole amount, to Jehovah, according to [Jdg
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#003), we may infer that she applied
the remainder to the maintenance of the image-worship.

(Note: There is no foundation for Bertheau's opinion, that the 200
shekels were no part of the 1100, but the trespass-money paid by the son
when he gave his mother back the money that he had purloined, since,
according to [Lev 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005), when a thief
restored to the owner any stolen property, he was to add the fifth of
its value. There is no ground for applying this law to the case before
us, simply because the taking of the money by the son is not even
described as a theft, whilst the mother really praises her son for his
open confession.)

Pesel and massecah (image and molten work) are joined together, as in
[Deu 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015). The difference between the
two words in this instance is very difficult to determine. Pesel
signifies an idolatrous image, whether made of wood or metal. Massecah,
on the other hand, signifies a cast, something poured; and when used in
the singular, is almost exclusively restricted to the calf cast by Aaron
or Jeroboam. It is generally connected with עגל, but it is used in the
same sense without this definition (e.g., [Deu
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012)). This makes the conjecture a
very natural one, that the two words together might simply denote a
likeness of Jehovah, and, judging from the occurrence at Sinai, a
representation of Jehovah in the form of a molten calf. But there is one
obstacle in the way of such a conjecture, namely, that in [Jdg
18:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#017), massecah is separated from
pesel, so as necessarily to suggest the idea of two distinct objects.
But as we can hardly suppose that Micah's mother had two images of
Jehovah made, and that Micah had both of them set up in his house of
God, no other explanation seems possible than that the massecah was
something belonging to the pesel, or image of Jehovah, but yet distinct
from it-in other words, that it was the pedestal upon which it stood.
The pesel was at any rate the principal thing, as we may clearly infer
from the fact that it is placed in the front rank among the four objects
of Micah's sanctuary, which the Danites took with them ([Jdg
18:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#017)), and that in [Jdg
18:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030), the pesel alone is mentioned
in connection with the setting up of the image-worship in Dan. Moreover,
there can hardly be any doubt that pesel, as a representation of
Jehovah, was an image of a bull, like the golden calf which Aaron had
made at Sinai ([Exo 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)), and the
golden calves which Jeroboam set up in the kingdom of Israel, and one of
which was set up in Dan ([Kg1 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#029)).

[Jdg 17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#005)

His mother did this, because her son Micah had a house of God, and had
had an ephod and teraphim made for himself, and one of his sons
consecrated to officiate there as a priest. מיכה האישׁ (the man Micah)
is therefore placed at the head absolutely, and is connected with what
follows by לו: "As for the man Micah, there was to him (he had) a house
of God." The whole verse is a circumstantial clause explanatory of what
precedes, and the following verbs ויּעשׂ, וימלּא, and ויהי, are simply a
continuation of the first clause, and therefore to be rendered as
pluperfects. Micah's beth Elohim (house of God) was a domestic temple
belonging to Micah's house, according to [Jdg
18:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#015). את־יד מלּא, to fill the
hand, i.e., to invest with the priesthood, to institute as priest (see
at [Lev 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#037)). The ephod was an
imitation of the high priest's shoulder-dress (see at [Jdg
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#027)). The teraphim were images of
household gods, penates, who were worshipped as the givers of earthly
prosperity, and as oracles (see at [Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)). - In [Jdg
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#006) it is observed, in explanation of
this unlawful conduct, that at that time there was no king in Israel,
and every one did what was right in his own eyes.

[Jdg 17:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007)

Appointment of a Levite as Priest. - [Jdg
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007). In the absence of a Levitical
priest, Micah had first of all appointed one of his sons as priest at
his sanctuary. He afterwards found a Levite for this service. A young
man from Bethlehem in Judah, of the family of Judah, who, being a
Levite, stayed (גּר) there (in Bethlehem) as a stranger, left this town
to sojourn "at the place which he should find," sc., as a place that
would afford him shelter and support, and came up to the mountains of
Ephraim to Micah's house, "making his journey," i.e., upon his journey.
(On the use of the inf. constr. with ל in the sense of the Latin gerund
in do, see Ewald, 280, d.) Bethlehem was not a Levitical town. The young
Levite from Bethlehem was neither born there nor made a citizen of the
place, but simply "sojourned there," i.e., dwelt there temporarily as a
stranger. The further statement as to his descent (mishpachath Judah) is
not to be understood as signifying that he was a descendant of some
family in the tribe of Judah, but simply that he belonged to the Levites
who dwelt in the tribe of Judah, and were reckoned in all civil matters
as belonging to that tribe. On the division of the land, it is true that
it was only to the priests that dwelling-places were allotted in the
inheritance of this tribe ([Jos
21:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#009)), whilst the rest of the
Levites, even the non-priestly members of the family of Kohath, received
their dwelling-places among the other tribes ([Jos
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#020).). At the same time, as many of
the towns which were allotted to the different tribes remained for a
long time in the possession of the Canaanites, and the Israelites did
not enter at once into the full and undisputed possession of their
inheritance, it might easily so happen that different towns which were
allotted to the Levites remained in possession of the Canaanites, and
consequently that the Levites were compelled to seek a settlement in
other places. It might also happen that individuals among the Levites
themselves, who were disinclined to perform the service assigned them by
the law, would remove from the Levitical towns and seek some other
occupation elsewhere (see also at [Jdg
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030)).

(Note: There is no reason, therefore, for pronouncing the words יהוּדה
ממּשׁפּחת (of the family of Judah) a gloss, and erasing them from the
text, as Houbigant proposes. The omission of them from the Cod. Vat. of
the lxx, and from the Syriac, is not enough to warrant this, as they
occur in the Cod. Al. of the lxx, and their absence from the authorities
mentioned may easily be accounted for from the difficulty which was felt
in explaining their meaning. On the other hand, it is impossible to
imagine any reason for the interpolation of such a gloss into the text.)

[Judges 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 17:10</span></span>

Micah made this proposal to the Levite: "Dwell with me, and become my
father and priest; I will give thee ten shekels of silver yearly, and
fitting out with clothes and maintenance." אב, father, is an honourable
title give to a priest as a paternal friend and spiritual adviser, and
is also used with reference to prophets in [Kg2
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#021) and [Kg2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014), and applied to Joseph in [Gen
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#008). ליּמים, for the days, sc., for
which a person was engaged, i.e., for the year (cf. [Sa1
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#007), and [Lev
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029)). "And the Levite went," i.e.,
went to Micah's house. This meaning is evident from the context. The
repetition of the subject, "the Levite," precludes our connecting it
with the following verb ויּואל. - In [Jdg
17:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#011) the result is summed up. The
Levite resolved (see at [Deu 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005)) to
dwell with Micah, who treated him as one of his sons, and entrusted him
with the priesthood at his house of God. And Micah rejoiced that he had
got a Levite as priest, and said, "Now I know that Jehovah will prosper
me." This belief, or, to speak more correctly, superstition, for which
Micah was very speedily to atone, proves that at that time the tribe of
Levi held the position assigned it in the law of Moses; that is to say,
that it was regarded as the tribe elected by God for the performance of
divine worship.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 18](jdg018)

</div>
