<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg014)  [Next](jdg016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

[Judges 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 15:1</span></span>

Further Acts of Samson. - [Jdg 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001).
His Revenge upon the Philistines. - [Jdg
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001).

Some time after, Samson visited his wife in the time of the wheat
harvest with a kid-a customary present at that time ([Gen
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#017))-and wished to go into the
chamber (the women's apartment) to her; but her father would not allow
him, and said, "I thought thou hatedst her, and therefore gave her to
thy friend ([Jdg 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#020)): behold her
younger sister is fairer than she; let her be thine in her stead."

[Judges 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 15:3</span></span>

Enraged at this answer, Samson said to them (i.e., to her father and
those around him), "Now am I blameless before the Philistines, if I do
evil to them." נקּה with מן, to be innocent away from a person, i.e.,
before him (see [Num 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#022)). Samson
regarded the treatment which he had received from his father-in-law as
but one effect of the disposition of the Philistines generally towards
the Israelites, and therefore resolved to avenge the wrong which he had
received from one member of the Philistines upon the whole nation, or at
all events upon the whole of the city of Timnath.

[Judges 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 15:4</span></span>

He therefore went and caught three hundred shualim, i.e., jackals,
animals which resemble foxes and are therefore frequently classed among
the foxes even by the common Arabs of the present day (see Niebuhr,
Beschr. v. Arab. p. 166). Their European name is derived from the
Persian schaghal. These animals, which are still found in great
quantities at Joppa, Gaza, and in Galilee, herd together, and may easily
be caught (see Rosenmller, Bibl. Althk. iv. 2, pp. 155ff.). He then took
torches, turned tail to tail, i.e., coupled the jackals together by
their tails, putting a torch between the two tails, set the torches on
fire, and made the animals run into the fields of standing corn
belonging to the Philistines. Then he burned "from the shocks of wheat
to the standing grain and to the olive gardens," i.e., the shocks of
wheat as well as the standing corn and the olive plantations. זית מרךּ
are joined together in the construct state.

[Judges 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 15:6</span></span>

The Philistines found out at once, that Samson had done them this injury
because his father-in-law, the Timnite, had taken away his wife and
given her to his companion. They therefore avenged themselves by burning
her and her father-probably by burning his house down to the ground,
with its occupants within it-an act of barbarity and cruelty which fully
justified Samson's war upon them.

[Judges 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 15:7</span></span>

Samson therefore declared to them, "If ye do such things, truly (כּי)
when I have avenged myself upon you, then will I cease," i.e., I will
not cease till I have taken vengeance upon you.

[Judges 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 15:8</span></span>

"Then he smote them hip and thigh (lit. 'thigh upon hip;' על as in [Gen
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#012)), a great slaughter." שׁוק,
thigh, strengthened by על־ירך, is a second accusative governed by the
verb, and added to define the word אותם more minutely, in the sense of
"on hip and thigh;" whilst the expression which follows, גדולה מכּה, is
added as an adverbial accusative to strengthen the verb ויּך. Smiting
hip and thigh is a proverbial expression for a cruel, unsparing
slaughter, like the German "cutting arm and leg in two," or the Arabic
"war in thigh fashion" (see Bertheau in loc.). After smiting the
Philistines, Samson went down and dwelt in the cleft of the rock Etam.
There is a town of Etam mentioned in [Ch2
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#006), between Bethlehem and Tekoah,
which was fortified by Rehoboam, and stood in all probability to the
south of Jerusalem, upon the mountains of Judah. But this Etam, which
Robinson (Pal. ii. 168) supposes to be the village of Urtas, a place
still inhabited, though lying in ruins, is not to be thought of here, as
the Philistines did not go up to the mountains of Judah ([Jdg
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#009)), as Bertheau imagines, but
simply came forward and encamped in Judah. The Etam of this verse is
mentioned in [Ch1 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#032), along with Ain
Rimmon and other Simeonitish towns, and is to be sought for on the
border of the Negeb and of the mountains of Judah, in the neighbourhood
of Khuweilifeh (see V. de Velde, Mem. p. 311). The expression "he went
down" suits this place very well, but not the Etam on the mountains of
Judah, to which he would have had to go up, and not down, from Timnath.

[Judges 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 15:9</span></span>

Samson is delivered up to the Philistines, and smites them with the
jaw-bone of an Ass.

[Jdg 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#009)

The Philistines came ("went up," denoting the advance of an army: see at
[Jos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001)) to avenge themselves for the
defeat they had sustained from Samson; and having encamped in Judah,
spread themselves out in Lechi (Lehi). Lechi (לחי, in pause לחי, i.e., a
jaw), which is probably mentioned again in [Sa2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011), and, according to [Jdg
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#017), received the name of
Ramath-lechi from Samson himself, cannot be traced with any certainty,
as the early church tradition respecting the place is utterly worthless.
Van de Velde imagines that it is to be found in the flattened rocky hill
el Lechieh, or Lekieh, upon which an ancient fortification has been
discovered, in the middle of the road from Tell Khewelfeh to Beersheba,
at the south-western approach of the mountains of Judah.

[Jdg 15:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#010)

When the Judaeans learned what was the object of this invasion on the
part of the Philistines, three thousand of them went down to the cleft
in the rock Etam, to bind Samson and deliver him up to the Philistines.
Instead of recognising in Samson a deliverer whom the Lord had raised up
for them, and crowding round him that they might smite their oppressors
with his help and drive them out of the land, the men of Judah were so
degraded, that they cast this reproach at Samson: "Knowest thou not that
the Philistines rule over us? Wherefore hast thou done this (the deed
described in [Jdg 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#008))? We have come
down to bind thee, and deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines."
Samson replied, "Swear to me that ye will not fall upon me yourselves."
פּגע with בּ, to thrust at a person, fall upon him, including in this
case, according to [Jdg 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#013), the
intention of killing.

[Jdg 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#013)

When they promised him this, he let them bind him with two new cords and
lead him up (into the camp of the Philistines) out of the rock (i.e.,
the cleft of the rock).

[Jdg 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#014)

But when he came to Lechi, and the Philistines shouted with joy as they
came to meet him, the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, "and the cords on
his arms became like two that had been burnt with fire, and his fetters
melted from his hands." The description rises up to a poetical
parallelism, to depict the triumph which Samson celebrated over the
Philistines in the power of the Spirit of Jehovah.

[Jdg 15:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#015)

As soon as he was relieved of his bands, he seized upon a fresh jaw-bone
of an ass, which he found there, and smote therewith a thousand men. He
himself commemorated this victory in a short poetical strain ([Jdg
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#016)): "With the ass's jaw-bone a
heap, two heaps; with the ass's jaw-bone I smote a thousand men." The
form of the word חמור = חמר is chosen on account of the resemblance to
חמור, and is found again at [Sa1
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#020). How Samson achieved this
victory is not minutely described. But the words "a heap, two heaps,"
point to the conclusion that it did not take place in one encounter, but
in several. The supernatural strength with which Samson rent asunder the
fetters bound upon him, when the Philistines thought they had him safely
in their power, filled them with fear and awe as before a superior
being, so that they fled, and he pursued them, smiting one heap after
another, as he overtook them, with an ass's jaw-bone which he found in
the way. The number given, viz., a thousand, is of course a round number
signifying a very great multitude, and has been adopted from the song
into the historical account.

[Jdg 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#017)

When he had given utterance to his saying, he threw the jaw-bone away,
and called the place Ramath-lechi, i.e., the jaw-bone height. This seems
to indicate that the name Lechi in [Jdg
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#009) is used proleptically, and that
the place first received its name from this deed of Samson.

[Judges 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 15:18</span></span>

The pursuit of the Philistines, however, and the conflict with them, had
exhausted Samson, so that he was very thirsty, and feared that he might
die from exhaustion; for it was about the time of the wheat-harvest
([Jdg 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)), and therefore hot summer
weather. Then he called to the Lord, "Thou hast through (בּיד) "Thy
servant given this great deliverance; and now I shall die for thirst,
and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised!" From this prayer we may
see that Samson was fully conscious that he was fighting for the cause
of the Lord. And the Lord helped him out of this trouble. God split the
hollow place at Lechi, so that water came out of it, as at Horeb and
Kadesh ([Exo 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006), and [Num
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#008), [Num
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#011)). The word מכתּשׁ, which is used
in [Pro 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022) to signify a mortar, is
explained by rabbinical expositors as denoting the socket of the teeth,
or the hollow place in which the teeth are fixed, like the Greek
ὁλμίσκος, mortariolum, according to Pollux, Onom. ii. c. 4, 21.
Accordingly many have understood the statement made here, as meaning
that God caused a fountain to flow miraculously out of the socket of a
tooth in the jaw-bone which Samson had thrown away, and thus provided
for his thirst. This view is the one upon which Luther's rendering, "God
split a tooth in the jaw, so that water came out," is founded, and is
has been voluminously defended by Bochart (Hieroz. l. ii. c. 15). But
the expression בּלּחי אשׁר, "the maktesh which is at Lechi," is opposed
to this view, since the tooth-socket in the jaw-bone of the ass would be
simply called הלּחי מכתּשׁ or בּלּחי מכתּשׁ; and so is also the remark
that this fountain was still in existence in the historian's own time.
And the article proves nothing to the contrary, as many proper names are
written with it (see Ewald, 277, c.). Consequently we must follow
Josephus (Ant. v. 8), who takes המּכתּשׁ as the name given to the
opening of the rock, which was cleft by God to let water flow out. "If a
rocky precipice bore the name of jaw-bone (lechi) on account of its
shape, it was a natural consequence of this figurative epithet, that the
name tooth-hollow should be given to a hole or gap in the rock"
(Studer). Moreover, the same name, Maktesh, occurs again in [Zep
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011), where it is applied to a
locality in or near Jerusalem. The hollow place was split by Elohim,
although it was to Jehovah that Samson had prayed, to indicate that the
miracle was wrought by God as the Creator and Lord of nature. Samson
drank, and his spirit returned, so that he revived again. Hence the
fountain received the name of En-hakkore, "the crier's well which is at
Lechi," unto this day. According to the accents, the last clause does
not belong to בּלּחי (in Lechi), but to וגו קרא (he called, etc.). It
received the name given to it unto this day. This implies, of course,
that the spring itself was in existence when our book was composed. - In
[Jdg 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#020) the account of the judicial
labours of Samson are brought to a close, with the remark that Samson
judged Israel in the days of the Philistines, i.e., during their rule,
for twenty years. What more is recorded of him in Judg 16 relates to his
fall and ruin; and although even in this he avenged himself upon the
Philistines, he procured no further deliverance for Israel. It is
impossible to draw any critical conclusions from the position in which
this remark occurs, as to a plurality of sources for the history of
Samson.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 16](jdg016)

</div>
