<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg004)  [Next](jdg006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 5:0</span></span>

Deborah's Song of Victory - Judges 5

This highly poetical song is so direct and lively an utterance of the
mighty force of the enthusiasm awakened by the exaltation of Israel, and
its victory over Sisera, that its genuineness if generally admitted now.
After a general summons to praise the Lord for the courage with which
the people rose up to fight against their foes ([Jdg
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002)), Deborah the singer dilates in
the first section ([Jdg 5:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#003)) upon
the significance of the victory, picturing in lively colours (1) the
glorious times when Israel was exalted to be the nation of the Lord
([Jdg 5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#003)); (2) the disgraceful
decline of the nation in the more recent times ([Jdg
5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)); and (3) the joyful turn of
affairs which followed her appearance ([Jdg
5:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009)). After a fresh summons to
rejoice in their victory ([Jdg 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)),
there follows in the second section ([Jdg
5:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013)) a lively picture of the
conflict and victory, in which there is a vivid description (a) of the
mighty gathering of the brave to battle ([Jdg
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013)); (b) of the cowardice of
those who stayed away from the battle, and of the bravery with which the
braver warriors risked their lives in the battle ([Jdg
5:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015)); and (c) of the successful
result of the conflict ([Jdg 5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019)).
To this there is appended in the third section ([Jdg
5:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)) an account of the glorious
issue of the battle and the victory: first of all, a brief notice of the
flight and pursuit of the foe ([Jdg
5:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)); secondly, a commemoration of
the slaying of Sisera by Jael ([Jdg
5:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024)); and thirdly, a scornful
description of the disappointment of Sisera's mother, who was counting
upon a large arrival of booty ([Jdg
5:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028)). The song then closes with
the hope, founded upon this victory, that all the enemies of the Lord
might perish, and Israel increase in strength ([Jdg
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031)). The whole song, therefore, is
divided into three leading sections, each of which again is arranged in
three somewhat unequal strophes, the first and second sections being
introduced by a summons to the praise of God ([Jdg
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002), [Jdg
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)), whilst the third closes with an
expression of hope, drawn from the contents of the whole, with regard to
the future prospects of the kingdom of God ([Jdg
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031)).

[Judges 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 5:1</span></span>

The historical introduction ("Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of
Abinoam on that day, saying") takes the place of a heading, and does not
mean that the song of Deborah and Barak which follows was composed by
them jointly, but simply that it was sung by them together, in
commemoration of the victory. The poetess or writer of the song,
according to [Jdg 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#003), [Jdg
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007), and [Jdg
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012), was Deborah. The song itself
opens with a summons to praise the Lord for the willing and joyful
rising up of His people.

[Judges 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 5:2</span></span>

2 That the strong in Israel showed themselves strong,

That the people willingly offered themselves,

Praise ye the Lord!

The meaning of פּרע and פּרעות is a subject of dispute. According to the
Septuagint rendering, and that of Theodot., ἐν τῷ ἄρξασθαι ἀρχηγοὺς ἐν
Ἰσραήλ, many give it the meaning to begin or to lead, and endeavour to
establish this meaning from an Arabic word signifying to find one's self
at the head of an affair. But this meaning cannot be established in
Hebrew. פּרע has no other meaning than to let loose from something, to
let a person loose or free (see at [Lev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006)); and in the only other passage
where פּרעות occurs ([Deu 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042)), it
does not refer to a leader, but to the luxuriant growth of the hair as
the sign of great strength. Hence in this passage also פּרעות literally
means comati, the hairy ones, i.e., those who possessed strength; and
פּרע, to manifest or put forth strength. The persons referred to are the
champions in the fight, who went before the nation with strength and
bravery. The preposition בּ before פּרע indicates the reason for
praising God, or rather the object with which the praise of the Lord was
connected. וגו בּפרע, literally "in the showing themselves strong." The
meaning is, "for the fact that the strong in Israel put forth strength."
התנדּב, to prove one's self willing, here to go into the battle of their
own free will, without any outward and authoritative command. This
introduction transports us in the most striking manner into the time of
the judges, when Israel had no king who could summon the nation to war,
but everything depended upon the voluntary rising of the strong and the
will of the nation at large. The manifestation of this strength and
willingness Deborah praises as a gracious gift of the Lord. After this
summons to praise the Lord, the first part of the song opens with an
appeal to the kings and princes of the earth to hear what Deborah has to
proclaim to the praise of God.

[Judges 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 5:3</span></span>

3 Hear, ye kings; give ear, ye princes!

I, to the Lord will I sing,

Will sing praise to the Lord, the God of Israel.

4 Lord, when Thou wentest out from Seir,

When Thou marchedst out of the fields of Edom,

The earth trembled, and the heavens also dropped;

The clouds also dropped water.

5 The mountains shook before the Lord,

Sinai there before the Lord, the God of Israel.

The "kings and princes" are not the rulers in Israel, for Israel had no
kings at that time, but the kings and princes of the heathen nations, as
in [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002). These were to discern the
mighty acts of Jehovah in Israel, and learn to fear Jehovah as the
almighty God. For the song to be sung applies to Him, the God of Israel.
זמּר, ψάλλειν, is the technical expression for singing with an
instrumental accompaniment (see at [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)).

[Judges 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 5:4</span></span>

To give the Lord the glory for the victory which had been gained through
His omnipotent help over the powerful army of Sisera, and to fill the
heathen with fear of Jehovah, and the Israelites with love and
confidence towards Him, the singer reverts to the terribly glorious
manifestation of Jehovah in the olden time, when Israel was accepted as
the nation of God (Ex 19). Just as Moses in his blessing ([Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)) referred the tribes of Israel to
this mighty act, as the source of all salvation and blessing for Israel,
so the prophetess Deborah makes the praise of this glorious
manifestation of God the starting-point of her praise of the great
grace, which Jehovah as the faithful covenant God had displayed to His
people in her own days. The tacit allusion to Moses' blessing is very
unmistakeable. But whereas Moses describes the descent of the Lord upon
Sinai (Ex 19), according to its gracious significance in relation to the
tribes of Israel, as an objective fact (Jehovah came from Sinai, [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)), Deborah clothes the remembrance
of it in the form of an address to God, to bring out the thought that
the help which Israel had just experienced was a renewal of the coming
of the Lord to His people. Jehovah's going out of Seir, and marching out
of the fields of Edom, is to be interpreted in the same sense as His
rising up from Seir ([Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)). As
the descent of the Lord upon Sinai is depicted there as a rising of the
sun from the east, so the same descent in a black cloud amidst thunder,
lightning, fire, and vapour of smoke ([Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018)), is represented here with
direct allusion to these phenomena as a storm rising up from Seir in the
east, in which the Lord advanced to meet His people as they came from
the west to Sinai. Before the Lord, who came down upon Sinai in the
storm and darkness of the cloud, the earth shook and the heaven dropped,
or, as it is afterwards more definitely explained, the clouds dropped
with water, emptied themselves of their abundance of water as they do in
the case of a storm. The mountains shook (נזלוּ, Niphal of זלל, dropping
the reduplication of the ל = נזלּוּ, [Isa
63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019); [Isa
64:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#002)), even the strong rocky mountain
of Sinai, which stood out so distinctly before the eyes of the singer,
that she speaks of it as "this Sinai," pointing to it as though it were
locally near. David's description of the miraculous guidance of Israel
through the desert in [Psa 68:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008), is
evidently founded upon this passage, though it by no means follows from
this that the passage before us also treats of the journey through the
desert, as Clericus supposes, or even of the presence of the Lord in the
battle with Sisera, and the victory which it secured. But greatly as
Israel had been exalted at Sinai by the Lord its God, it had fallen just
as deeply into bondage to its oppressors through its own sins, until
Deborah arose to help it ([Jdg 5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)).

[Judges 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 5:6</span></span>

6 In the days of Shamgar, the son of Anath,

In the days of Jael, the paths kept holiday,

And the wanderers of the paths went crooked ways.

7 The towns in Israel kept holiday, they kept holiday,

Until that I, Deborah, arose,

That I arose a mother in Israel

8 They chose new gods;

Then was war at the gates:

Was there a shield seen and a spear

Among forty thousand in Israel?

The deep degradation and disgrace into which Israel had sunk before the
appearance of Deborah, through its falling away from the Lord into
idolatry, forms the dark reverse of that glorification at Sinai.
Although, after Ehud, Shamgar had also brought help to the people
against their enemies by a victory over the Philistines ([Jdg
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)), and although Jael, who proved
herself a heroine by slaying the fugitive Sisera, was then alive, things
had got to such a pitch with Israel, that no one would venture upon the
public high roads. There are no good grounds for the conjecture that
Jael was a different person from the Jael mentioned in [Jdg
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017)., whether a judge who is not
further known, as Ewald supposes, or a female judge who stood at the
head of the nation in these unhappy times (Bertheau). ארחות חדלוּ, lit.,
"the paths ceased," sc., to be paths, or to be trodden by men. נתיבות
הלכי, "those who went upon paths," or beaten ways, i.e., those who were
obliged to undertake journeys for the purpose of friendly intercourse or
trade, notwithstanding the burden of foreign rule which pressed upon the
land; such persons went by "twisted paths," i.e., by roads and
circuitous routes which turned away from the high roads. And the פּרזון,
i.e., the cultivated land, with its open towns and villages, and with
their inhabitants, was as forsaken and desolate as the public highways.
The word perazon has been rendered judge or guidance by modern
expositors, after the example of Teller and Gesenius; and in [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011) decision or guidance. But this
meaning, which has been adopted into all the more recent lexicons, has
nothing really to support it, and does not even suit our verse, into
which it would introduce the strange contradiction, that at the time
when Shamgar and Jael were judges, there were no judges in Israel. In
addition to the Septuagint version, which renders the word δυνατοὶ in
this verse (i.e., according to the Cod. Vat., for the Col. Al. has
φράζων), and then in the most unmeaning way adopts the rendering αὔξησον
in [Jdg 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011), from which we may
clearly see that the translators did not know the meaning of the word,
it is common to adduce an Arabic word which signifies segregavit,
discrevit rem ab aliis, though it is impossible to prove that the Arabic
word ever had the meaning to judge or to lead. All the old translators,
as well as the Rabbins, have based their rendering of the word upon
פּרזי, inhabitant of the flat country ([Deu
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005), and [Sa1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018)), and פּרזות, the open flat
country, as distinguished from the towns surrounded by walls ([Eze
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011); [Zac
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)), according to which פּרזון, as
the place of meeting, would denote both the cultivated land with its
unenclosed towns and villages, and also the population that was settled
in the open country in unfortified places-a meaning which also lies at
the foundation of the word in [Hab
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#014). Accordingly, Luther has rendered
the word Bauern (peasants). שׁקּמתּי עד for קמתּי אשׁר עד. The
contraction of אשׁר into שׁ, with Dagesh following, and generally
pointed with Seghol, but here with Patach on account of the ק, which is
closely related to the gutturals, belongs to the popular character of
the song, and is therefore also found in the Song of Solomon ([Jdg
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#012); [Jdg
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007), [Jdg
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#017); [Jdg
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006)). It is also met with here and
there in simple prose ([Jdg 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#017); [Jdg
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#012); [Jdg
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#026)); but it was only in the
literature of the time of the captivity and a still later date, that it
found its way more and more from the language of ordinary conversation
into that of the Scriptures. Deborah describes herself as "a mother in
Israel," on account of her having watched over her people with maternal
care, just as Job calls himself a father to the poor who had been
supported by him ([Job 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#016); cf. [Isa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#021)).

[Judges 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 5:8</span></span>

[Jdg 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#008) describes the cause of the
misery into which Israel had fallen. חדשׁים אלהים is the object to יבחר,
and the subject is to be found in the previous term Israel. Israel
forsook its God and creator, and chose new gods, i.e., gods not
worshipped by its fathers (vid., [Deu
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)). Then there was war (לחם, the
construct state of לחם, a verbal noun formed from the Piel, and
signifying conflict or war) at the gates; i.e., the enemy pressed up to
the very gates of the Israelitish towns, and besieged them, and there
was not seen a shield or spear among forty thousand in Israel, i.e.,
there were no warriors found in Israel who ventured to defend the land
against the foe. אם indicates a question with a negative reply assumed,
as in [Kg1 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#027), etc. Shield and spear
(or lance) are mentioned particularly as arms of offence and defence, to
signify arms of all kinds. The words are not to be explained from [Sa1
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#022), as signifying that there were
no longer any weapons to be found among the Israelites, because the
enemy had taken them away ("not seen" is not equivalent to "not found"
in [Sa1 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#022)); they simply affirm
that there were no longer any weapons to be seen, because not one of the
40,000 men in Israel took a weapon in his hand. The number 40,000 is not
the number of the men who offered themselves willingly for battle,
according to [Jdg 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002) (Bertheau); for
apart from the fact that they did not go unarmed into the battle, it is
at variance with the statement in [Jdg
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006), [Jdg
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#010), that Barak went into the war and
smote the enemy with only 10,000 men. It is a round number, i.e., an
approximative statement of the number of the warriors who might have
smitten the enemy and delivered Israel from bondage, and was probably
chosen with a reference to the 40,000 fighting men of the tribes on the
east of the Jordan, who went with Joshua to Canaan and helped their
brethren to conquer the land ([Jos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013)). Most of the more recent
expositors have given a different rendering of [Jdg
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#008). Many of them render the first
clause according to the Peshito and Vulgate, "God chose something new,"
taking Elohim as the subject, and chadashim (new) as the object. But to
this it has very properly been objected, that, according to the terms of
the song, it was not Elohim but Jehovah who effected the deliverance of
Israel, and that the Hebrew for new things is not חדשׁים, but חדשׁות
([Isa 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#009); [Isa
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#006)), or חדשׁה ([Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019); [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022)). On these grounds Ewald and
Bertheau render Elohim "judges" (they chose new judges), and appeal to
[Exo 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); [Exo
22:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007), where the authorities who
administered justice in the name of God are called Elohim. But these
passages are not sufficient by themselves to establish the meaning
"judges," and still less to establish the rendering "new judges" for
Elohim chadashim. Moreover, according to both these explanations, the
next clause must be understood as relating to the specially courageous
conflict which the Israelites in their enthusiasm carried on with
Sisera; whereas the further statement, that among 40,000 warriors who
offered themselves willingly for battle there was not a shield or a
lance to be seen, is irreconcilably at variance with this. For the
explanation suggested, namely, that these warriors did not possess the
ordinary weapons for a well-conducted engagement, but had nothing but
bows and swords, or instead of weapons of any kind had only the staffs
and tools of shepherds and husbandmen, is proved to be untenable by the
simple fact that there is nothing at all to indicate any contrast
between ordinary and extraordinary weapons, and that such a contrast is
altogether foreign to the context. Moreover, the fact appealed to, that
אז points to a victorious conflict in [Jdg
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013), [Jdg
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019), [Jdg
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022), as well as in [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011), is not strong enough to support
the view in question, as אז is employed in [Jdg
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019) in connection with the battle of
the kings of Canaan, which was not a successful one, but terminated in a
defeat.

The singer now turns from the contemplation of the deep degradation of
Israel to the glorious change which took place as soon as she appeared:
-

[Judges 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 5:9</span></span>

9 My heart inclines to the leaders of Israel;

To those who offered themselves willingly in the nation. Praise ye the
Lord!

10 Ye that ride upon white asses;

Ye that sit upon covering,

And that walk in the way, reflect!

11 With the voice of the archers among drawers (of water),

There praise ye the righteous acts of the Lord,

The righteous acts of His villages in Israel.

Then the people of the Lord went down to the gates!

We must supply the subst. verb in connection with ל לבּי, "My heart is
(sc., inclined) towards the leaders of Israel," i.e., feels itself drawn
towards them. הוקק for מהוקק ([Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014)), the determining one, i.e., the
commander or leader in war: as in [Deu
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#021). The leaders and willing ones
are first of all to praise the Lord for having crowned their willingness
with victory.

[Judges 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 5:10</span></span>

And all classes of the people, both high and low, have reason to join in
the praise. Those who ride upon white, i.e., white-spotted asses, are
the upper classes generally, and not merely the leaders (cf. [Jdg
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004); [Jdg
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#014)). צהר, lit. dazzling white; but
since there are no asses that are perfectly white, and white was a
colour that was highly valued both by Hebrews and Arabs, they applied
the term white to those that were only spotted with white. Those who sit
upon coverings (מדּין from מד, a covering or carpet, with the plural
termination ין, which is to be regarded as a poetical Chaldaism) are the
rich and prosperous; and those who walk on the way, i.e., travellers on
foot, represent the middle and lower classes, who have to go about and
attend to their affairs. Considered logically, this triple division of
the nation is not a very exact one, as the first two do not form a true
antithesis. But the want of exactness does not warrant our fusing
together the middle term and the first, and understanding by middin
either saddles or saddle-cloths, as Ewald and Bertheau have done; for
saddle-cloths are still further from forming an antithesis to asses, so
that those who ride upon white asses could be distinguished, as the
upper classes and leaders, from those who sit upon saddles, or are
"somewhat richer." Moreover, there is no reason for regarding these
three classes as referring simply to the long line of warriors hastening
from the victory to the triumphal fte. On the contrary, all classes of
the people are addressed, as enjoying the fruits of the victory that had
been obtained: the upper classes, who ride upon their costly animals;
the rich resting at home upon their splendid carpets; and the poor
travellers, who can now go quietly along the high-road again without
fear of interruption from the foe ([Jdg
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)). שׂיחוּ is rendered "sing" by
many; but this rendering cannot be sustained from [Psa
105:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#002) and [Psa
145:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#005), and it is not necessary on the
verse before us, since the well-established meaning of the word
"ponder," reflect, sc., upon the acts of the Lord, is a perfectly
suitable one.

[Judges 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 5:11</span></span>

The whole nation had good reason to make this reflection, as the
warriors, having returned home, were now relating the mighty acts of the
Lord among the women who were watering their flocks, and the people had
returned to their towns once more. This is in all probability the idea
of the obscure verse before us, which has been interpreted in such very
different ways. The first clause, which has no verb, and cannot
constitute a sentence by itself, must be connected with the following
clause, and taken as an anakolouthon, as יתנּוּ שׁם does not form a
direct continuation of the clause commencing with מקּול. After the words
"from the voice of the archers," we should expect the continuation
"there is heard," or "there sounds forth the praise of the acts of the
Lord." Instead of that, the construction that was commenced is
relinquished at יתנּוּ שׁם, and a different turn is given to the
thought. This not only seems to offer the simplest explanation, but the
only possible solution of the difficulty. For the explanation that מן is
to be taken as signifying "away from," as in [Num
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024), etc., in the sense of "far from
the voice of the archers, among the watering women," does not suit the
following word שׁם, "there," at all. It would be necessary to attribute
to מן the meaning "no more disquieted by," a meaning which the
preposition could not possibly have in this clause. מחצצים are not
sharers in the booty, for חצץ simply means to cut, to cut in pieces, to
divide, and is never applied to the sharing of booty, for which חלּק is
the word used (vid., [Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030); [Psa
68:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013); [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)). מחצּץ is to be regarded, as the
Rabbins maintain, as a denom. from חץ, to hold an arrow, signifying
therefore the shooter of an arrow. It was probably a natural thing for
Deborah, who dwelt in Benjamin, to mention the archers as
representatives of warriors generally, since this was the principal
weapon employed by the Benjaminites (see [Ch1
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#040); [Ch1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002); [Ch2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007); [Ch2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#017)). The tarrying of the warriors
among the drawers of water, where the flocks and herds were being
watered, points to the time of peace, when the warriors were again
occupied with their civil and domestic affairs. יתנּוּ is a simple
aorist. תּנּה, lit. to repeat, then to relate, or praise. "The
righteousness of Jehovah," i.e., the marvellous acts of the Lord in and
upon Israel for the accomplishing of His purposes of salvation, in which
the righteousness of His work upon earth was manifested (cf. [Sa1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#007); [Mic
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005)). פּרזונו צדקות has been rendered
by modern expositors, either "the righteous acts of His guidance or of
His decision" (Ewald and Bertheau), or "the righteous acts of His
commanders," or "the benefits towards His princes (leaders) in Israel"
(Ros. and others). But neither of these can be sustained. We must take
פּרזון here in just the same sense as in [Jdg
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007); the country covered with open
towns and villages, together with their inhabitants, whom Jehovah had
delivered from the hostile oppression that had rested upon them, by
means of the victory obtained over Sisera. After that victory the people
of the Lord went down again to their gates, from the mountains and
hiding-places in which they had taken refuge from their foes ([Jdg
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006), [Jdg
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007)), returning again to the plains of
the land, and the towns that were now delivered from the foe.

[Judges 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 5:12</span></span>

[Jdg 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012) forms the introduction to
the second part, viz., the description of the conflict and the victory.
Throwing herself into the great event which she is about to commemorate,
Deborah calls upon herself to strike up a song, and upon Barak to lead
off his prisoners:

12 Awake, awake, Deborah!

Awake, awake, utter a song!

Rise up, Barak, and lead captive thy captives, O son of Abinoam!

עוּרי has the tone upon the last syllable on the first two occasions, to
answer to the rapid summoning burst of the Lord in the opening address
(Bertheau). שׁבי שׁבה, to lead away captives, as the fruit of the
victory; not merely to lead in triumph. On the form וּשׁבה with
Chateph-patach, see Ewald, 90, b. In the next three strophes of this
part ([Jdg 5:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013)) the progress of
the conflict is described; and in the first two the part taken in the
battle by the different tribes ([Jdg
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013), and [Jdg
5:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015)).

[Judges 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 5:13</span></span>

13 Then came down a remnant of nobles of the nation;

Jehovah came down to me among the heroes.

14 Of Ephraim, whose root in Amalek;

Behind thee Benjamin among thy peoples.

From Machir came down leaders,

And from Zebulun marchers with the staff of the conductor.

15a And princes in Issachar with Deborah,

And Issachar as well as Barak,

Driven into the valley through his feet.

Looking back to the commencement of the battle, the poetess describes
the streaming of the brave men of the nation down from the mountains, to
fight the enemy with Barak and Deborah in the valley of Jezreel; though
the whole nation did not raise as one man against its oppressors, but
only a remnant of the noble and brave in the nation, with whom Jehovah
went into the battle. In [Jdg 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013) the
Masoretic pointing of ירד is connected with the rabbinical idea of the
word as the fut. apoc. of רדה: "then (now) will the remnant rule over
the glorious," i.e., the remnant left in Israel over the stately foe;
"Jehovah rules for me (or through me) over the heroes in Sisera's army,"
which Luther has also adopted. But, as Schnurr. has maintained, this
view is decidedly erroneous, inasmuch as it is altogether irreconcilable
with the description which follows of the marching of the tribes of
Israel into the battle. ירד is to be understood in the same sense as
ירדוּ in [Jdg 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014), and to be pointed
as a perfect ירד.

(Note: The Cod. Al. of the lxx contains the correct rendering, τότε
κατέβη κατάλειμμα. In the Targum also ירד is correctly translated נתת,
descendit, although the germs of the rabbinical interpretation are
contained in the paraphrase of the whole verse: tunc descendit unus ex
exercitu Israel et fregit fortitudinem fortium gentium. Ecce non ex
fortitudine manus eorum fuit hoc; sed Dominus fregit ante populum suum
fortitudinem virorum osorum eorum.)

"There came down," sc., from the mountains of the land into the plain of
Jezreel, a remnant of nobles. לאדּירים is used instead of a closer
subordination through the construct state, to bring out the idea of
שׂריד into greater prominence (see Ewald, 292). עם is in apposition to
לאדּירים, and not to be connected with the following word יהוה, as it is
by some, in opposition to the accents. The thought is rather this: with
the nobles or among the brave Jehovah himself went against the foe. לי
is a dat. commodi, equivalent to "for my joy."

[Judges 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 5:14</span></span>

"From (מנּי, poetical for מן) Ephraim," sc., there came fighting men;
not the whole tribe, but only nobles or brave men, and indeed those
whose roots were in Amalek, i.e., those who were rooted or had taken
root, i.e., had settled and spread themselves out upon the
tribe-territory of Ephraim, which had formerly been inhabited by
Amalekites, the mount of the Amalekites, mentioned in [Jdg
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#015) (for the figure itself, see [Isa
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006); [Psa
80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010), and [Job
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003)). "Behind thee," i.e., behind
Ephraim, there followed Benjamin among thy (Ephraim's) people (עממים, a
poetical form for עמּים, in the sense of hosts). Benjamin lived farther
south than Ephraim, and therefore, when looked at from the stand-point
of the plain of Jezreel, behind Ephraim; "but he came upon the scene of
battle, either in subordination to the more powerful Ephraimites, or
rushing on with the Ephraimitish hosts" (Bertheau). "From Machir," i.e.,
from western Manasseh, there came down leaders (see at [Jdg
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009)), sc., with warriors in their
train. Machir cannot refer to the Manassite family of Machir, to which
Moses gave the northern part of Gilead, and Bashan, for an inheritance
(comp. [Jos 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001) with [Jos
13:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#029)), but it stands poetically
for Manasseh generally, as Machir was the only son of Manasseh, from
whom all the Manassites were descended ([Gen
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#023); [Num
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#029)., [Num
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001)). The reference here, however, is
simply to that portion of the tribe of Manasseh which had received its
inheritance by the side of Ephraim, in the land to the west of the
Jordan. This explanation of the word is required, not only by the fact
that Machir is mentioned after Ephraim and Benjamin, and before Zebulun
and Issachar, but still more decidedly by the introduction of Gilead
beyond Jordan in connection with Reuben, in [Jdg
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017), which can only signify Gad and
eastern Manasseh. Hence the two names Machir and Gilead, the names of
Manasseh's son and grandson, are poetically employed to denote the two
halves of the tribe of Manasseh; Machir signifying the western
Manassites, and Gilead the eastern. "From Zebulun marchers (משׁך, to
approach in long processions, as in [Jdg
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006)) with the staff of the conductor."
ספר, writer or numberer, was the technical name given to the
musterer-general, whose duty it was to levy and muster the troops ([Kg2
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#019); cf. [Ch2
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#011)); here it denotes the military
leader generally.

[Judges 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 5:15</span></span>

שׂרי, "my princes," does not furnish any appropriate meaning, as neither
Deborah nor Barak was of the tribe of Issachar, and it is not stated
anywhere that the Issacharites gathered round Deborah as their leaders.
The reading שׂרי (stat. constr.), adopted by the old versions, must be
taken as the correct one, and the introduction of the preposition בּ
does not preclude this (compare בגּלבּע הרי, [Sa2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021), and Ewald, 289, b.). עם, which
is used to denote an outward equality, as in [Sa1
17:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#042), and is substantially the same
as the כּן which follows ("just as"), is construed without כּ in the
first clause, as in [Psa 48:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#006). בּעמק:
into the valley of Jezreel, the plain of Kishon. בּרגליו שׁלּח, as in
[Job 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008), to be sent off, i.e.,
incessantly impelled, through his feet; here it is applied to an
irresistible force of enthusiasm for the battle. The nominative to שׁלּח
is Issachar and Barak.

15b At the brooks of Reuben were great resolutions of heart.

16 Why remainest thou between the hurdles,

To hear the piping of the flocks?

At the brooks of Reuben were great projects of heart.

17 Gilead rests on the other side of the Jordan;

And Dan ... why tarries he by ships?

Asher sits on the shore of the sea,

And by his bays he reposes.

18 Zebulun, a people that despises its soul even to death,

And Naphtali upon the heights of the field.

In this strophe Deborah first of all mentions the tribes which took no
part in the conflict ([Jdg 5:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015)),
and then returns in [Jdg 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018) to the
Zebulunites, who staked their life along with Naphtali for the
deliverance of Israel from the yoke of the enemy. The enumeration of the
tribes who remained at a distance from the conflict commences with
Reuben ([Jdg 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015) and [Jdg
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#016)). In this tribe there did arise a
lively sympathy with the national elevation. They held meetings, passed
great resolutions, but it led to no practical result; and at length they
preferred to remain quietly at home in their own comfortable pastoral
life. The meaning brooks for פּלגּות is well established by [Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017), and there is no reason whatever
for explaining the word as equivalent to פּלגּות, מפלגּות, divisions
([Ch2 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#005), [Ch2
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#012); [Ezr
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#018)). The territory of Reuben, which
was celebrated for its splendid pastures, must have abounded in brooks.
The question, Why satest thou, or remainedst thou sitting between the
hurdles? i.e., in the comfortable repose of a shepherd's life, is an
utterance of amazement; and the irony is very apparent in the next
clause, to hear the bleating of the flocks, i.e., the piping of the
shepherds, instead of the blast of the war-trumpets.

[Judges 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 5:17</span></span>

Gilead, Dan, and Asher took no part at all. By Gilead, the tribes of Gad
and half Manasseh are intended. The use of the term הגּלעד to denote the
whole of the territory of the Israelites on the east of the Jordan
probably gave occasion to this, although גלעד (without the article) does
not refer to the land even here, but refers primarily to the grandson of
Manasseh, as the representative of his family which dwelt in Gilead.
(For further remarks, see at [Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014).) Dan also did not let the
national movement disturb it in its earthly trade and commerce. גּוּר,
to keep one's self in a place, is construed here with the accusative of
the place, as in [Psa 120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005). The
territory of Dan included the port of Joppa (see at [Jos
19:46](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#046)), where the Danites probably
carried on a trade with the Phoenicians. Asher also in his land upon the
coast did not allow himself to be disturbed from his rest, to join in
the common war of its nation. ימּים חוף is used, as in [Gen
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013), for the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea. מפרצים, ἁπ. λεγ., literally a rent, and hence applied
to a bay, as an incision made in the sea-shore.

[Judges 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 5:18</span></span>

Zebulun and Naphtali acted quite differently. Zebulun showed itself as a
people that despised its life even to death, i.e., that sacrificed its
life for the deliverance of its fatherland. Naphtali did the same in its
mountain home. The two tribes had raised 10,000 fighting men at Barak's
call ([Jdg 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#010)), who constituted at
any rate the kernel of the Israelitish army.

If we run over the tribes enumerated, it seems strange that the tribes
of Judah and Simeon are not mentioned either among those who joined in
the battle, or among those who stayed away. The only way in which this
can be explained is on the supposition that these two tribes were never
summoned by Barak, either because they were so involved in conflict with
the Philistines, that they were unable to render any assistance to the
northern tribes against their Canaanitish oppressors, as we might infer
from [Jdg 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031), or because of some
inward disagreement between these tribes and the rest. But even apart
from Judah and Simeon, the want of sympathy on the part of the tribes
that are reproved is a sufficient proof that the enthusiasm for the
cause of the Lord had greatly diminished in the nation, and that the
internal unity of the congregation was considerably loosened.

In the next strophe the battle and the victory are described: -

[Judges 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 5:19</span></span>

19 Kings came, ... they fought;

The kings of Canaan fought At Taanach, at the waters of Megiddo.

A piece of silver they did not take.

20 From heaven they fought,

The stars from their courses fought against Sisera.

21 The brook of Kishon swept them away,

The brook of the olden time, the brook Kishon.

Go on, my soul, in strength!

The advance of the foe is described in few words. Kings came on and
fought. They were the kings of Canaan, since Jabin, like his ancestor
([Jos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001).), had formed an alliance
with other kings of northern Canaan, who went to the battle under the
command of Sisera. The battle took place at Taanach (see at [Jos
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#021)), by the water of Megiddo, the
present Lejun (see at [Jos 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#021)),
i.e., by the brook Kishon (cf. [Jdg
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#007)). Taanach and Megiddo were not
quite five miles apart, and beside and between them there were several
brooks which ran into the southern arm of the Kishon, that flowed
through the plain to the north of both these towns. The hostile kings
went into the battle with the hope of slaying the Israelites and making
a rich capture of booty. But their hopes were disappointed. They could
not take with them a piece of silver as booty. בּצע, which generally
signifies booty or gain, is probably to be taken here in its primary
sense of frustum, from בּצע, to cut off or cut in pieces, a "piece of
silver," equivalent to a single piece of valuable booty.

[Judges 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 5:20</span></span>

For not only did the Israelites fight against them, but he powers of
heaven also. "From heaven" is more minutely defined by "the stars from
their courses." These words explain the statement in [Jdg
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#015), "the Lord discomfited Sisera;"
though in our opinion not so clearly as to enable us to define more
precisely the natural phenomenon by which God threw the enemy into
confusion. In all probability we have to think of a terrible storm, with
thunder and lightning and hail, or the sudden bursting of a cloud, which
is poetically described as though the stars of heaven had left their
courses to fight for the Lord and His kingdom upon earth.

[Judges 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 5:21</span></span>

The kings of Canaan could do nothing against these powers. They were
smitten; the brook Kishon washed them (i.e., their corpses) away. The
meaning "to wash away" is well established by the dialects and the
context, though the verb itself only occurs here. As the battle was
fought between Taanach and Megiddo, i.e., to the south of the brook
Kishon, and the smitten foe fled towards the north, many of them met
with their death in the waves of the brook, which was flowing over its
banks at the time. The brook is called קדוּמים נחל, i.e., the brook of
the old world or the olden time (according to the lxx Cod. Vat.
χειμάῤῥους ἀρχαίων), as the stream that had been flowing from time
immemorial, and not, as the Chaldee interprets it, the stream that had
been celebrated from olden time on account of the mighty acts that had
been performed there. The meaning suggested by Ewald and others, "brook
of attacks, or slaughters," is not well sustained, although קדּם is
sometimes used to denote a hostile encounter. The last clause interrupts
the description of the slaughter and the victory. Borne away by the
might of the acts to be commemorated, Deborah stimulates her soul, i.e.,
herself, to a vigorous continuation of her song. תּדרכי is jussive, and
עז an accusative governed by the verb, in strength, vigorously; for she
had still to celebrate the glorious results of the victory. This is done
in the third part of the song ([Jdg
5:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)), the first strophe of which
([Jdg 5:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)) describes in brief
drastic traits the flight of the foe, and the treatment of the fugitives
by the people of the land.

[Judges 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 5:22</span></span>

22 Then did the hoofs of the horses stamp

With the hunting, the hunting of his strong ones.

23 Curse ye Meroz, saith the angel of the Lord;

Curse ye, curse ye the inhabitants thereof!

Because they came not to the help of Jehovah,

To the help of Jehovah among the mighty.

24 Blessed before women be Jael,

The wife of Heber the Kenite,

Blessed before women in the tent!

The war-chariots of the enemy hunted away in the wildest flight ([Jdg
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)). The horses stamped the ground
with the continuous hunting or galloping away of the warriors. דהרה, the
hunting (cf. דּהר, [Nah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#002)). The
repetition of the word expresses the continuance or incessant duration
of the same thing (see Ewald, 313, a.). אבּירים, strong ones, are not
the horses, but the warriors in the war-chariots. The suffix refers to
סוּס, which is used collectively. The mighty ones on horses are not,
however, merely the Canaanitish princes, such as Sisera, as Ewald
maintains, but the warriors generally who hunted away upon their
war-chariots.

[Judges 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 5:23</span></span>

The enemy, or at all events Sisera, might have been destroyed in his
flight by the inhabitants of Meroz; but they did not come to the help of
the Israelites, and brought down the curse of God upon themselves in
consequence. That this is the thought of [Jdg
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023) is evident from the context, and
more especially from the blessing pronounced upon Jael in [Jdg
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024). The situation of Meroz, which is
not mentioned again, cannot be determined with certainty Wilson and v.
Raumer imagine that it may be Kefr Musr on the south of Tabor, the
situation of which at all events is more suitable than Marussus, which
was an hour and a half to the north of Beisan, and which Rabbi Schwarz
supposed to be Meroz (see V. de Velde, Mem. p. 334). The curse upon the
inhabitants of this place is described as a word or command of the angel
of the Lord, inasmuch as it was the angel of the Lord who fought for
Israel at Megiddo, as the revealer of the invisible God, and smote the
Canaanites. Deborah heard from him the words of the curse upon the
inhabitants of Meroz, because they did not come to help Jehovah when He
was fighting with and for the Israelites. "Among the heroes," or mighty
men, i.e., associating with the warriors of Israel.

[Judges 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 5:24</span></span>

Jael behaved altogether differently, although she was not an Israelite,
but a woman of the tribe of the Kenites, which was only allied with
Israel (see [Jdg 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#011), [Jdg
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017).). For her heroic deed she was to
be blessed before women (מן as in [Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014), literally removed away from
women). The "women in the tent" are dwellers in tents, or shepherdesses.
This heroic act is poetically commemorated in the strophe which follows
in [Jdg 5:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#025).

[Judges 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 5:25</span></span>

25 He asked water, she gave him milk;

She handed him cream in the dish of nobles.

26 She stretched out her hand to the plug,

And her right hand to the workmen's hammer,

And hammered Sisera, broke his head,

And dashed in pieces and pierced his temples.

27 Between her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down:

Between her feet he bowed, he fell:

Where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

Assuming that the fact itself is well known, Deborah does not think it
necessary to mention Sisera's name in [Jdg
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#025). חמאה, which generally signifies
thick curdled milk, is used here as synonymous with חלב, in the sense of
good superior milk. ספל is only used here and in [Jdg
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#038), and signifies a bowl or vessel
for holding liquids (see Arab., Chald, and Talm.; also Bochart, Hieroz,
i. pp. 625ff., ed. Ros.). The dish of nobles is a fine costly bowl, such
as they are accustomed to hand to noble guests. The whole verse is
simply intended to express the thought, that Jael had given to her guest
Sisera a friendly reception, and treated him honourably and hospitably,
simply in order to make him feel secure.

[Judges 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 5:26</span></span>

"Her hand," i.e., the left hand, as is shown by the antithesis, "her
right hand," which follows. On the form תּשׁלחנה, the third pers. fem.
sing. with נה attached, to distinguish it the more clearly from the
second pers., see the remarks on [Exo
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#010). עמלים הלמוּת, hammer or mallet
of the hard workers, is a large heavy hammer. For the purpose of
depicting the boldness and greatness of the deed, the words are crowded
together in the second hemistich: הלם, to hammer, or smite with the
hammer; מחק, ἁπ. λεγ., to smite in pieces, smite through; מחץ, to smite
or dash in pieces; חלף, to pierce or bore through. The heaping up of the
words in [Jdg 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#027) answers the same
purpose. They do not "express the delight of a satisfied thirst for
revenge," but simply bring out the thought that Sisera, who was for
years the terror of Israel, was now struck dead with a single blow. כּרע
בּאשׁר, at the place where he bowed, there he fell שׁדוּד, overpowered
and destroyed. In conclusion, the singer refers once more in the last
strophe ([Jdg 5:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028)) to the mother
of Sisera, as she waited impatiently for the return of her son, and
foreboded his death, whilst the prudent princesses who surrounded her
sought to cheer her with the prospect of a rich arrival of booty.

[Judges 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 5:28</span></span>

28 Through the window there looks out and cries aloud

The mother of Sisera, through the lattice work,

Why does his chariot delay its coming?

Why tarry the steps of his team?

29 The wise of her princesses reply:

\- But she repeats her words to herself -

30 Surely they are finding and sharing booty:

A maiden, two maidens to the head of a man,

Booty of variegated cloths for Sisera:

Booty of variegated cloths, garments worked in divers colours,

A variegated cloth, two garments worked in divers colours for his neck
as booty.

Sisera's mother looks out with impatience for the return of her son, and
cries aloud out of the window, Why is he never coming?-foreboding the
disastrous result of the war. תּיבּב, ἁπ. λεγ., signifies to cry; in
Aramaean it is used for הריע and רנּן, to denote a loud joyful cry; here
it evidently signifies a loud cry of anxiety. For the repeated question,
Why does his chariot delay its coming? is evidently expressive of
anxiety and alarm. The form אחרוּ, perf. Piel for אחרוּ, may be
attributed to the influence of the aleph, which favours the seghol
sound, like יחמוּ in [Gen 30:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#039). The
combination of מרכּבותיו פּעמי, "steps of his chariots," cannot be
explained, as it is by Bertheau, on the ground that the word פעמי, as a
general expression for intermittent movement, might also be applied to
the jerking of the wheels in rolling, but simply on the supposition that
מרכּבות, as a synonym for רכב, is used for the horses yoked to the
chariot in the sense of team, like רכב in [Sa2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004); [Sa2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018), etc.

[Judges 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 5:29</span></span>

The princesses in attendance upon Sisera's mother sought to console her
with the remark, that Sisera would have to gather together rich booty,
and that his return was delayed in consequence. In the expression "the
wisest of her princesses" (see Ges. 119, 2), the irony is very obvious,
as the reality put all their wise conjectures to shame. תּעננּה, third
pers. plur. fem. for תּענינה. The second hemistich of [Jdg
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#029) contains a clause inserted as a
parenthesis. אף־היא is adversative: "but she;" אף is only an emphatic
copula; the antithesis lies in the emphatic change of subject indicated
by היא. אמריה השׁיב, lit. to bring back her words, i.e., to repeat. להּ
is used in a reflective sense, "to herself." The meaning is: But
Sisera's mother did not allow herself to be quieted by the words of her
wise princesses; on the contrary, she kept repeating the anxious
question, Why does Sisera delay his coming? In [Jdg
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030) there follows the answer of the
wise princesses. They imagine that Sisera has been detained by the large
amount of booty which has to be divided. הלא, nonne, is he not, in the
sense of lively certainty. They will certainly discover rich booty, and
divide it. רחם, uterus, for puella. "A girl (or indeed probably) two
girls to the head of the man," i.e., for each man. צבעים, coloured
things, cloths or clothes. רקמה, worked stuff, or garments worked in
divers colours (see the remarks on [Exo
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#036)), is attached without the vav
cop. to צבעים, and is also dependent upon שׁלל. The closing words, שׁלל
לצוּארי, "for the necks," or (as the plural is also frequently used to
signify a single neck, e.g., [Gen
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#016); [Gen
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#014)) "for the neck of the booty," do
not give any appropriate sense, as שׁלל neither signifies animals taken
as booty nor the taker of booty. The idea, however, that שׁלל is used
for שׁלל אישׁ, like הלך in [Sa2 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#004)
for הלך אישׁ, viator, and חתף in [Pro
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#028) for חתף אישׁ, seems
inadmissible, since שׁלל ecni has just before been used three times in
its literal sense. There is just the same objection to the application
of שׁלל to animals taken as booty, not to mention the fact that they
would hardly have thought of having valuable clothes upon the necks of
animals taken as booty. Consequently the only explanation that remains,
is either to alter לצוּארי into לצוּארו or לצוּאריו, or else to change
שׁלל into שׁגל, the royal spouse. In the former case, שׁלל would have to
be taken as in apposition to רקמתים צבע: a variegated cloth, two worked
in divers colours for his (Sisera's) neck as booty, as the lxx have
rendered it (τῷ τραχήλῳ αὐτοῦ σκῦλα). Ewald and Bertheau decide in
favour of the second alteration, and defend it on the ground that שׁלל
might easily find its way into the text as a copyist's error for שׁגל,
on account of שׁלל having been already written three times before, and
that we cannot dispense with some such word as שׁגל here, since the
repetition of שׁלל three times, and the threefold use of ל, evidently
show that there were three different kinds of people among whom the
booty was to be distributed; and also that it was only a fitting thing
that Sisera should set apart one portion of the booty to adorn the neck
of his wife, and that the wisest of the noble ladies, when mentioning
the booty, should not forget themselves.

[Judges 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 5:31</span></span>

31a So shall all Thine enemies perish, O Jehovah!

But let those who love Him be like the rising of the sun in its
strength.

This forms the conclusion of the song. כּן, so, refers to the whole of
the song: just in the same manner as Sisera and his warriors. The rising
of the sun in its strength is a striking image of the exaltation of
Israel to a more and more glorious unfolding of its destiny, which
Deborah anticipated as the result of this victory. With the last clause,
"And the land had rest forty years" (cf. [Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011), [Jdg
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030); [Jdg
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#028)), the account of this event is
brought to a close.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 6](jdg006)

</div>
