<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer022)  [Next](jer024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 23:1</span></span>

The gathering again of the flock, scattered by the evil shepherds, by
meant of the righteous branch from the stock of David. - [Jer
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001). "Woe to shepherds that destroy
and scatter the flock of my pasturing! saith Jahveh. [Jer
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002). Therefore thus saith Jahveh, the
God of Israel, concerning the shepherds that feed my people: Ye have
scattered my flock, and driven them away, and not visited them; behold,
I will visit on you the evil of your doings, saith Jahveh. [Jer
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003). And I will gather the remnant of
my flock out of all lands whither I have driven them, and bring them
back to their pasture, that they may be fruitful and increase; [Jer
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#004). And will raise up over them
shepherds that shall feed them, and they shall fear no more, nor be
dismayed, nor be lacking, saith Jahveh. [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005). Behold, days come, saith Jahveh,
that I raise up unto David a righteous branch, that shall reign as king,
and deal wisely, and do right and justice in the land. [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006). In his days Judah shall have
welfare, and Israel dwell safely; and this is his name whereby he shall
be called: Jahveh our Righteousness. [Jer
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007). Therefore, behold, days come,
saith Jahveh, that they shall no more say: By the life of Jahveh who
brought up the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt, [Jer
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#008). But: By the life of Jahveh who
brought up and led forth the seed of the house of Israel out of the land
towards midnight, and out of all the lands whither I had driven them,
and they shall dwell in their own land."

This portion is the conclusion of the prophecy concerning the shepherds
of Israel, Jer 22. In [Jer 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001) and
[Jer 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002) what has been foretold
concerning the last kings of Judah is condensed into one general
sentence, so as thus to form a point of connection for the declaration
of salvation which follows at [Jer
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003), consisting in the gathering
again of the people, neglected and scattered by the evil shepherds, by
means of the righteous branch of David. The Lord cries woe upon the
shepherds. רעים without article, because the matter concerns all evil
shepherds, and is not applied till [Jer
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002) to the evil rulers of Judah.
Venema rightly says: Generale vae pastoribus malis praemittitur, quod
mox ad pastores Judae applicatur. It is so clear from the context as to
have been generally admitted by recent comm., that by shepherds are
meant not merely the false prophets and priests, nor even these along
with the kings; cf. on [Jer 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015); [Jer
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034)., and Ezek 34. The flock of my
pasturing, in other words, the flock, which I feed; for מרעית sig. both
the feeding (cf. [Hos 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#006)) and the
place where the flock feeds, cf. [Jer
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#036); [Psa
74:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001). Israel is called the flock of
Jahveh's pasturing inasmuch as He exerts a special care over it. The
flock bad shepherds, the ungodly monarchs on the throne of David, have
brought to ruin and scattered. The scattering is in [Jer
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002), cf. with [Jer
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003), called a driving out into the
lands; but the "destroying" must be discovered from the train of
thought, for the clause: ye have not visited them ([Jer
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002)), intimates merely their neglect
of the sheep committed to their charge. What the "destroying" more
especially is, we may gather from the conduct of King Jehoiakim,
described in [Jer 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013).; it consists
in oppression, violence, and the shedding of innocent blood; cf. [Eze
34:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002). With לכן, [Jer
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002), is made the application of the
general sentence, [Jer 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001), to the
shepherds of Israel. Because they are such as have scattered, driven
away, and not visited the flock of the Lord, therefore He will punish in
them the wickedness of their doings. In the לא פקדתּם אתם is summed up
all that the rulers have omitted to do for the flock committed to their
care; cf. the specification of what they have not done, [Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004). It was their duty, as Ven. truly
says, to see ut vera religio, pabulum populi spiritual, recte et rite
exerceretur. Instead of this, they have, by introducing idolatry,
directly encouraged ungodliness, and the immorality which flows
therefrom. Here in "ye have not visited them" we have the negative
moment made prominent, so that in [Jer
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003) may follow what the Lord will do
for His scattered flock. Cf. the further expansion of this promise in
[Eze 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#012). We must note "I have
driven them," since in [Jer 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002) it
was said that the bad shepherds had driven the flock away. The one does
not exclude the other. By their corrupting the people, the wicked
shepherds had occasioned the driving out; and this God has inflicted on
the people as punishment. But the people, too, had their share in the
guilt; but to this attention is not here directed, since the question
deals only with the shepherds.

[Jeremiah 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 23:4</span></span>

When the Lord shall gather His people out of the dispersion, then will
He raise up shepherds over them who will so feed them that they shall no
longer need to fear or to be dismayed before enemies who might be strong
enough to subjugate, slay, and carry them captive. The figurative
expressions are founded on the idea that the sheep, when they are
neglected by the shepherds, are torn and devoured by wild beasts; cf.
[Eze 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#008). They shall not be lacking;
cf. for נפקד with this force, [Sa1
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#007); in substance = not be lost. לא
יפּקדוּ is chosen with a view to לא פקדתּם אתם ([Jer
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002)): because the shepherds did not
take charge of the sheep, therefore the sheep are scattered and lost.
Hereafter this shall happen no more. The question as to how this promise
is to be accomplished is answered by [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005) and [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006). The substance of these verses is
indeed introduced by the phrase: behold, days come, as something new and
important, but not as something not to happen till after the things
foretold in [Jer 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#004). According to
Jeremiah's usage throughout, that phrase does not indicate any progress
in time as compared with what precedes, but draws attention to the
weightiness of what is to be announced. There is also a suggestion of
"the contrast between the hope and the existing condition of affairs,
which does not itself justify that hope. However gloomy the present is,
yet there is a time coming" (Hgstb.). The promise: I make to arise
(raise up) to David a righteous branch, rests upon the promise, [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012); [Ch1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#012) : I raise up thy seed after
thee, which shall be of thy sons-which the Lord will hereafter fulfil to
David. Graf tries to show by many, but not tenable arguments, that צמח
has here a collective force. That he is wrong, we may see from the
passages [Zac 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008) and [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012), where the same "branch" foretold
by Jeremiah is called the man whose name is צמח; and even without this
we may discover the same from the context of the present passage, both
from "He shall reign as king," and still more from: they shall call his
name Jahveh Tsidkenu. Neither of these sayings can be spoken of a series
of kings. Besides, we have the passages [Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009) and [Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023)., [Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024), where the servant to be raised
up to David by Jahveh is called "my servant David." Although then צמח
has a collective force when it means a plant of the field, it by no
means follows that "it has always a collective force" in its transferred
spiritual signification. And the passage, [Jer
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#017), where the promise is explained
by: David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of Israel (cf.
[Jer 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#021)), does not prove that the
branch of David is a collective grouping together of all David's future
posterity, but only that this one branch of David shall possess the
throne for ever, and not, like mortal men, for a series of years only;
[Sa2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016). צמח denotes the Messiah,
and this title is formed from צמח, [Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002) (see Del. on this passage). Nor
does the mention of shepherds in the plural, [Jer
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#004), at all oppose this. An untenable
rendering of the sense is: first I will raise up unto you shepherds,
then the Messiah; or: better shepherds, inprimis unum, Messiam (Chr. B.
Mich.). The two promises are not so to be joined. First we have the
raising up of good shepherds, in contrast to the evil shepherds that
have destroyed the people; then the promise is further explained to the
effect that these good shepherds shall be raised up to David in the
"righteous branch," i.e., in the promised "seed" of his sons. The good
shepherds are contrasted with the evil shepherds, but are then summed up
in the person of the Messiah, as being comprised therein. The relation
of the good shepherds to the righteous branch is not so, that the latter
is the most pre-eminent of the former, but that in that one branch of
David the people should have given to them all the good shepherds needed
for their deliverance. The Messiah does not correspond to the series of
David's earthly posterity that sit upon his throne, in that He too, as
second David, will also have a long series of descendants upon His
throne; but in that His kingdom, His dominion, lasts for ever. In the
parallel passage, [Jer 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015), where
the contrast to the evil shepherds is omitted, we therefore hear only of
the one branch of David; so in Ezek 34, where only the one good
shepherd, the servant of the Lord, David, stands in contrast to the evil
shepherds ([Jer 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023)). Hence neither
must we seek the fulfilment of our prophecy in the elevation of the
Maccabees, who were not even of the race of David, nor understand, as
Grot., Zerubbabel to be the righteous branch, but the Messiah, as was
rightly understood by the Chald. He is צדּיק in contrast to the then
reigning members of the house of David, and as He who will do right and
justice in His realm; cf. [Jer 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015),
where the same is said of Josiah as contrasted with his ungodly son
Jehoiakim. מלך is subjoined to מלך to bespeak His rule as kingship in
the fullest sense of the word. Regnabit rex, i.e., magnifice regnabit,
ut non tantum appareant aliquae reliquiae pristinae dignitatis, sed ut
rex floreat et vigeat et obtineat perfectionem, qualis fuit sub Davide
et Salomone ac multo praestantior (Calv.). השׂכּיל, deal prudently, rule
wisely, as in [Jer 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015), not: be
fortunate, prosperous. Here the context demands the former rendering,
the only one justified by usage, since the doing of right and justice is
mentioned as the fruit and result of the השׂכיל. These words, too, point
back to David, of whom it is in [Sa2
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#015) said, that he as king did right
and justice to all his people.

[Jeremiah 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 23:6</span></span>

[Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006) exhibits the welfare which
the "branch" will, by His wise and just rule, secure for the people.
Judah shall be blessed with welfare (נושׁע), and Israel dwell safely;
that blessing will come into fulfilment which Moses set before the
people's view in [Deu 33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028). יהוּדה as
the totality of the inhabitants is construed as feminine, as in [Jer
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#007); [Jer
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002), etc. Israel denotes the ten
tribes. Under the just sceptre of the Messiah, all Israel will reach the
destiny designed for it by the Lord, will, as God's people, attain to
full dignity and glory.

This is the name by which they shall call Him, the branch of David:
Jahveh our Righteousness. The suffix in יקראו refers to "righteous
branch." Instead of the 3 pers. sing. יקרא with the suffix ו, some codd.
have the plur. יקראוּ. This some polemical authors, such as Raim.,
Martini, Galatin, hold to be the true reading; and they affirmed the
other had proceeded from the Jews, with the design of explaining away
the deity of the Messiah. The Jews translated, they said: This is the
name whereby Jahveh will call him: Our Righteousness; which is indeed
the rendering of R. Saad. Gaon apud Aben Ezra, and of Menasse ben
Israel. But this rendering is rejected by most Jewish comm. as being at
variance with the accents, so that the impugned reading could not well
have been invented by the Jews for polemical purposes. יקראו is attested
by most codd., and is rendered by the lxx, so that the sense can be none
other than: they will call the righteous branch of David "Jahveh our
Righteousness." Most comm., including even Hitz., admit that the suffix
refers to צמח, the principal person in both verses. Only Ew., Graf, and
Ng. seek to refer it to Israel, because in [Jer
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#016) the same name is given to
Jerusalem. But the passage cited does not prove the case. To call any
one by a name universally denotes in the prophetic usage: to set him
forth as that which the name expresses; so here: the branch of David
will manifest Himself to the people of Israel as Jahve Tsidkenu. This
name is variously expounded. The older Christian comm. understand that
the Messiah is here called Jehovah, and must therefore be true God, and
that He is called our righteousness, inasmuch as He justifies us by His
merit.

(Note: Thus the Vulg. renders: Dominus justus noster; and even Calv.
says: Quicunque sine contentione et amarulentia judicant, facile vident,
idem nomen competer in Christum, quatenus est Deus, sicuti nomen filii
Davidis respectu humanae naturae ei tribuitur. - Omnibus aequis et
moderatis hoc constabit, Christum hic insigniri duplici elogio, ut in eo
nobis commendet propheta tam deitatis gloriam, quam veritatem humanae
naturae; and by the righteousness he understands justification by the
merits of Christ.)

But the rabbinical interpreters, headed by the Chald., take the name to
be an abbreviation of a sentence; so e.g., Kimchi: Israel vocabit
Messiam hoc nomine, quia ejus temporibus Domini justitia nobis firma,
jugis et non recedet. They appeal to [Jer
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#017) and to other passages, such as
[Exo 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015), where Moses calls the
altar "Jahveh my Banner," and [Gen
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020), where Jacob gives to the altar
built by him the name El elohe Jisrael. Hgstb. has rightly pronounced
for this interpretation. The passages cited show who in such names an
entire sentence is conveyed. "Jahveh my Banner" is as much as to say:
This altar is dedicated to Jahveh my banner, or to the Almighty, the God
of Israel. So all names compounded of Jahveh; e.g., Jehoshua = Jahveh
salvation, brief for: he to whom Jahveh vouchsafes salvation. So
Tsidkijahu = Jahve's righteousness, for: he to whom Jahveh deals
righteousness. To this corresponds Jahveh Tsidkenu: he by whom Jahveh
deals righteousness. We are bound to take the name thus by the parallel
passage, [Jer 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#016), where the same
name is given to Jerusalem, to convey the thought, that by the Messiah
the Lord will make Jerusalem the city of Righteousness, will give His
righteousness to it, will adorn and glorify it therewith.

צדקנוּ is not to be referred, as it is by the ancient Church comm., to
justification through the forgiveness of sins. With this we have not
here to do, but with personal righteousness, which consists in
deliverance from all unrighteousness, and which is bound up with
blessedness. Actual righteousness has indeed the forgiveness of sins for
its foundation, and in this respect justification is not to be wholly
excluded; but this latter is here subordinate to actual righteousness,
which the Messiah secures for Israel by the righteousness of His reign.
The unrighteousness of the former kings has brought Israel and Judah to
corruption and ruin; the righteousness of the branch to be hereafter
raised up to David will remove all the ruin and mischief from Judah, and
procure for them the righteousness and blessedness which is of God. -
"What Jeremiah," as is well remarked by Hgstb., "sums up in the name
Jehovah Tsidkenu, Ezekiel expands at length in the parallel [Eze
34:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#025) : the Lord concludes with
them a covenant of peace; rich blessings fall to their lot; He breaks
their yoke, frees them from bondage; they do not become the heathen's
prey." These divine blessings are also to be conferred upon the people
by means of the righteous branch. What the ancient Church comm. found in
the name was true as to the substance. For as no man is perfectly
righteous, so no mere earthly king can impart to the people the
righteousness of Jahveh in the full sense of the term; only He who is
endowed with the righteousness of God. In so far the Godhead of this
King is contained implicite in the name; only we must not understand
that he that bore the name is called Jahveh. But that righteousness, as
the sum of all blessing, is set before the people's view, we may gather
from the context, especially from [Jer
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007) and [Jer
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#008), where it is said that the
blessings to be conferred will outshine all former manifestations of
God's grace. This is the sense of both verses, which, save in the matter
of a trifling change in [Jer 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#008), are
verbally repeated from [Jer 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#014) and
[Jer 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#015), where they have already
been expounded.

(Note: The lxx have omitted both these verses here, and have placed them
at the end of the chapter, after [Jer
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#040); but by their contents they do
not at all belong to that, whereas after [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006) they are very much in place, as
even Hitz. admits. In the text of the lxx handed down, [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006) ends with the words: ̓Ιωσεδὲκ ἐν
τοῖς προφήταις; and ̓Ιωσεδὲκ may be said to correspond to יהוה צדקנוּ,
and ἐν τοῖς προφήταις to לנּביאים, [Jer
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009). Hitz. and Gr. therefore infer
that [Jer 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007) and [Jer
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#008) were wanting also in the Heb.
text used by the translator, and that they must have been added by way
of supplement, most probably from another MS. This inference is thought
to find support in the assumption that, because the Greek MSS have no
point between ̓Ιωσεδὲκ and ἐν τοῦς προφήταις, therefore the Alexandrian
translator must have joined these words together so as to make one -
meaningless - sentence. A thoroughly uncritical conclusion, which could
be defended only if the Alex. translators had punctuated their Greek
text as we have it punctuated in our printed editions. And if a later
reader of the lxx had added the verses from the Hebrew text, then he
would certainly have intercalated them at the spot where they stood in
the original, i.e., between [Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006)
and [Jer 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009). Their displacement to a
position after [Jer 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#040) is to be
explained from the fact that in [Jer
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#014) and [Jer
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#015) they immediately follow a
threatening: and is manifestly the work of the translator himself, who
omitted them after [Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006),
understanding them as of threatening import, because a threatening
seemed to him to be out of place after [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006).)

[Jeremiah 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 23:9</span></span>

Against the False Prophets. - Next to the kings, the pseudo-prophets,
who flattered the people's carnal longings, have done most to contribute
to the fall of the realm. Therefore Jeremiah passes directly from his
discourse against the wicked kings to rebuking the false prophets; and
if we may presume from the main substance, the latter discourse belongs
to the same time as the former. It begins

[Jer 23:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009)

With a description of the pernicious practices of these persons. - [Jer
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009). "Concerning the prophets. Broken
is mine heart within me; all my bones totter. I am become like a drunken
man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, because of Jahveh and
because of His holy words. [Jer 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#010).
For of adulterers the land is full, for because of the curse the land
withereth, the pastures of the wilderness dry up; and their course is
become evil, and their strength not right. [Jer
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#011). For both prophet and priest are
profane; yea, in mine house found I their wickedness, saith Jahveh. [Jer
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#012). Therefore their way shall be to
them as slippery places in darkness, they shall be thrown down and fall
therein; for I bring evil upon them, the year of their visitation, saith
Jahveh. [Jer 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#013). In the prophets of
Samaria saw I folly; they prophesied in the name of Baal, and led my
people Israel astray. [Jer 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014). But
in the prophets of Jerusalem saw I an horrible thing, committing
adultery and walking in falsehood, and they strengthen the hands of the
wicked, that none returneth from his wickedness. They are all become to
me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah. [Jer
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#015). Therefore thus saith Jahveh of
hosts concerning the prophets: Behold, I feed them with wormwood, and
give them to drink water of bitterness; for from the prophets of
Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth over all the land."

"Concerning the prophets" is the heading, as in [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002); [Jer
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001); [Jer
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001), [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007), [Jer
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023), [Jer
49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028); and corresponds to the woe
uttered against the wicked shepherds, [Jer
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001). It refers to the entire portion
vv. 9-40, which is thus distinguished from the oracles concerning the
kings, [Jer 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001) and 22. It might
indeed be joined, according to the accents, with what follows: because
of the prophets is my heart broken; but as the cause of Jeremiah's deep
agitation is given at the end of the second half-verse: because of
Jahveh, etc., it is not likely the seer would in one sentence have given
two different and quite separate reasons. The brokenness of his heart
denotes the profoundest inward emotion yet not despondency by reason of
sin and misery, like "a broken heart" in [Psa
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019); [Psa
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019), etc., but because of God's
wrath at the impious lives of the pseudo-prophets. This has overcome
him, and this he must publish. This wrath had broken his heart and
seized on all his bones, so that they nervelessly tremble, and he
resembles a drunken man who can no longer stand firm on his feet. He
feels himself inwardly quite downcast; he not only feels the horrors of
the judgment that is to befall the false prophets and corrupt priests
who lead the people astray, but knows well the dreadful sufferings the
people too will have to endure. The verb רחף occurs only twice in the
Piel besides in the present passage; in [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002), of the Spirit of God that in the
beginning of creation brooded over the waters of the earth, and [Deu
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011), of the eagle that flutters over
her young - in Arabic rchf, to be soft. The root meaning of the word is
doubtless: to be flaccid; here accordingly, to totter, to sway to and
fro. "Because of Jahveh" is more fully explained by "because of the
words of His holiness," i.e., the words which God as holy has made known
to him regarding the unholy ongoings of the pseudo-prophets. - From [Jer
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#010) onwards come the sayings of God
which have so terribly agitated the prophet. The land is full of
adulterers. Adultery in the literal sense is mentioned by way of
example, as a reckless transgression of God's commands, then much in
vogue, whereby the moral foundations of the kingdom were broken up. In
[Jer 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014) the prophets are said to
commit adultery and walk in lying, cf. [Jer
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#023) and [Jer
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007). By reason of this vice a curse
lies on the land, under which it is withering away. The clause "for
because of the curse," etc., is not to be taken as parenthesis (Ng.),
but as co-ordinate with the previous clause, giving the second, or
rather the chief ground, why Jeremiah is so deeply distressed. The
reason of this is not so much the prevailing moral corruption, as the
curse lying on the land because of the moral corruption of its
inhabitants. אלה is not perjury (Chald., Rashi, Kimchi), but the curse
wherewith God punishes the transgression of His covenant laws, cf. [Jer
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#003), [Jer
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#008), [Deu
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015)., [Jer
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#019). The words are modelled after
[Isa 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#004).; and הארץ is not the
population, but the land itself, which suffers under God's curse, and
which is visited with drought; cf. [Jer
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004). The next words point to drought.
נאות מדבּר as in [Jer 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#009). By ותּהי
the further description of the people's depravity is attached to the
first clause of the verse. Their course is become evil; their running or
racing, i.e., the aim and endeavour of the ungodly. The suffix on this
word מרוּצתם refers not to "adulterers," but ad sensum to the
inhabitants of the land. Their strength is not-right, i.e., they are
strong, valiant in wrong; cf. [Jer
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#002). For - so goes [Jer
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#011) - both prophets and priests, who
should lead the people in the right way, are profane, and desecrate by
their wickedness even the house of God, presumably by idolatry; cf. [Jer
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034). There is no reason for thinking
here, as Hitz. does, of adultery practised in the temple.

[Jer 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#012)

For this the Lord will punish them. Their way shall be to them as
slippery places in darkness. This threatening is after the manner of
[Psa 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#006), where חשׁך are joined,
changed by Jeremiah to the words in the text. The passage cited shows
that we may not separate בּאפלה from חלקלקּות, as Ew. does, to join it
to the following ידּחוּ. Their way shall resemble slippery places in the
dark, when one may readily slip and fall. Besides, they are to be
thrust, pushed, so that they must fall on the slippery path (ידּחוּ from
דּחח = דּחה, [Psa 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#005); "therein" to
be referred to "their way"). The clause: "for I bring evil," etc., is
formed after [Jer 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#023).

[Jer 23:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#013)

To display the vileness of the prophets, these are parallelized with the
prophets of Samaria. The latter did foolishly (תּפלה, prop. of that
which is unsalted, insipid, [Job 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#006),
hence irrational, insulsum), since they prophesied, being inspired by
Baal the no-god, and by such prophesying led the people into error; cf.
[Kg1 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019). Much more horrible is the
conduct of the prophets of Jerusalem, who commit adultery, walk in
lying, and strengthen the wicked in their wickedness, not merely by
their delusive pretences (cf. [Jer
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#017), [Jer
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014); [Jer
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#013)), but also by their immoral
lives, so that no one turns from his wickedness, cf. [Eze
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#022). לבלתּי is here and in [Jer
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#018), as in ex. 20:20, construed,
contrary to the usage everywhere else, not with the infin., but with the
verb. fin. As the prophets, instead of converting the wicked, only
confirmed them in their sins, therefore all the inhabitants of Judah or
Jerusalem are become as corrupt as Sodom and Gomorrah. "They all" are
not the prophets, but the inhabitants of Judah or Jerusalem; and "the
inhabitants thereof" are those of the capital, cf. [Deu
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032); [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010). On the seducers the Lord will
therefore inflict punishment, because impiousness has gone forth from
them over the whole land. With the punishment threatened in [Jer
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#015), cf. [Jer
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#014).

[Jer 23:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016)

Warning against the lying prophecies of the prophets. - [Jer
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016). "Thus saith Jahveh of hosts:
Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you! They
deceive you; a vision of their heart they speak, not out of the mouth of
Jahveh. [Jer 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#017). They say still
unto my despisers: 'Jahveh hath spoken: Peace shall ye have;' and unto
every one that walketh in the stubbornness of his heart they say: 'There
shall no evil come upon you.' [Jer
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#018). For who hath stood in Jahveh's
counsel, that he might have seen and heard His word? who hath marked my
word and heard it? [Jer 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019). Behold
a tempest from Jahveh, fury goeth forth, and eddying whirlwind shall
hurl itself upon the head of the wicked. [Jer
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#020). The anger of God shall not turn
till He have done and till He have performed the thoughts of His heart.
At the end of the days shall ye be well aware of this. [Jer
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#021). I have not sent the prophets,
yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. [Jer
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#022). But if they had stood in my
counsel, they would publish my words to my people and bring them back
from their evil way and from the evil of their doings."

The warning against these prophets is founded in [Jer
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016) on the fact that they give out
the thoughts of their own hearts to be divine revelation, and promise
peace and prosperity to all stiff-necked sinners. מהבּלים, lit., they
make you vain, i.e., make you to yield yourselves to vain delusion,
seduce you to false confidence. This they do by their speaking visions,
i.e., revelations of their heart, not what God has spoken, revealed to
them. As an illustration of this, [Jer
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#017) tells that they prophesy
continued peace or well-being to the despisers of God. The infin. abs.
אמור after the verb. fin. intimates the duration or repetition of the
thing. דּבּר יהוה are words of the false prophets, with which they give
out that their prophesyings are God's word. Since we nowhere else find
sayings of Jahveh introduced by דּבּר יהוה, but usually by 'כּה אמר י,
the lxx have taken offence at that formula, and, reading דבר, join the
words with למנאצי: τοῖς ἀπωθουμένοις τὸν λόγον κυρίου. To this reading
Hitz. and Gr. give the preference over the Masoretic; but they have not
noticed that they thus get an unsuitable sense. For דבר יהוה in
prophetic language never denotes the Mosaic law or the "moral law"
(Hitz.), but the word of God published by the prophets. By their view of
"word of Jahveh" they would here obtain the self-inconsistent thought:
to the despisers of divine revelation they proclaim as revelation. The
Masoretic reading is clearly right; and Jeremiah chose the unusual
introductory formula to distinguish the language of the pseudo-prophets
from that of the true prophets of the Lord. וכל־הלך ב' is prefixed
absolutely: and as concerning every one that walks...they say, for: and
to every one...they say. On the "stubbornness of their heart," see on
[Jer 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017). With the speech of the
false prophets, cf. [Jer 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#013) and
[Jer 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014). - In [Jer
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#018) a more comprehensive reason is
given to show that these prophets are not publishing God's decrees. The
question: Who hath stood? has negative force = None hath stood. By this
Jeremiah does not deny the possibility of this universally, but only of
the false prophets (Hitz.). This limitation of the words is suggested by
the context. To the true prophets the Lord reveals His סוד, [Amo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007). ויראוישׁמע are not to be taken
jussively: let him see and hear (Hitz.), for the foregoing interrogation
is not a conditional clause introducing a command. The imperfects with ו
are clauses of consequence or design, and after a preceding perfect
should be rendered in English by the conditional of the pluperfect.
Seeing the word of God refers to prophetic vision. The second question
is appended without at all conveying any inference from what precedes;
and in it the second verb (with ו consec.) is simply a strengthening of
the first: who hath hearkened to my word and heard it? The Masoretes
have quite unnecessarily changed the Chet. דּברי .tehC into דּברו. In
the graphic representation of the prophets, the transition to the direct
speech of God, and conversely, is no unusual thing. The change of
ויּשׁמע into ישׁמע, unnecessary and even improper as it is, is preferred
by Graf and Ng., inasmuch as they take the interrogative מי in both
clauses in the sense of quisquis and understand the verse thus: He who
has but stood in the counsel of the Lord, let him see and hear His word
(i.e., he must see and hear His word); and he that hath marked my word,
let him publish it (i.e., he must publish it). This exposition becomes
only then necessary, if we leave the context out of view and regard the
question as being to the effect that no one has stood in God's counsel -
which Jeremiah could not mean. Not to speak of the change of the text
necessary for carrying it through, this view does not even give a
suitable sense. If the clause: He that has stood in the counsel of the
Lord, he must proclaim His word, is to be regarded as having a
demonstrative force, then the principal idea must be supplied, thus
namely: "and it is impossible that it should be favourable to those who
despise it." In [Jer 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019) Jeremiah
publishes a real word of the Lord, which sounds very differently from
the words of the false prophets. A tempest from Jahveh will burst over
the heads of the evil-doers, and the wrath of God will not cease until
it has accomplished the divine decree. "A tempest from Jahveh" is
defined by "fury" in apposition as being a manifestation of God's wrath;
and the whole first clause is further expanded in the second part of the
verse. The tempest from Jahveh goes forth, i.e., breaks out, and as
whirling tornado or eddying whirlwind bursts over the head of the
wicked. יחוּל is to be taken in accordance with מתחולל: twist, whirl,
cf. [Sa2 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029). "The thoughts of His
heart" must not be limited to what God has decreed de interitu populi
(Calv.); it comprehends God's whole redemptive plan in His people's
regard-not merely the overthrow of the kingdom of Judah, but also the
purification of the people by means of judgments and the final
glorification of His kingdom. To this future the next clause points: at
the end of the days ye shall have clear knowledge of this. "The end of
the days" is not merely the completion of the period in which we now are
(Hitz., Gr. Ng., etc.), but, as universally, the end of the times, i.e.,
the Messianic future, the last period of the world's history which opens
at the close of the present aeon; see on [Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001); [Num
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#014), etc. התבּונן is strengthened by
בּינה yb dene: attain to insight, come to clearer knowledge.

[Jer 23:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#021)

From the word of the Lord proclaimed in [Jer
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019). it appears that the prophets
who prophesy peace or well-being to the despisers of God are not sent
and inspired by God. If they had stood in the counsel of God, and so had
truly learnt God's word, they must have published it and turned the
people from its evil way. This completely proves the statement of [Jer
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016), that the preachers of peace
deceive the people. Then follows -

[Jer 23:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023)

[Jer 23:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023), in continuation, an
intimation that God knows and will punish the lying practices of these
prophets. - [Jer 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023). "Am I then a
God near at hand, saith Jahveh, and not a God afar off? [Jer
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024). Or can any hide himself in
secret, that I cannot see him? saith Jahveh. Do not I will the heaven
and the earth? saith Jahveh. [Jer
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#025). I have heard what the prophets
say, that prophesy falsehood in my name, saying: I have dreamed, I have
dreamed. [Jer 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#026). How long? Have
they it in their mind, the prophets of the deceit of their heart, [Jer
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#027). Do they think to make my people
forget my name by their dreams which they tell one to the other, as
their fathers forgot my name by Baal? [Jer
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028). The prophet that hath a dream,
let him tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word in
truth. What is the straw to the corn? saith Jahveh. [Jer
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029). Is not thus my word - as fire,
saith Jahveh, and as a hammer that dasheth the rock in pieces? [Jer
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#030). Therefore, behold, I am against
the prophets that steal my words one from the other. [Jer
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#031). Behold, I am against the
prophets, saith Jahveh, that take their tongues and say: God's word.
[Jer 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#032). Behold, I am against the
prophets that prophesy lying dreams, saith Jahve, and tell them, and
lead my people astray with their lies and their boasting, whom yet I
have not sent nor commanded them, and they bring no good to this people,
saith Jahveh."

The force of the question: Am I a God at hand, not afar off? is seen
from what follows. Far and near are here in their local, not their
temporal signification. A god near at hand is one whose domain and whose
knowledge do not extend far; a God afar off, one who sees and works into
the far distance. The question, which has an affirmative force, is
explained by the statement of [Jer
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024) : I fill heaven and earth. Hitz.
insists on understanding "near at hand" of temporal nearness, after [Deu
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017) : a God who is not far hence, a
newly appeared God; and he supposes that, since in the east, from of
old, knowledge is that which is known by experience, therefore the
greatness of one's knowledge depends on one's advancement in years ([Job
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007), [Job
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010); [Job
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#012), etc.); and God, he says, is the
Ancient of days, [Dan 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009). But this
line of thought is wholly foreign to the present passage. It is not
wealth of knowledge as the result of long life or old age that God
claims for Himself in [Jer 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024), but
the power of seeing into that which is hidden so that none can conceal
himself from Him, or omniscience. The design with which God here dwells
on His omniscience and omnipresence too (cf. [Kg1
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027); [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)) is shown in [Jer
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#025). The false prophets went so far
with their lying predictions, that it might appear as if God did not
hear or see their words and deeds. The Lord exposes this delusion by
calling His omniscience to mind in the words: I have heard how they
prophesy falsehood in my name and say, I have dreamed, i.e., a dream
sent by God, have had a revelation in dreams, whereas according to [Jer
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#026) the dream was the deceit of
their heart - "spun out of their own heart" (Hitz.). [Jer
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#026) is variously interpreted. Hitz.
supposes that the interrogative ה (in הישׁ) is made subordinate in the
clause, and that the question is expressed with a double interrogative.
He translates: How long still is there anything left in the heart of the
prophets? as much as to say: how long have they materials for this? But
there is a total want of illustrations in point for this subordination
and doubling of the interrogative; and the force given to the ישׁ is
quite arbitrary, since we should have had some intimation of what it was
that was present in their hearts. Even the repetition of the
interrogative particles is unexplained, and the connecting of ישׁ with a
participle, instead of with the infinitive with ל, cannot be defended by
means of passages where החל is joined with an adjective and the idea "to
be" has to be supplied. L. de Dieu, followed by Seb. Schmidt, Chr. B.
Mich., Ros., Maur., Umbr., Graf, was right in taking "How long" by
itself as an aposiopesis: how long, sc. shall this go on? and in
beginning a new question with הישׁ, a question continued and completed
by the further question: "Do they think," etc., [Jer
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#027). Is it in the heart of the
prophets, i.e., have the prophets a mind to prophesy falsehood? do they
mean to make men forget my name? Against holding [Jer
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#027) as a resumption of the question
there is no well-founded objection. Ng. affirms that after החשׁבים we
must in that case have here הם as recapitulation of the subject; but
that is rendered unnecessary by the subject's being contained in the
immediately preceding words. The conjecture propounded by Ng., to change
הישׁ into האשׁ: how long still is the fire in the heart of the prophets?
needs no refutation. To make to forget the name of the Lord is: so to
banish the Lord, as seen in His government and works, from the people's
heart, that He is no longer feared and honoured. By their dreams which
they relate one to the other, i.e., not one prophet to the other, but
the prophet to his fellow-man amongst the people. בּבּעל, because of the
Baal, whom their fathers made their god, cf. [Jdg
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007); [Sa1
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#009). - These lies the prophets ought
to cease. [Jer 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028). Each is to speak
what he has, what is given him. He that has a dream is to tell the
dream, and he that has God's word should tell it. Dream as opposed to
word of the Lord is an ordinary dream, the fiction of one's own heart;
not a dream-revelation given by God, which the pseudo-prophets
represented their dreams to be. These dreams are as different from God's
word as straw is from corn. This clause is supported, [Jer
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029), by a statement of the nature of
God's word. It is thus (כּה), namely, as fire and as a hammer that
smashes the rocks. The sense of these words is not this: the word of God
is strong enough by itself, needs no human addition, or: it will burn as
fire the straw of the man's word mixed with it. There is here no
question of the mixing of God's word with man's word. The false prophets
did not mingle the two, but gave out their man's word for God's. Nor, by
laying stress on the indwelling power of the word of God, does Jeremiah
merely give his hearers a characteristic by which they may distinguish
genuine prophecy; he seeks besides to make them know that the word of
the Lord which he proclaims will make an end of the lying prophets'
work. Thus understood, [Jer 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029)
forms a stepping-stone to the threatenings uttered in [Jer
23:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#030) against the lying prophets.
The comparison to fire does not refer to the reflex influence which the
word exerts on the speaker, so as that we should with Rashi and Ros. cf.
[Jer 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009); the fire comes before us as
that which consumes all man's work that will not stand the test; cf.
[Co1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012). The comparison to a hammer
which smashes the rock shows the power of God, which overcomes all that
is earthly, even what is firmest and hardest; cf. [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012). Its effect and accomplishment
nothing can hinder.

[Jer 23:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#030)

Threatening of punishment. לכן does not connect with [Jer
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029), but with the main idea of the
previous verses, the conduct of the false prophets there exposed. הנני
על, behold, I will be against them, will come upon them as an enemy; cf.
[Eze 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#008). The practice of these
prophets is characterized in three ways, yet without marking out three
classes of unworthy men. One habit of theirs is that of stealing the
word of God one from another. Not inspired of God themselves, they tried
to appropriate words of God from other prophets in order to give their
own utterances the character of divine oracles. Another is: they take
their tongues and say, God's word, i.e., they use their tongues to speak
pretended words from God. The verb ינאמוּ occurs only here; elsewhere
only the participle נאם, and that almost always joined with יהוה in the
sig. effatum Domini; here without it, but in the same sense. The root
meaning of נאם is disputed. Connected etymologically with נהם, המה, it
doubtlessly denotes originally, that which is whispered, Jahveh's secret
confidential communication; but it is constantly used, not for the word
of God as silently inspired by God, but as softly uttered by the
prophet. The meaning is not: their prophesying is "mere wagging of the
tongue, talk according to their own caprice" (Graf); but: they give out
their sayings for God's, whereas God speaks neither to nor by them.
Finally, their third way of doing consists in feigning revelations by
means of dreams, which are but deceptive dreams. At this point the
discourse falls back on the description in [Jer
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#026). The words "and lead my people
astray" refer to all their three ways of acting before characterized.
פּחזוּת is their boasting of revelations from God. Then comes

[Jer 23:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#033)

A rebuke of their mockery at Jeremiah's threatening predictions. - [Jer
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#033). "And when this people, or the
prophet, or a priest ask thee, saying: What is the burden of Jahveh?
then say to them: What the burden is - now I will cast you off, saith
Jahveh. [Jer 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#034). And the prophet,
the priest, and the people that shall say: burden of Jahveh, on that man
will I visit it and on his house. [Jer
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#035). Thus shall ye say each to the
other, and each to his brother: What hath Jahveh answered, and what hath
Jahveh spoken? [Jer 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#036). But burden
of Jahveh shall ye mention no more, for a burden to every one shall his
own word be; and ye wrest the words of the living God Jahveh of hosts,
our God. [Jer 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#037). Thus shalt thou
say to the prophet: What hath Jahveh answered thee, and what hath He
spoken? [Jer 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#038). But if ye say:
burden of Jahveh, therefore thus saith Jahveh: Because ye say this word:
burden of Jahveh, and yet I have sent unto you, saying, Ye shall not
say: burden of Jahveh; [Jer 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#039).
Therefore, behold, I will utterly forget you, and cast away from my face
you and this city that I gave you and your fathers, [Jer
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#040). And will lay upon you
everlasting reproach, and everlasting, never-to-be-forgotten disgrace."

The word משּׂא, from נשׂא, lift up, bear, sig. burden, and, like the
phrase: lift up the voice, means a saying of weighty or dread import.
The word has the latter sig. in the headings to the prophecies of
threatening character; see on [Nah
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001), where this meaning of the word in
the headings is asserted, and the widespread opinion that it means
effatum is refuted. Jeremiah's adversaries - as appears from these
verses - used the word "burden" of his prophetic sayings by way of
mockery, meaning burdensome prophecies, in order to throw ridicule on
the prophet's speeches, by them regarded as offensive. Thus if the
people, or a prophet, or a priest ask: What is the burden of Jahveh,
i.e., how runs it, or what does it contain? he is to answer: The Lord
saith: I will cast you off, i.e., disburden myself of you, as it were -
the idea of "burden" being kept up in the answer to the question. The
article on the word prophet is used to show that the word is used
generally of the class of prophets at large. The את in the answering
clause is nota accus., the following phrase being designedly repeated
from the question; and hence the unusual combination את־מה. The sense
is: as regards the question what the burden is, I will cast you away.
There is no reason to alter the text to fit the lxx translation: ὑμεῖς
ἐστὲ τὸ λῆμμα, or Vulg.: vos estis onus, as Cappell., J. D. Mich.,
Hitz., Gr., etc., do. The lxx rendering is based, not on another
reading, but on another division of the words, viz., אתם המשׂא. - In
[Jer 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#034) the meaning of this answer
is more fully explained. On every one that uses the word "burden" in
this sneering way God will avenge the sneer, and not only on his person,
but on his house, his family as well. In [Jer
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#035) they are told how they are to
speak of prophecy. [Jer 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#036). They
are no longer to make use of the phrase "burden of Jahveh," "for the
burden shall his word be to each one," i.e., the word "burden" will be
to each who uses it a burden that crushes him down. "And ye wrest,"
etc., is part of the reason for what is said: and ye have = for ye have
wrested the words of the living God. The clause is properly a corollary
which tells what happens when they use the forbidden word.

[Jer 23:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#038)

In case they, in spite of the prohibition, persist in the use of the
forbidden word, i.e., to not cease their mockery of God's word, then the
punishment set forth in [Jer 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#033) is
certainly to come on them. In the threat אתכם נשׁיתי there is a
manifestly designed word-play on משּׂא. lxx, Vulg., Syr. have therefore
rendered as if from נשׂיתי נשׂא (or נשׂאתי) instead: ἐγὼ λαμβάνω, ego
tollam vos portans. One cod. gives נשׂא, and Ew., Hitz., Graf, Ng.,
etc., hold this reading to be right; but hardly with justice. The Chald.
has expressed the reading of the text in its ארטושׁ יתכון מרטשׁ, et
relinquam vos relinquendo. And the form נשׁיתי is explained only by
reading נשׁא (נשׁה); not by נשׂא, for this verb keeps its א everywhere,
save with the one exception of נשׂוּי, [Psa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), formed after the parallel כסוּי.
The assertion that the reading in the text gives no good sense is
unfounded. I will utterly forget you is much more in keeping than: I
will utterly lift you up, carry you forth. - With [Jer
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#040), cf. [Jer
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#011).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 24](jer024)

</div>
