<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer016)  [Next](jer018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 17:1</span></span>

Judah's sin is ineffaceably stamped upon the hearts of the people and on
their altars. These four verses are closely connected with the
preceding, and show why it is necessary that Judah be cast forth amidst
the heathen, by reason of its being perfectly stepped in idolatry. [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001). "The sin of Judah is written
with an iron pen, with the point of a diamond graven on the table of
their hearts and on the horns of your altars. [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002). As they remember their children,
so do they their altars and their Astartes by the green tree upon the
high hills. [Jer 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003). My mountain in
the field, thy substance, all thy treasures give I for a prey, thy high
places for sin in all thy borders. [Jer
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004). And thou shalt discontinue, and
that of thine own self, from thine inheritance that I gave thee, and I
cause thee to serve thine enemies in a land which thou knowest not; for
a fire have ye kindled in mine anger, for ever it burneth."

The sin of Judah ([Jer 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)) is not
their sinfulness, their proneness to sin, but their sinful practices,
idolatry. This is written upon the tables of the hearts of them of
Judah, i.e., stamped on them (cf. for this figure [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003); [Pro
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#003)), and that deep and firmly. This
is intimated by the writing with an iron pen and graving with a diamond.
צפּרן, from צפר, scratch, used in [Deu
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#012) for the nail of the finger, here
of the point of the style or graving-iron, the diamond pencil which
gravers use for carving in iron, steel, and stone.

(Note: Cf. Plinii hist. n. xxxvii. 15: crustae adamantis expetuntur a
sculptoribus ferroque includuntur, nullam non duritiem ex facili
excavantes.)

שׁמיר, diamond, not emery as Boch. and Ros. supposed; cf. [Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009); [Zac
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#012). The things last mentioned are so
to be distributed that "on the table of their heart" shall belong to
"written with a pen of iron," and "on the horns of their altars" to
"with the point of a diamond grave." The iron style was used only for
writing or carving letters in a hard material, [Job
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024). If with it one wrote on tables,
it was for the purpose of impressing the writing very deeply, so that it
could not easily be effaced. The having of sin engraved upon the tables
of the heart does not mean that a sense of unatoned sin could not be got
rid of (Graf); for with a sense of sin we have here nothing to do, but
with the deep and firm root sin has taken in the heart. To the tables of
the heart as the inward seat of sin are opposed the horns of their
altars (at "altars" the discourse is directly addressed to the Jews). By
altars are generally understood idolatrous altars, partly because of the
plural, "since the altar of Jahveh was but one," partly because of [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002), where the altars in question are
certainly those of the idols. But the first reason proves nothing, since
the temple of the Lord itself contained two altars, on whose horns the
blood of the sacrifice was sprinkled. The blood of the sin-offering was
put not merely on the altar of burnt-offering, but also on the horns of
the altar of incense, [Lev 4:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007); [Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016). Nor is the second reason
conclusive, since there is no difficulty in taking it to be the altars
of Jahveh as defiled by idolatry. This, indeed, we must do, since Josiah
had destroyed the altars of the false gods, whereas here the altars are
spoken of as existing monuments of idolatry. The question, in how far
the sin of Judah is ineffaceably engraven upon the horns of her altars,
is variously answered by comm., and the answer depends on the view taken
of [Jer 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002), which is itself
disputed. It is certainly wrong to join [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002) as protasis with [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003) as apodosis, for it is
incompatible with the beginning of [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003), הררי. Ew. therefore proposes to
attach "my mountain in the field" to [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002), and to change הררי into הררי:
upon the high hills, the mountains in the field - a manifest makeshift.
Umbr. translates: As their children remember their altars...so will I my
mountain in the field, thy possession...give for a prey; and makes out
the sense to be: "in proportion to the strength and ineffaceableness of
the impressions, such as are to be found in the children of idolatrous
fathers, must be the severity of the consequent punishment from God."
But if this were the force, then כּן could not possibly be omitted
before the apodosis; apart altogether from the suddenness of such a
transition from the sins of the people ([Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)) to the sins of the children.

[Jer 17:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002)

[Jer 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002) is plainly meant to be a
fuller and clearer disclosure of the sins written on the tables of
Judah's heart, finding therein its point of connection with [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001). The verse has no verbum finit.,
and besides it is a question whether "their children" is subject or
object to "remember." The rule, that in calm discourse the subject
follows the verb, does not decide for us; for the object very frequently
follows next, and in the case of the infinitive the subject is often not
mentioned, but must be supplied from the context. Here we may either
translate: as their sons remember (Chald. and Jerome), or: as they
remember their sons. As already said, the first translation gives no
sense in keeping with the context. Rashi, Kimchi, J. D. Mich., Maur.,
Hitz. follow the other rendering: as they remember their children, so do
they their altars. On this view, the verb. fin. יזכּרוּ is supplied from
the infin. זכר, and the two accusatives are placed alongside, as in [Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003) after the participle, without the
particle of comparison demanded by the sense, cf. also [Psa
92:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#008); [Job
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#015). Ng. calls this construction
very harsh; but it has analogues in the passages cited, and gives the
very suitable sense: Their altars, Astartes, are as dear to them as
their children. Hitz. takes the force to be this: "Whenever they think
of their children, they remember, and cannot but remember, the altars to
whose horns the blood of their sacrificed children adheres. And so in
the case of a green tree upon the heights; i.e., when they light upon
such an one, they cannot help calling to mind the Asherahs, which were
such trees." But this interpretation is clearly wrong; for it takes the
second clause על עץ as object to זכר, which is grammatically quite
indefensible, and which is besides incompatible with the order of the
words. Besides, the idea that they remember the altars because the blood
of their children stuck to the horns of them, is put into the words; and
the putting of it in is made possible only by Hitz.'s arbitrarily
separating "their Astartes" from "their altars," and from the
specification of place in the next clause: "by the green tree." The
words mean: As they remember their children, so do they their altars and
Asherahs by every green tree. The co-ordination of Asherahs and altars
makes it clear that it is not sacrifices to Moloch that are meant by
altars; for the Asherahs have no connection with the worship of Moloch.
Ng.'s assertions, that אשׁרים is the name for male images of Baal, and
that there can be no doubt of their connection with child-slaughtering
Moloch-worship, are unfounded and erroneous. The word means images of
Asherah; see on [Kg1 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023) and [Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021). Graf says that ר' על־עץdoes not
belong to "altars and Asherahs," because in that case it would need to
be ר' עץ תּחת, as in [Jer 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020); [Jer
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006), [Jer
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#013); [Isa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#005); [Deu
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#002); [Kg2
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#004); [Kg2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#010), but that it depends on זכר.
This remark is not correctly expressed, and Graf himself gives על a
local force, thus: by every green tree and on every high hill they think
of the altars and Asherahs. This local relation cannot be spoken of as a
"dependence" upon the verb; nor does it necessarily exclude the
connection with "altars and Asherahs," since we can quite well think of
the altars and Asherahs as being by or beside every green tree and on
the hills. At the same time, we hold it better to connect the local
reference with the verb, because it gives the stronger sense - namely,
that the Jews not merely think of the altars and Asherahs which are by
every green tree and upon the high hills, but that by every green tree
and on the high hills they think of their altars and Asherahs, even when
there are no such things to be seen there. Thus we can now answer the
question before thrown out, in what respects the sin was ineffaceably
engraven on the horns of the altar: It was because the altars and images
of the false gods had entwined themselves as closely about their hearts
as their children, so that they brought the sin of their idolatry along
with their sacrifices to the altars of Jahveh. The offerings which they
bring, in this state of mind, to the Lord are defiled by idolatry and
carry their sins to the altar, so that, in the blood which is sprinkled
on its horns, the sins of the offerers are poured out on the altar.
Hence it appears unmistakeably that [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001) does not deal with the
consciousness of sin as not yet cancelled or forgiven, but with the sin
of idolatry, which, ineradicably implanted in the hearts of the people
and indelibly recorded before God on the horns of the altar, calls down
God's wrath in punishment as announced in [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003) and [Jer
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004).

"My mountain in the field" is taken by most comm. as a name for
Jerusalem or Zion. But it is a question whether the words are vocative,
or whether they are accusative; and so with the rest of the objects,
"thy substance," etc., dependent on אתּן. If we take them to be
vocative, so that Jerusalem is addressed, then we must hold "thy
substance" and "thy treasures" to be the goods and gear of Jerusalem,
while the city will be regarded as representative of the kingdom, or
rather of the population of Judah. But the second clause, "thy high
places in all thy borders," does not seem to be quite in keeping with
this, and still less [Jer 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004) : thou
shalt discontinue from thine inheritance, which is clearly spoken of the
people of Judah. Furthermore, if Jerusalem were the party addressed, we
should expect feminine suffixes, since Jerusalem is everywhere else
personified as a woman, as the daughter of Zion. We therefore hold "my
mountain" to be accusative, and, under "the mountain of Jahveh in the
field," understand, not the city of Jerusalem, but Mount Zion as the
site of the temple, the mountain of the house of Jahveh, [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); [Zac
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#003); [Psa
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003). The addition בּשׂדה may not be
translated: with the field (Ges., de W., Ng.); for בּ denotes the means
or instrument, or an accessory accompanying the principal thing or
action and subservient to it (Ew. 217, f. 3), but not the mere external
surroundings or belongings. Ng.'s assertion, that בּ, amidst = together
with, is due to an extreme position in an empirical mode of treating
language. בּשׂדה means "in the field," and "mountain in the field" is
like the "rock of the plain," [Jer
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013). But whether it denotes "the
clear outstanding loftiness of the mountain, so that for it we might
say: My mountain commanding a wide prospect" (Umbr., Graf), is a
question. שׂדה, field, denotes not the fruitful fields lying round Mount
Zion, but, like "field of the Amalekites," [Gen
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007), "field of Edom" ([Gen
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#004)), the land or country; see on
[Eze 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#002); and so here: my mountain in
the land (of Judah or Israel). The land is spoken of as a field, as a
level or plain ([Jer 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013)), in
reference to the spiritual height of the temple mountain or mountain of
God above the whole land; not in reference to the physical pre-eminence
of Zion, which cannot be meant, since Zion is considerably exceeded in
height of the highlands of Judah. By its choice to be the site of the
Lord's throne amid His people, Mount Zion was exalted above the whole
land as is a mountain in the field; and it is hereafter to be exalted
above all mountains ([Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); [Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)), while the whole land is to be
lowered to the level of a plain ([Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010)). The following objects are
ranged alongside as asyndetons: the Mount Zion as His peculiar
possession and the substance of the people, all their treasures will the
Lord give for a prey to the enemy. "Thy high places" is also introduced,
with rhetorical effect, without copula. "Thy high places," i.e., the
heights on which Judah had practised idolatry, will He give up, for
their sins' sake, throughout the whole land. The whole clause, from "thy
high places" to "thy borders," is an apposition to the first half of the
verse, setting forth the reason why the whole land, the mountain of the
Lord, and all the substance of the people, are to be delivered to the
enemy; because, viz., the whole land has been defiled by idolatry. Hitz.
wrongly translates בּחטּאת for sin, i.e., for a sin-offering.

[Jer 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004)

And thou shalt discontinue from thine inheritance. There is in שׁמטתּה
an allusion to the law in [Exo 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011),
to let the ground lie untilled in the seventh year, and in [Deu
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#002), to let loans go, not to exact
from one's neighbour what has been lent to him. Because Judah has
transgressed this law, the Lord will compel the people to let go their
hold of their inheritance, i.e., He will cast them out of it. וּבך seems
strange, interposed between the verb and the "from thine inheritance"
dependent on it. The later Greek translators (for the entire passage
[Jer 17:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001) is wanting in the lxx)
render it μόνη, and Jerome sola. Ew. therefore conjectures לבדד, but
without due reason, since the translation is only a free rendering of:
and that by thyself. J. D. Mich., Gr., and Ng. propose to read ידך, on
the ground of the connection wrongly made between שׁמט and ידו, to let
go his hand, [Deu 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#002), given in Ges.
Lex. s.v. For ידו in this case is not object to שׁמט, but belongs to
משׁה, hand-lending; and in [Deu 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#003)
ידך is subject to תּשׁמט, the hand shall quit hold. וּבך sig. and that
by thee, i.e., by thine own fault; cf. [Eze
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#016). Meaning: by thine own fault
thou must needs leave behind thee thine inheritance, thy land, and serve
thine enemies in a foreign land. On the last clause, "for a fire," etc.,
cf. [Jer 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#014), where is also
discussed the relation of the present [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003) and [Jer
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004) to [Jer
15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013). For ever burns the fire,
i.e., until the sin is blotted out by the punishment, and for ever
inasmuch as the wicked are to be punished for ever.

[Jeremiah 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 17:5</span></span>

Further Confirmation of this Announcement in General Reflections
concerning the Sources of Ruin and of well-being. - This portion falls
into two halves: a. On the sources of ruin and of well-being ([Jer
17:5-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)); b. On the way to life ([Jer
17:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#018)). The reflections of the
first half show the curse of confidence in man and the blessings of
confidence in God the Lord, [Jer
17:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005); to which is joined, [Jer
17:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014), a prayer of the prophet for
deliverance from his enemies.

[Jer 17:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)

"Thus saith Jahveh: Cursed is the man that trusteth in man and maketh
flesh his arm, while his heart departeth from Jahveh. [Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006). He shall be as a destitute man
in the wilderness, and shall not see that good cometh; he shall inhabit
parched places in the desert, a salt land and uninhabited. [Jer
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007). Blessed is the man that trusteth
in Jahve, and whose trust Jahveh is. [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008). He shall be as a tree planted by
the water, and shall by the river spread out his roots, and shall not
fear when heat cometh; his leaves shall be green, and in the year of
drought he shall not have care, neither cease from yielding fruit. [Jer
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009). Deceitful is the heart above
all, and corrupt it is, who can know it? [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010). I Jahveh search the heart and
try the reins, even to give every one according to his way, according to
the fruit of his doings. [Jer 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011).
The partridge hatCheth the egg which it laid not; there is that getteth
riches and not by right. In the midst of his days they forsake him, and
at his end he shall be a fool. [Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012). Thou throne of glory, loftiness
from the beginning, thou place of our sanctuary. [Jer
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013). Thou hope of Israel, Jahveh,
all that forsake Thee come to shame. They that depart from me shall be
written in the earth, for they have forsaken the fountain of living
water, Jahveh."

Trust in man and departure from God brings only mischief ([Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005) and [Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006)); trust in the Lord brings
blessing only ([Jer 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007), [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008)). These truths are substantiated
in [Jer 17:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009), and elucidated by
illustrations.

Trust in man is described according to the nature of it in the second
clause: he that maketh flesh his arm, i.e., has strength. Flesh, the
antithesis to spirit (cf. [Isa 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)),
sets forth the vanity and perishableness of man and of all other earthly
beings; cf. besides [Isa 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003), also
[Job 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004); [Psa
56:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005). In [Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006) we are shown the curse of this
trusting in man. One who so does is as ערער in the steppe. This word,
which is found beside only in [Psa
102:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018), and in the form ערוער [Jer
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006), is rendered by the old
translators by means of words which mean desert plants or thorny growths
(lxx ἀγριομυρίκη; Jerome, myrice; similarly in Chald. and Syr.); so Ew.,
arid shrub; Umbr., a bare tree. All these renderings are merely guesses
from the context; and the latter, indeed, tells rather against than for
a bush or tree, since the following clause, "he shall not see," can be
said only of a man. So in [Psa 102:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018),
where we hear of the prayer of the ערער. The word is from ערר, to be
naked, made bare, and denotes the destitute man, who lacks all the means
of subsistence. It is not the homeless or outcast (Graf, Hitz.). He
shall not see, i.e., experience that good comes, i.e., he shall have no
prosperity, but shall inhabit "burnt places," tracts in the desert
parched by the sun's heat. Salt-land, i.e., quite unfruitful land; cf.
[Deu 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022). לא תשׁב is a relative
clause: and which is not inhabited = uninhabitable. Dwelling in parched
tracts and salt regions is a figure for the total want of the means of
life (equivalent to the German: auf keinen grnen Zweig kommen).

[Jer 17:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007)

[Jer 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007) and [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008) show the companion picture, the
blessings of trusting in the Lord. "That trusteth in Jahveh" is
strengthened by the synonymous "whose trust Jahveh is;" cf. [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005). The portrayal of the prosperity
of him that trusts in the Lord is an extension of the picture in [Psa
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003), of the man that hath his
delight in the law of the Lord. The form יוּבל is ἁπ. λεγ., equivalent
to יבל, water-brook, which, moreover, occurs only in the plural (יבלי),
[Isa 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#025); [Isa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#004). He spreads forth his roots by
the brook, to gain more and more strength for growth. The Chet. ירא is
imperf. from ירא, and is to be read ירא. The Keri gives יראה from ראה,
corresponding to the יראה in [Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006). The Chet. is unqualifiedly
right, and לא ירא correspond to לא ידאג. As to בּצּרת, see on [Jer
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001). He has no fear for the heat in
the year of drought, because the brook by which he grows does not dry
up.

[Jer 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)

To bring this truth home to the people, the prophet in [Jer
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009) discloses the nature of the human
heart, and then shows in [Jer 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010)
how God, as the Searcher of hearts, requites man according to his
conduct. Trust in man has its seat in the heart, which seeks thereby to
secure to itself success and prosperity. But the heart of man is more
deceitful, cunning than all else עקב, from the denom. עקב .moned , to
deal treacherously). אנוּשׁ, lit., dangerously sick, incurable, cf. [Jer
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018); here, sore wounded by sin,
corrupt or depraved. Who can know it? i.e., fathom its nature and
corruptness. Therefore a man must not trust the suggestions and
illusions of his own heart.

[Jer 17:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010)

Only God searches the heart and tries the reins, the seat of the most
hidden emotions and feelings, cf. [Jer
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020); [Jer
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003), and deals accordingly, requiting
each according to his life and his doings. The ו before לתת, which is
wanting in many MSS and is not expressed by the old translators, is not
to be objected to. It serves to separate the aim in view from the rest,
and to give it the prominence due to an independent thought; cf. Ew.
340, b. As to the truth itself, cf. [Jer
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019). With this is joined the common
saying as to the partridge, [Jer
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011). The aim is not to specify greed
as another root of the corruption of the heart, or to give another case
of false confidence in the earthly (Ng., Graf); but to corroborate by a
common saying, whose truth should be obvious to the people, the greater
truth, that God, as Searcher of hearts, requites each according to his
works. The proverb ran: He that gains riches, and that by wrong, i.e.,
in an unjust, dishonourable manner, is like a partridge which hatches
eggs it has not laid. In the Proverbs we often find comparisons, as
here, without the כּ similit.: a gainer of riches is a partridge
(Rephuhn, properly Rphuhn from rpen = rufen, to call or cry); a bird yet
found in plenty in the tribe of Judah; cf. Robinson, Palestine. All
other interpretations are arbitrary. It is true that natural history has
not proved the fact of this peculiarity of the partridge, on which the
proverb was founded; testimonies as to this habit of the creature are
found only in certain Church fathers, and these were probably deduced
from this passage (cf. Winer, bibl. R. W., art. Rebhuhn). But the
proverb assumes only the fact that such was the widespread popular
belief amongst the Israelites, without saying anything as to the
correctness of it. "HatCheth and layeth not" are to be taken relatively.
דּגר, the Targum word in [Job 39:14](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#014)
for חמּם, fovere, sig. hatch, lit., to hold eggs close together, cover
eggs; see on [Isa 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#015). ילד, to bring
forth, here of laying eggs. As to the Kametz in both words, see Ew. 100,
c. The point of the comparison, that the young hatched out of another
bird's eggs forsake the mother, is brought out in the application of the
proverb. Hence is to be explained "forsake him:" the riches forsake him,
instead of: are lost to him, vanish, in the half of his days, i.e., in
the midst of life; and at the end of his life he shall be a fool, i.e.,
the folly of his conduct shall fully appear.

[Jer 17:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)

In [Jer 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012) and [Jer
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013) Jeremiah concludes this
meditation with an address to the Lord, which the Lord corroborates by
His own word.

Verse 12 is taken by many ancient comm. as a simple statement: a throne
of glory, loftiness from the beginning, is the place of our sanctuary.
This is grammatically defensible; but the view preferred by almost all
moderns, that it is an apostrophe, is more in keeping with the tension
of feeling in the discourse. The "place of our sanctuary" is the temple
as the spot where God sits throned amidst His people, not the heaven as
God's throne: [Isa 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001). This the
pronoun our does not befit, since heaven is never spoken of as the
sanctuary of Israel. Hence we must refer both the preceding phrases to
the earthly throne of God in the temple on Zion. The temple is in [Jer
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021) called throne of the כּבוד יהוה,
because in it Jahveh is enthroned above the ark; [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022); [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002); [Psa
99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001). מראשׁון has here the sig. of
מראשׁ, [Isa 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021); [Isa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004), [Isa
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#026); [Isa
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016) : from the beginning onwards,
from all time. Heaven as the proper throne of God is often called מרום,
loftiness; cf. [Isa 57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015); [Psa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008); but so also is Mount Zion as
God's earthly dwelling-place; cf. [Eze
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023); [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040). Zion is called loftiness from
the beginning, i.e., from immemorial time, as having been from eternity
chosen to be the abode of God's glory upon earth; cf. [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017), where in the song of Moses by
the Red Sea, Mount Zion is pointed out prophetically as the place of the
abode of Jahveh, inasmuch as it had been set apart thereto by the
sacrifice of Isaac; see the expos. of [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017). Nor does מראשׁ always mean the
beginning of the world, but in [Isa
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#026) and [Isa
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016) it is used of the beginning of
the things then under discussion. From the place of Jahveh's throne
amongst His people, [Jer 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013), the
discourse passes to Him who is there enthroned: Thou hope of Israel,
Jahveh (cf. [Jer 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008)), through whom
Zion and the temple had attained to that eminence. The praise of God's
throne prepares only the transition to praise of the Lord, who there
makes known His glory. The address to Jahveh: Thou hope of Israel, is
not a prayer directed to Him, so as to justify the objection against the
vocative acceptation of [Jer 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012),
that it were unseemly to address words of prayer to the temple. The
juxtaposition of the sanctuary as the throne of God and of Jahveh, the
hope of Israel, involves only that the forsaking of the sanctuary on
Zion is a forsaking of Jahveh, the hope of Israel. It needs hardly be
observed that this adverting to the temple as the seat of Jahve's
throne, whence help may come, is not in contradiction to the warning
given in [Jer 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004), [Jer
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009). against false confidence in the
temple as a power present to protect. That warning is aimed against the
idolaters, who believed that God's presence was so bound up with the
temple, that the latter was beyond the risk of harm. The Lord is really
present in the temple on Zion only to those who draw near Him in the
confidence of true faith. All who forsake the Lord come to shame. This
word the Lord confirms through the mouth of the prophet in the second
part of the verse. יסוּרי, according to the Chet., is a substantive from
סוּר, formed like יריב from ריב (cf. Ew. 162, a); the Keri וסוּרי is
partic. from סוּר with ו cop. - an uncalled-for conjecture. My departers
= those that depart from me, shall be written in the earth, in the loose
earth, where writing speedily disappears. ארץ, synonymous with עפר, cf.
[Job 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#008), suggesting death. The
antithesis to this is not the graving in rock, [Job
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024), but being written in the book
of life; cf. [Dan 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001) with [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032). In this direction the grounding
clause points: they have forsaken the fountain of living water ([Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)); for without water one must pine
and perish. - On this follows directly,

[Jer 17:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014)

The prophet's prayer for rescue from his enemies. - [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014). "Heal me, Jahveh, that I may be
healed; help me, that I may be holpen, for Thou art my praise. [Jer
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#015). Behold, they say to me, Where
is the word of Jahveh? let it come, now. [Jer
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016). I have not withdrawn myself
from being a shepherd after Thee, neither wished for the day of trouble,
Thou knowest; that which went forth of my lips was open before Thy face.
[Jer 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#017). Be not to me a confusion,
my refuge art Thou in the day of evil. [Jer
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#018). Let my persecutors be put to
shame, but let not me be put to shame; let them be confounded, but let
not me be confounded; bring upon them the day of evil, and break them
with a double breach."

The experience Jeremiah had had in his calling seemed to contradict the
truth, that trust in the Lord brings blessing ([Jer
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007).); for his preaching of God's
word had brought him nothing but persecution and suffering. Therefore he
prays the Lord to remove this contradiction and to verify that truth in
his case also. The prayer of [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014), "heal me," reminds one of [Psa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#003); [Psa
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003). Thou art תּהלּתי, the object of
my praises; cf. [Psa 71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006); [Deu
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#021). - The occasion for this prayer
is furnished by the attacks of his enemies, who ask in scorn what then
has become of that which he proclaims as the word of the Lord, why it
does not come to pass. Hence we see that the discourse, of which this
complaint is the conclusion, was delivered before the first invasion of
Judah by the Chaldeans. So long as his announcements were not fulfilled,
the unbelieving were free to persecute him as a false prophet (cf. [Deu
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022)), and to give out that his
prophecies were inspired by his own spite against his people. He
explains, on the contrary, that in his calling he has neither acted of
his own accord, nor wished for misfortune to the people, but that he has
spoken by the inspiration of God alone. 'לא אצתּי cannot mean: I have
not pressed myself forward to follow Thee as shepherd, i.e., pressed
myself forward into Thy service in vain and overweening self-conceit
(Umbr.). For although this sense would fall very well in with the train
of thought, yet it cannot be grammatically justified. אוּץ, press, press
oneself on to anything, is construed with ל, cf.Josh. [Jer
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#013); with מן it can only mean: press
oneself away from a thing. מרעה may stand for מהיות , cf. [Jer
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002), [Sa1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023); [Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013) : from being a shepherd after
Thee, i.e., I have not withdrawn myself from following after Thee as a
shepherd. Against this rendering the fact seems to weigh, that usually
it is not the prophets, but only the kings and princes, that are
entitled the shepherds of the people; cf. [Jer
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001). For this reason, it would
appear, Hitz. and Graf have taken רעה in the sig. to seek after a person
or thing, and have translated: I have not pressed myself away from
keeping after Thee, or from being one that followed Thee faithfully. For
this appeal is made to places like [Pro
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#020); [Pro
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#007); [Psa
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#003), where רעה does mean to seek
after a thing, to take pleasure in it. But in this sig. רעה is always
construed with the accus. of the thing or person, not with אחרי, as
here. Nor does it by any means follow, from the fact of shepherds
meaning usually kings or rulers, that the idea of "shepherd" is
exhausted in ruling and governing people. According to [Psa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001), Jahveh is the shepherd of the
godly, who feeds them in green pastures and leads them to the refreshing
water, who revives their soul, etc. In this sense prophets, too, feed
the people, if they, following the Lord as chief shepherd, declare God's
word to the people. We cannot in any case abide by Ng.'s rendering, who,
taking רעה in its literal sense, puts the meaning thus: I have not
pressed myself away from being a shepherd, in order to go after Thee.
For the assumption that Jeremiah had, before his call, been, like Amos,
a herd of cattle, contradicts [Jer
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001); nor from the fact, that the
cities of the priests and of the Levites were provided with grazing
fields (מגרשׁים), does it at all follow that the priests themselves
tended their flocks. "The day of trouble," the ill, disastrous day, is
made out by Ng. to be the day of his entering upon the office of prophet
- a view that needs no refutation. It is the day of destruction for
Jerusalem and Judah, which Jeremiah had foretold. When Ng. says: "He
need not have gone out of his way to affirm that he did not desire the
day of disaster for the whole people," he has neglected to notice that
Jeremiah is here defending himself against the charges of his enemies,
who inferred from his prophecies of evil that he found a pleasure in his
people's calamity, and wished for it to come. For the truth of his
defence, Jeremiah appeals to the omniscience of God: "Thou knowest it."
That which goes from my lips, i.e., the word that came from my lips, was
נך פּניך, before or over against thy face, i.e., manifest to Thee.

[Jer 17:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#017)

On this he founds his entreaty that the Lord will not bring him to
confusion and shame by leaving his prophecies as to Judah unfulfilled,
and gives his encouragement to pray in the clause: Thou art my refuge in
the day of evil, in evil times; cf. [Jer
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#011). May God rather put his
persecutors to shame and confusion by the accomplishment of the calamity
foretold, [Jer 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#018). תּהיה pointed
with Tsere instead of the abbreviation תּהי, cf. Ew. 224, c. הביא is
imperat. instead of הבא, as in [Sa1
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#040), where the Masoretes have thus
pointed even the הביא. But in the Hiph. the i has in many cases
maintained itself against the , so that we are neither justified in
regarding the form before us as scriptio plena, nor yet in reading
הביאה. - Break them with a double breach, i.e., let the disaster fall on
them doubly. "A double breach," pr. something doubled in the way of
breaking or demolition. שׁבּרון is not subordinated to משׁנה in stat.
constr., but is added as accus. of kind; cf. Ew. 287, h.

[Jer 17:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019)

Of the hallowing of the Sabbath. - [Jer
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019). "Thus said Jahveh unto me: Go
and stand in the gate of the sons of the people, by which the kings of
Judah come in and by which they go out, and in all gates of Jerusalem,
[Jer 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#020). And say unto them: Hear
the word of Jahveh, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all
inhabitants of Jerusalem, that go in by these gates: [Jer
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021). Thus hath Jahveh said: Take
heed for your souls, and bear no burden on the Sabbath-day, and bring it
in by the gates of Jerusalem. [Jer
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#022). And carry forth no burden out
of your houses on the Sabbath-day, and do no work, and hallow the
Sabbath-day, as I commanded your fathers. [Jer
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#023). But they hearkened not, neither
inclined their ear, and made their neck stiff, that they might not hear
nor take instruction. [Jer 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024). But
if ye will really hearken unto me, saith Jahveh, to bring in no burden
by the gates of the city on the Sabbath-day, and to hallow the
Sabbath-day, to do no work thereon, [Jer
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#025). Then shall there go through the
gates of the city kings and princes, who sit on the throne of David,
riding in chariots and on horses, they and their princes, the men of
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ad this city shall be inhabited
for ever. [Jer 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026). And they shall
come from the cities of Judah and the outskirts of Jerusalem, from the
land of Benjamin and from the lowland, from the hill-country and from
the south, that bring burnt-offering and slain-offering, meat-offering
and incense, and that bring praise into the house of Jahveh. [Jer
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#027). But if ye hearken not to me, to
hallow the Sabbath-day, and not to bear a burden, and to come into the
gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath-day, then will I kindle fire in her
gates, so that it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and not be
quenched."

The introduction, [Jer 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019), shows
that this passage has, in point of form, but a loose connection with
what precedes. It is, however, not a distinct and independent prophecy;
for it wants the heading, "The word of Jahveh which came," etc., proper
to all the greater discourses. Besides, in point of subject-matter, it
may very well be joined with the preceding general reflections as to the
springs of mischief and of well-being; inasmuch as it shows how the way
of safety appointed to the people lies in keeping the decalogue, as
exemplified in one of its fundamental precepts. - The whole passage
contains only God's command to the prophet; but the execution of it,
i.e., the proclamation to the people of what was commanded, is involved
in the nature of the case. Jeremiah is to proclaim this word of the Lord
in all the gates of Jerusalem, that it may be obeyed in them all. The
locality of the gate of the sons of the people is obscure and difficult
to determine, that by which the kings of Judah go and come. בּני עם
seems to stand for בּני העם, as the Keri would have it. In [Jer
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023) and [Kg2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006), "sons of the people" means the
common people as opposed to the rich and the notables; in [Ch2
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#005), [Ch2
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#007)., the people as opposed to the
priests and Levites, that is, the laity. The first sig. of the phrase
seems here to be excluded by the fact, that the kings come and go by
this gate; for there is not the smallest probability that a gate so used
could have borne the name of "gate of the common people." But we might
well pause to weigh the second sig. of the word, if we could but assume
that it was a gate of the temple that was meant. Ng. concludes that it
was so, on the ground that we know of no city gate through which only
the kings and the dregs of the people were free to go, or the kings and
the mass of their subjects, to the exclusion of the priests. But this
does not prove his point; for we are not informed as to the temple, that
the kings and the laity were permitted to go and come by one gate only,
while the others were reserved for priests and Levites. Still it is much
more likely that the principal entrance to the outer court of the temple
should have obtained the name of "people's gate," or "laymen's gate,"
than that a city gate should have been so called; and that by that
"people's gate" the kings also entered into the court of the temple,
while the priests and Levites came and went by side gates which were
more at hand for the court of the priests. Certainly Ng. is right when
he further remarks, that the name was not one in general use, but must
have been used by the priests only. On the other hand, there is nothing
to support clearly the surmise that the gate יסוד, [Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005), was so called; the east gate of
the outer court is much more likely. We need not be surprised at the
mention of this chief gate of the temple along with the city gates; for
certainly there would be always a great multitude of people to be found
at this gate, even if what Ng. assumes were not the case, that by the
sale and purchase of things used in the temple, this gate was the scene
of a Sabbath-breaking trade. But if, with the majority of comm., we are
to hold that by "people's gate" a city gate was meant, then we cannot
determine which it was. Of the suppositions that it was the
Benjamin-gate, or the well-gate, [Neh
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#014) (Maur.), or the gate of the midst
which led through the northern wall of Zion from the upper city into the
lower city (Hitz.), or the water-gate, [Neh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026) (Graf), each is as unfounded as
another. From the plural: the kings of Judah ([Jer
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#020)), Hitz. infers that more kings
than one were then existing alongside one another, and that thus the
name must denote the members of the royal family. But his idea has been
arbitrarily forced into the text. The gates of the city, as well as of
the temple, did not last over the reign of but one king, [Jer
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021). השּׁמר בּנפשׁות, to take heed
for the souls, i.e., take care of the souls, so as not to lose life (cf.
[Mal 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015)), is a more pregnant
construction than that with ל, [Deu
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015), although it yields the same
sense. Ng. seeks erroneously to explain the phrase according to [Sa2
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010) (נשׁמר בּחרב, take care against
the sword) and [Deu 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#008), where
השּׁׁמר ought not to be joined at all with בּנגע. The bearing of burdens
on the Sabbath, both into the city and out of one's house, seems to
point most directly at market trade and business, cf. [Neh
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#015)., but is used only as one
instance of the citizens' occupations; hence are appended the very words
of the law: to do no work, [Exo 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016);
[Exo 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010); [Deu
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014), and: to hallow the Sabbath,
namely, by cessation from all labour, cf. [Jer
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024). The remark in [Jer
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#023), that the fathers have already
transgressed God's law, is neither contrary to the aim in view, as Hitz.
fancies, nor superfluous, but serves to characterize the transgression
censured as an old and deeply-rooted sin, which God must at length
punish unless the people cease therefrom. The description of the
fathers' disobedience is a verbal repetition of [Jer
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#026). The Chet. שׁומע cannot be a
participle, but is a clerical error for שׁמוע (infin. constr. with
(scriptio plena), as in [Jer 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#010) and
[Jer 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#015). See a similar error in
[Jer 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025) and [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006). On "nor take instruction," cf.
[Jer 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030).

In the next verses the observance of this commandment is enforced by a
representation of the blessings which the hallowing of the Sabbath will
bring to the people ([Jer 17:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024)),
and the curse upon its profanation ([Jer
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)). If they keep the Sabbath holy,
the glory of the dynasty of David and the prosperity of the people will
acquire permanence, and Jerusalem remain continually inhabited, and the
people at large will bring thank-offerings to the Lord in His temple.
Hitz., Graf, and Ng. take objection to the collocation: kings and
princes ([Jer 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025)), because princes
do not sit on the throne of David, nor can they have other "princes"
dependent on them, as we must assume from the "they and their princes."
But although the ושׂרים be awanting in the parallel, [Jer
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#004), yet this passage cannot be
regarded as the standard; for whereas the discourse in Jer 22 is
addressed to the king, the present is to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
or rather the people of Judah. The ושׂרים is subordinate to the kings,
so that the sitting on the throne of David is to be referred only to the
kings, the following ושׂריהם helping further to define them. "Riding" is
to be joined both with "in chariots" and "on horses," since רכב means
either driving or riding. The driving and riding of the kings and their
princes through the gates of Jerusalem is a sign of the undiminished
splendour of the rule of David's race.

[Jer 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026)

Besides the blessing of the continuance of the Davidic monarchy,
Jerusalem will also have to rejoice in the continued spiritual privilege
of public worship in the house of the Lord. From the ends of the kingdom
the people will come with offerings to the temple, to present
thank-offerings for benefits received. The rhetorical enumeration of the
various parts of the country appears again in [Jer
32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044). The cities of Judah and the
outskirts of Jerusalem denote the part of the country which bordered on
Jerusalem; then we have the land of Benjamin, the northern province of
the kingdom, and three districts into which the tribal domain of Judah
was divided: the Shephelah in the west on the Mediterranean Sea, the
hill-country, and the southland; see on [Jos
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021), [Jos
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033), and [Jos
15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048). The desert of Judah ([Jos
15:61](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061)) is not mentioned, as being
comprehended under the hill-country. The offerings are divided into two
classes: bloody, burnt and slain offerings, and unbloody, meat-offerings
and frankincense, which was strewed upon the meat-offering ([Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)). The latter is not the
incense-offering (Graf), which is not called לבונה, but קטרת, cf. [Exo
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007)., although frankincense was one
of the ingredients of the incense prepared for burning ([Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034)). These offerings they will
bring as "praise-offering" into the house of the Lord. תּודה is not here
used for זבח תּודה, praise-offering, as one species of slain-offering,
but is, as we see from [Jer 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#011), a
general designation for the praise and thanks which they desire to
express by means of the offerings specified.

[Jer 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#027)

In the event of the continuance of this desecration of the Sabbath,
Jerusalem is to be burnt up with fire, cf. [Jer
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#014), and, as regards the expressions
used, [Amo 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#014); [Hos
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 18](jer018)

</div>
