<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer013)  [Next](jer015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 14:0</span></span>

The Word Concerning the Droughts - Jeremiah 14-17

The distress arising from a lengthened drought ([Jer
14:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002)) gives the prophet occasion for
urgent prayer on behalf of his people ([Jer
14:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007) and [Jer
14:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019)); but the Lord rejects all
intercession, and gives the people notice, for their apostasy from Him,
of their coming destruction by sword, famine, and pestilence ([Jer
14:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#010) and [Jer
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)). Next, the prophet complains
of the persecution he has to endure, and is corrected by the Lord and
comforted ([Jer 15:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)). Then he has
his course of conduct for the future prescribed to him, since Judah is,
for its sins, to be cast forth into banishment, but is again to be
restored (16:1-17:4). And the discourse concludes with general
considerations upon the roots of the mischief, together with prayers for
the prophet's safety, and statements as to the way by which judgment may
be turned aside.

This prophetic word, though it had its origin in a special period of
distress, does not contain any single discourse such as may have been
delivered by Jeremiah before the people upon occasion of this calamity,
but is, like the former sections, a summary of addresses and utterances
concerning the corruption of the people, and the bitter experiences to
which his office exposes the prophet. For these matters the special
event above mentioned serves as a starting-point, inasmuch as the deep
moral degradation of Judah, which must draw after it yet sorer
judgments, is displayed in the relation assumed by the people to the
judgment sent on them at that time. - The favourite attempts of recent
commentators to dissect the passage into single portions, and to assign
these to special points of time and to refer them to particular
historical occurrences, have proved an entire failure, as Graf himself
admits. The whole discourse moves in the same region of thought and
adheres to the same aspect of affairs as the preceding ones, without
suggesting special historical relations. And there is an advance made in
the prophetic declaration, only in so far as here the whole substance of
the discourse culminates in the thought that, because of Judah's being
hardened in sin, the judgment of rejection can no in no way be turned
aside, not even by the intercession of those whose prayers would have
the greatest weight.

[Jeremiah 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 14:1</span></span>

The Uselessness of Prayer on behalf of the People. - The title in [Jer
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001) specifies the occasion for the
following discourse: What came a word of Jahveh to Jeremiah concerning
the drought. - Besides here, אשׁר היה is made to precede the דבר יהוה in
[Jer 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001); [Jer
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001); [Jer
49:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034); and so, by a kind of
attraction, the prophecy which follows receivers an outward connection
with that which precedes. Concerning the matters of the droughts.
בּצּרות, plur. of בּצּרה, [Psa 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010);
[Psa 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001), might mean harassments,
troubles in general. But the description of a great drought, with which
the prophecy begins, taken along with [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008), where בּצּרת occurs, meaning
drought, lit., cutting off, restraint of rain, shows that the plural
here is to be referred to the sing. בּצּרת (cf. עשׁתּרות from עשׁתּרת),
and that it means the withholding of rain or drought (as freq. in
Chald.). We must note the plur., which is not to be taken as intensive
of a great drought, but points to repeated droughts. Withdrawal of rain
was threatened as a judgment against the despisers of God's word ([Lev
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019).; [Deu
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#017); [Deu
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023)); and this chastisement has at
various times been inflicted on the sinful people; cf. [Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003); [Jer
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004); [Jer
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#010); [Hag
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#010). As the occasion of the present
prophecy, we have therefore to regard not a single great drought, but a
succession of droughts. Hence we cannot fix the time at which the
discourse was composed, since we have no historical notices as to the
particular times at which God was then punishing His people by
withdrawing the rain.

[Jeremiah 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 14:2</span></span>

Description of the distress arising from the drought. - [Jer
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002). Judah mourneth, and the gates
thereof languish, like mourning on the ground, and the cry of Jerusalem
goeth up. [Jer 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#003). Their nobles send
their mean ones for water: they come to the wells, find no water, return
with empty pitchers, are ashamed and confounded and cover their head.
[Jer 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#004). For the ground, which is
confounded, because no rain is fallen upon the earth, the husbandmen are
ashamed, cover their head. [Jer 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#005).
Yea, the hind also in the field, she beareth and forsaketh it, because
there is no grass. [Jer 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#006). And the
wild asses stand on the bare-topped heights, gasp for air like the
jackals; their eyes fail because there is no herb."

The country and the city, the distinguished and the mean, the field and
the husbandmen, are thrown into deep mourning, and the beasts of the
field pine away because neither grass nor herb grows. This description
gives a touching picture of the distress into which the land and its
inhabitants have fallen for lack of rain. Judah is the kingdom or the
country with its inhabitants; the gates as used poetically for the
cities with the citizens. Not mankind only, but the land itself mourns
and pines away, with all the creatures that live on it; cf. [Jer
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#004), where the ground is said to be
dismayed along with the tillers of it. The gates of the cities are
mentioned as being the places where the citizens congregate. אמלל, fade
away, pine, is strengthened by: are black, i.e., mourn, down to the
earth; pregnant for: set themselves mourning on the ground. As
frequently, Jerusalem is mentioned alongside of Judah as being its
capital. Their cry of anguish rises up to heaven. This universal
mourning is specialized from [Jer 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#003)
on. Their nobles, i.e., the distinguished men of Judah and Jerusalem,
send their mean ones, i.e., their retainers or servants and maids, for
water to the wells (גּבים, pits, [Kg2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#016), here cisterns). The Chet. צעור,
here and in [Jer 48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004), is an unusual
form for צעיר, Keri. Finding no water, they return, their vessels empty,
i.e., with empty pitchers, ashamed of their disappointed hope. בּשׁוּ is
strengthened by the synonym הכלמוּ. Covering the head is a token of deep
grief turned inwards upon itself; cf. [Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030); [Sa2
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#005). האדמה is the ground generally.
חתּה is a relative clause: quae consternata est. "Because no rain,"
etc., literally as in [Kg1 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#007). -
Even the beasts droop and perish. כּי is intensive: yea, even. The hind
brings forth and forsakes, sc. the new-born offspring, because for want
of grass she cannot sustain herself and her young. עזוב, infin. abs. set
with emphasis for the temp. fin., as [Gen
41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043); [Exo
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#011), and often; cf. Gesen. 131, 4, a,
Ew. 351, c. The hind was regarded by the ancients as tenderly caring for
her young, cf. Boch. Hieroz. i. lib. 3, c. 17 (ii. p. 254, ed. Ros.) The
wild asses upon the bleak mountain-tops, where these animals choose to
dwell, gasp for air, because, by reason of the dreadful drought, it is
not possible to get a breath of air even on the hills. Like the תּנּים,
jackals, cf. [Jer 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010); [Jer
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022), etc. Vulg. has dracones, with
the Aram. versions; and Hitz. and Graf are of opinion that the mention
of jackals is not here in point, and that, since תּנּים does not mean
dracones, the word stands here, as in [Exo
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#003); [Exo
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002), for תּנּין, the monster
inhabiting the water, a crocodile or some kind of whale that stretches
its head out of the water to draw breath with gaping jaws. On this Ng.
has well remarked: he cannot see why the gaping, panting jaws of the
jackal should not serve as a figure in such a case as the present. Their
eyes fail away - from exhaustion due to want of wear. עשׂב, bushes and
under-shrubs, as distinguished from דּשׁא, green grass.

[Jeremiah 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 14:7</span></span>

The prayer. - [Jer 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007). "If our
iniquities testify against us, O Jahveh, deal Thou for Thy name's sake,
for many are our backslidings; against Thee have we sinned. [Jer
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008). Thou hope of Israel, his Saviour
in time of need, why wilt Thou be as a stranger in the land, like a
wayfarer that hath put up to tarry for a night? [Jer
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#009). Why wilt Thou be as a man
astonied, as a mighty man that cannot help, and yet Thou art in the
midst of us, Jahveh, and Thy name is named upon us - O leave us not!"

The prophet utters this prayer in the name of his people (cf. [Jer
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#011)). It begins with confession of
sore transgression. Thus the chastisement which has befallen them they
have deserved as a just punishment; but the Lord is besought to help for
His name's sake, i.e., not: "for the sake of Thy honour, with which it
is not consistent that contempt of Thy will should go unpunished"
(Hitz.). This interpretation suits neither the idea of the name of God
nor the context. The name of God is the manifestation of God's being.
From Moses' time on, God, as Jahveh, has revealed Himself as the
Redeemer and Saviour of the children of Israel, whom He had adopted to
be His people, and as God, who is merciful and gracious, long-suffering,
and of great goodness and faithfulness ([Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)). As such He is besought to
reveal Himself now that they confess their backsliding and sin, and seek
His grace. Not for the sake of His honour in the eyes of the world, lest
the heathen believe He has no power to help, as Graf holds, for all
reference to the heathen nations is foreign to this connection; but He
is entreated to help, not to belie the hope of His people, because
Israel sets its hope in Him as Saviour in time of need ([Jer
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#009)). If by withholding rain He makes
His land and people to pine, then He does not reveal Himself as the lord
and owner of Judah, not as the God that dwells amidst His people; but He
seems a stranger passing through the land, who sets up His tent there
only to spend the night, who "feels no share in the weal and woe of the
dwellers therein" (Hitz.). This is the meaning of the question in [Jer
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008). The ancient expositors take נטה
elliptically, as in [Gen 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008) : that
stretches out His tent to pass the night. Hitz., again, objects that the
wayfarer does not drag a tent about with him, and, like Ew., takes this
verb in the sense of swerve from the direct route, cf. [Sa2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#019), [Sa2
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#021), etc. But the reason alleged is
not tenable; since travellers did often carry their tents with them, and
נטה, to turn oneself, is not used absolutely in the sig. to turn aside
from the way, without the qualification: to the right or to the left.
סוּר is in use for to turn aside to tarry, to turn in, [Jer
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005). We therefore abide by the old
interpretation, since "swerve from the way" has here no suitable
meaning.

[Jeremiah 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 14:9</span></span>

The pleader makes further appeal to God's almighty power. It is
impossible that Jahveh can let Himself look like a man at his wit's end
or a nerveless warrior, as He would seem to be if He should not give
help to His people in their present need. Since the time of A. Schultens
the ἁπ. λεγ. נדהם is rendered, after the Arab. dahama, to make an
unforeseen attack, by stupefactus, attonitus, one who, by reason of a
sudden mischance, has lost his presence of mind and is helpless. This is
in keeping with the next comparison, that with a warrior who has no
strength to help. The passage closes with an appeal to the relation of
grace which Jahveh sustains towards His people. ואתּה comes in
adversatively: yet art Thou in our midst, i.e., present to Thy people.
Thy name is named upon us, i.e., Thou hast revealed Thyself to us in Thy
being as God of salvation; see on [Jer
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010). אל־תּנּחנוּ, lit., lay us not
down, i.e., let us not sink.

[Jeremiah 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 14:10</span></span>

The Lord's answer. - [Jer 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#010). "Thus
saith Jahveh unto this people: Thus they loved to wander, their feet
they kept not back; and Jahveh hath no pleasure in them, now will He
remember their iniquities and visit their sins. [Jer
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#011). And Jahveh hath said unto me:
Pray not for this people for their good. [Jer
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#012). When they fast, I hear not
their cry; and when they bring burnt-offering and meat-offering, I have
no pleasure in them; but by sword, and famine, and pestilence will I
consume them. [Jer 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#013). Then said I:
Ah Lord Jahveh, behold, the prophets say to them, Ye shall see no sword,
and famine shall not befall you, but assured peace give I in this place.
[Jer 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014). And Jahveh said unto me:
Lies do the prophets prophesy in my name: I have not sent them, nor
commanded them, nor spoken to them; lying vision, and divination, and a
thing of nought, and deceit of their heart they prophesy to you. [Jer
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#015). Therefore thus saith Jahveh
concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, when I have not sent
them, who yet say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land: By sword
and famine shall these prophets perish. [Jer
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#016). And the people to whom they
prophesy shall lie cast out upon the streets of Jerusalem, by reason of
the famine and of the sword, and none will bury them, them and their
wives, their sons and their daughters; and I pour their wickedness upon
them. [Jer 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017). And thou shalt say
to them this word: Let mine eyes run down with tears day and night and
let them not cease; for with a great breach is broken the
virgin-daughter of my people, with a very grievous blow. [Jer
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#018). If I go forth into the field,
behold the slain with the sword; and if I come into the city, behold
them that pine with famine; for prophet and priest pass into a land and
know it not."

To the prophet's prayer the Lord answers in the first place, [Jer
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#010), by pointing to the backsliding
of the people, for which He is now punishing them. In the "thus they
love," etc., lies a backward reference to what precedes. The reference
is certainly not to the vain going for water ([Jer
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#003)), as Chr. B. Mich. and R. Salomo
Haccohen thought it was; nor is it to the description of the animals
afflicted by thirst, [Jer 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#005) and
[Jer 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#006), in which Ng. finds a
description of the passionate, unbridled lust after idolatry, the real
and final cause of the ruin that has befallen Israel. Where could be the
likeness between the wild ass's panting for breath and the wandering of
the Jews? That to which the "thus" refers must be sought for in the body
of the prayer to which Jahveh makes answer, as Ros. rightly saw. Not by
any means in the fact that in [Jer
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#009) the Jews prided themselves on
being the people of God and yet went after false gods, so that God
answered: ita amant vacillare, as good as to say: ita instabiles illos
esse, ut nunc ab ipso, nunc ab aliis auxilium quaerant (Ros.); for נוּע
cannot here mean the waving and swaying of reeds, but only the wandering
after other gods, cf. [Jer 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023), [Jer
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031). This is shown by the addition:
they kept not back their feet, cf. with [Jer
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025), where in the same reference the
withholding of the feet is enjoined. Graf is right in referring huts to
the preceding prayer: "Thus, in the same degree as Jahveh has estranged
Himself from His people (cf. [Jer 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008)
and [Jer 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#009)), have they estranged
themselves from their God." They loved to wander after strange gods, and
so have brought on themselves God's displeasure. Therefore punishment
comes on them. The second clause of the verse is a reminiscence of [Hos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013). - After mentioning the reason
why He punishes Judah, the Lord in [Jer
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#011). rejects the prayer of the
prophet, because He will not hear the people's cry to Him. Neither by
means of fasts nor sacrifice will they secure God's pleasure. The
prophet's prayer implies that the people will humble themselves and turn
to the Lord. Hence God explains His rejection of the prayer by saying
that He will give no heed to the people's fasting and sacrifices. The
reason of this appears from the context - namely, because they turn to
Him only in their need, while their heart still cleaves to the idols, so
that their prayers are but lip-service, and their sacrifices a soulless
formality. The suffix in רצם refers not to the sacrifices, but, like
that in רנּתם, to the Jews who, by bringing sacrifices, seek to win
God's love. כּי, but, introducing the antithesis to "have no pleasure in
them." The sword in battle, famine, and pestilence, at the siege of the
cities, are the three means by which God designs to destroy the
backsliding people; cf. [Lev 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#025).

In spite of the rejection of his prayer, the prophet endeavours yet
again to entreat God's favour for the people, laying stress, [Jer
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#013), on the fact that they had been
deceived and confirmed in their infatuation by the delusive forecastings
of the false prophets who promised peace. Peace of truth, i.e., peace
that rests on God's faithfulness, and so: assured peace will I give you.
Thus spoke these prophets in the name of Jahveh; cf. on this [Jer
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010); [Jer
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#012). Hitz. and Graf propose to change
שׁלום אמת into שׁלום ואמת, acc. to [Jer
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#006) and [Isa
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#008), because the lxx have ἀλήθειαν
καὶ εἰρήνην. But none of the passages cited furnishes sufficient ground
for this. In [Jer 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#006) the lxx have
rendered εἰρήνην καὶ πίστιν, in [Isa
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#008), εἰρήνη καὶ δικαιοσύνη; giving
thereby a clear proof that we cannot draw from their rendering any
certain inferences as to the precise words of the original text. Nor do
the parallels prove anything, since in them the expression often varies
in detail. But there can be no doubt that in the mouth of the
pseudo-prophets "assured peace" is more natural than "peace and truth."
But the Lord does not allow this excuse. He has not sent the prophets
that so prophesy: they prophesy lying vision, divination, falsehood, and
deceit, and shall themselves be destroyed by sword and famine. The
cumulation of the words, "lying vision," etc., shows God's wrath and
indignation at the wicked practices of these men. Graf wants to delete ו
before אליל, and to couple אליל with קסם, so as to make one idea:
prophecy of nought. For this he can allege none other than the erroneous
reason that קסם, taken by itself, does not sufficiently correspond to
"lying vision," inasmuch as, he says, it has not always a bad sense
attached to it; whereas the fact is that it is nowhere used for genuine
prophecy. The Chet. אלוּל and תּרמוּת are unusual formations, for which
the usual forms are substituted in the Keri. Deceit of their heart is
not self-deceit, but deceit which their heart has devised; cf. [Jer
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#026). But the people to whom these
prophets prophesied are to perish by sword and famine, and to lie
unburied in the streets of Jerusalem; cf. [Jer
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#002); [Jer
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#004). They are not therefore held
excused because false prophets told them lies, for they have given
credit to these lies, lies that flattered their sinful passions, and
have not been willing to hear or take to heart the word of the true
prophets, who preached repentance and return to God.

(Note: The Berleburg Bible says: "They wish to have such teachers, and
even to bring it about that there shall be so many deceiving workers,
because they can hardly even endure or listen to the upright ones. That
is the reason why it is to go no better with them than we see it is."
Calvin too has suggested the doubt: posset tamen videri parum humaniter
agere Deus, quod tam duras paenas infligit miseris hominibus, qui
aliunde decepti sunt, and has then given the true solution: certum est,
nisi ultro mundus appeteret mendacia, non tantam fore efficaciam diaboli
ad fallendum. Quod igitur ita rapiuntur homines ad imposturas, hoc fit
eorum culpa, quoniam magis propensi sunt ad vanitatem, quam ut se Deo et
verbo ejus subjiciant.)

To Hitz. it seems surprising that, in describing the punishment which is
to fall on seducers and seduced, there should not be severer judgment,
in words at least, levelled against the seducers as being those involved
in the deeper guilt; whereas the very contrary is the case in the Hebrew
text. Hitz. further proposes to get rid of this discrepancy by
conjectures founded on the lxx, yet without clearly informing us how we
are to read. But the difficulty solves itself as soon as we pay
attention to the connection. The portion of the discourse before us
deals with the judgment which is to burst on the godless people, in the
course of which those who had seduced the people are only casually
mentioned. For the purpose in hand, it was sufficient to say briefly of
the seducers that they too should perish by sword and famine who
affirmed that these punishments should not befall the people, whereas it
was necessary to set before the people the terrors of this judgment in
all their horror, in order not to fail of effect. With the reckoning of
the various classes of persons: they, their wives, etc., cf. the account
of their participation in idolatry, [Jer
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018). Hitz. rightly paraphrases
ושׁפכתּי: and in this wise will I pour out. רעתם, not: the calamity
destined for them, but: their wickedness which falls on them with its
consequences, cf. [Jer 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019), [Hos
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015), for propheta videtur causam
reddere, cur Deus horribile illud judicium exequi statuerit contra
Judaeos, nempe quoniam digni erant tali mercede (Calv.).

[Jeremiah 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 14:17</span></span>

The words, "and speak unto them this word," surprise us, because no word
from God follows, as in [Jer 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012),
but an exposition of the prophet's feelings in regard to the dreadful
judgment announced. Hence Dahl. and Ew. propose to join the words in
question with what goes before, while at the same time Ew. hints a
suspicion that an entire sentence has been dropped after the words. But
for this suspicion there is no ground, and the joining of the words with
the preceding context is contrary to the unfailing usage of this by no
means infrequent formula. The true explanation is found in Kimchi and
Calvin. The prophet is led to exhibit to the hardened people the grief
and pain he feels in contemplating the coming ruin of Judah, ut pavorem
illis incuteret, si forte, cum haec audirent, resipiscerent (Kimchi). If
not his words, then surely his tears; for the terrible calamity he has
to announce must touch and stagger them, so that they may be persuaded
to examine themselves and consider what it is that tends to their peace.
To make impression on their hardened consciences, he depicts the
appalling ruin, because of which his eyes run with tears day and night.
On "run down," etc., cf. [Jer 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017);
[Jer 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017); [Lam
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#018), etc. "Let them not cease" gives
emphasis: not be silent, at peace, cf. [Lam
3:49](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#049), i.e., weep incessantly day and
night. The appellation of the people: virgin-daughter of my people,
i.e., daughter that is my people, cf. [Jer
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011), corresponds to the love
revealing itself in tears. The depth of sorrow is further shown in the
clause: with a blow that is very dangerous, cf. [Jer
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019). In [Jer
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#018) the prophet portrays the
condition of things after the fall of Jerusalem: out upon the field are
those pierced with the sword; in the city תּחלוּאי , lit., suffering of
famine, [Deu 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#021), here abstr. pro
concr. of those pining in famine; and those that remain in life depart
into exile. Instead of the people Jeremiah mentions only the prophets
and priests as being the flower of God's people. סחר, to wander about,
in Hebr. usually in the way of commerce, here acc. to Aram. usage,
possibly too with the idea of begging subjoined. In the ולא ידעוּ Graf
holds the ו to be entirely out of place, while Hitz. pronounces against
him. The words are variously taken; e.g., and know nothing, wander about
aimless and helpless. But with this the omission of the article with ארץ
is incompatible. The omission shows that "and now not" furnishes an
attribute to "into a land." We therefore translate: and know it not =
which they know not, since the pronominal suffix is wont to be often
omitted where it can without difficulty be supplied from the preceding
clause.

[Jeremiah 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 14:19</span></span>

Renewed supplication and repeated rejection of the same. - [Jer
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019). "Hast thou then really rejected
Judah? or doth thy soul loathe Zion? Why hast Thou smitten us, so that
there is no healing for us? We look for peace, and there is no good; for
the time of healing, and behold terror! [Jer
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#020). We know, Jahveh, our
wickedness, the iniquity of our fathers, for we have sinned against
Thee. [Jer 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021). Abhor not, for Thy
name's sake; disgrace not the throne of Thy glory; remember, break not
Thy covenant with us! [Jer 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022). Are
there among the vain gods of the Gentiles givers of rain, or will the
heavens give showers? Art not Thou (He), Jahveh our God? and we hope in
Thee, for Thou hast made all these."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 15](jer015)

</div>
