<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer033)  [Next](jer035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 34:0</span></span>

I. The Labour and Suffering of the Prophet Before and after the Conquest
and Destruction of Jerusalem - Jeremiah 34-45

Under this title may be placed the whole of the contents of these twelve
chapters, which fall into three divisions. For Jer 34-36 contain partly
utterances of Jeremiah in the early part of the siege of Jerusalem under
Zedekiah, partly matters of fact in Jehoiakim's time. Next, mention is
made, in Jer 37-39, of the toils and sufferings of the prophet during
that siege, until the fall of the city; then, in Jer 40-44, is depicted
his active labour among the people who had been left behind in the land
by the Chaldeans, and who afterwards fled to Egypt; finally, as an
appendix to the account of his labours among the people, we find, in
[Jer 45:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001), the words of comfort
addressed to Baruch by Jeremiah. The second of these divisions is marked
by a historical introduction, [Jer
37:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#001), and the third by a somewhat
lengthened prophetic heading. Only Jer 34-36, which we regard as the
first division, seems to be without an external bond of unity. Graf,
Ewald, Ngelsbach, and others have consequently marked them as
appendixes; but in this way neither their position nor their connection
is at all accounted for. The relation of Jer 34 to the following is
analogous to that of [Jer 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001).
Just as the collection of special announcements regarding judgment and
deliverance, [Jer 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001), was
introduced by the utterances of the prophet in the beginning of the last
siege of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans; so too, in our third division, the
collected evidences of the labours of Jeremiah before and after the
destruction of Jerusalem, are introduced, Jer 34, by the utterances
which predict quite definitely what shall be the issue of the siege of
the city and the fate of the king and people. The first of these
utterances is set in a frame of historical statements regarding the
siege ([Jer 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001), [Jer
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#007)); this setting marks it out as an
introduction to the notices following. But the second utterance, [Jer
34:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008), refers to the fact of the
manumission of the Hebrew men-and maid-servants during the siege, and
the cancelling of that measure afterwards. The following chapters, Jer
35, 36, furnish two proofs of the activity of the prophet under
Jehoiakim, which, on account of their historical nature, could not be
introduced till now, since they would not admit of being inserted in the
collection of the particular prophecies of coming judgment, Jer 21-29.

A. Prophecies Delivered under Zedekiah, and Events of Jehoiakim's Time -
Jeremiah 34-36

Concerning Zedekiah and the Emancipation of the Men-and Maid-Servants -
Jeremiah 34

This chapter contains two prophecies of the time of the siege of
Jerusalem under Zedekiah, of which the first, [Jer
34:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001), announces to the king the
fruitlessness of resistance to the power of the Chaldeans; the second,
[Jer 34:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008), threatens the princes
and people of Judah with severe judgments for annulling the manumission
of the Hebrew men-and maid-servants. Both of these utterances belong to
the first period of the siege, probably the ninth year of the reign of
Zedekiah.

[Jeremiah 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 34:1</span></span>

The message to Zedekiah is regarded by Hitzig, Ewald, Graf, Ngelsbach,
etc. as a supplement to [Jer 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001).,
and as giving, in its complete form, the prophecy to which [Jer
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003). was referred, as the reason of
the confinement of Jeremiah in the court of the prison. Certainly it is
so far true that Jeremiah, in [Jer
34:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#002), expresses himself more fully
regarding the fate of King Zedekiah at the fall of Jerusalem into the
hands of the Chaldeans than in [Jer
32:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003); [Jer
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003)., and [Jer
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#017); but we are not warranted in
drawing the inference that this message forms a historical appendix or
supplement to [Jer 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003)., and was the
occasion or reason of Jeremiah's imprisonment. See, on the contrary, the
remarks on [Jer 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003). It is not given
here as an appendix to explain the reason of the prophet's imprisonment,
but as a prophecy from which we may see how King Zedekiah was
forewarned, from the very beginning of the siege, of what its issue
would be, that he might frame his conduct accordingly. Nor does it
belong to the period when Nebuchadnezzar, after beating off the
Egyptians who had come to the relief of the beleaguered city, had
returned to the siege of Jerusalem, but to the earliest period of the
siege, when Zedekiah might still cherish the hope of defeating and
driving off the Chaldeans through the help of the Egyptians. - According
to [Jer 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001), the word of the Lord
came to Jeremiah when "Nebuchadnezzar and," i.e., with, "all his host,
and all the kingdoms of the land of the dominion of his hand, and all
the nations, were fighting against Jerusalem and all her towns." The
words are multiplied to represent the strength of the Chaldean army, so
as to deepen the impression of overpowering might, against which
resistance is vain. The army consists of men drawn from all the kingdoms
of the territory he rules, and of all nations. ארץ ממשׁלת means the same
as ארץ ממשׁלתּו, [Jer 51:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#028), the
territory over which his dominion, which includes many kingdoms,
extends. The lxx have omitted "all the nations" as superfluous. See a
like conglomeration of words in a similar description, [Eze
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007). "All her towns" are the towns of
Judah which belong to Jerusalem; see [Jer
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#015). According to [Jer
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#007), the strong towns not yet taken
are meant, especially those strongly fortified, Lachish and Azekah in
the plain ([Jos 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039), [Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035)), the former of which is shown
still under the name Um Lakhis, while the latter is to be sought for in
the vicinity of Socho; see on [Jos
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003), [Jos
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010), and [Ch2
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#009). - Jeremiah is to say to the
king:

[Jer 34:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#002)

"Thus saith Jahveh: Behold, I will deliver this city into the hand of
the king of Babylon, that he may burn it with fire. [Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003). And thou shalt not escape from
his hand, but shalt certainly be seized and delivered into his hand; and
thine eyes shall see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and his mouth
shall speak with thy mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon. [Jer
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#004). But hear the word of Jahveh, O
Zedekiah, king of Judah. Thus saith Jahveh concerning thee: Thou shalt
not die by the sword. [Jer 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005). In
peace shalt thou die; and as with the burnings of thy fathers, the
former kings who were before thee, so shall they make a burning for
thee, and they shall wail for thee, \[crying,\] 'Alas, lord!' for I have
spoken the word, saith Jahveh. - On [Jer
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#002), [Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003), cf. [Jer
32:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003). "But hear," [Jer
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#004), introduces an exception to what
has been said before; but the meaning of [Jer
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#004), [Jer
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005) is disputed. They are usually
understood in this say: Zedekiah shall be carried into exile to Babylon,
but shall not be killed with the sword, or executed, but shall die a
peaceful death, and be buried with royal honours. But C. B. Michaelis,
Venema, Hitzig, and Graf take the words as an exception that will occur,
should Zedekiah follow the advice given him to deliver himself up to the
king of Babylon, instead of continuing the struggle. Then what is
denounced in [Jer 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003) will not
happen; Zedekiah shall not be carried away to Babylon, but shall die as
king in Jerusalem. This view rests on the hypothesis that the divine
message has for its object to induce the king to submit and give up
himself (cf. [Jer 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017).). But this
supposition has no foundation; and what must be inserted, as the
condition laid before Zedekiah, "if thou dost willingly submit to the
king of Babylon," is quite arbitrary, and incompatible with the spirit
of the word, "But hear the word of Jahveh," for in this case [Jer
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#004) at least would require to run,
"Obey the word of Jahveh" (שׁמע בּדבר ), as [Jer
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#020). To take the words שׁמע דברin
the sense, "Give ear to the word, obey the word of Jahveh," is not
merely inadmissible grammatically, but also against the context; for the
word of Jahveh which Zedekiah is to hear, gives no directions as to how
he is to act, but is simply an intimation as to what the end of his life
shall be: to change or avert this does not stand in his power, so that
we cannot here think of obedience or disobedience. The message in [Jer
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#004), [Jer
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005) states more in detail what that
was which lay before Zedekiah: he shall fall into the hands of the king
of Babylon, be carried into exile in Babylon, yet shall not die a
violent death through the sword, but die peacefully, and be buried with
honour - not, like Jehoiakim, fall in battle, and be left unmourned and
unburied ([Jer 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018).). This
intimation accords with the notices given elsewhere as to the end of
Zedekiah ([Jer 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#005); [Jer
39:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005)). Although Zedekiah died a
prisoner in Babylon ([Jer 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011)), yet
his imprisonment would not necessarily be an obstacle in the way of an
honourable burial after the fashion of his fathers. When Jehoiachin,
after an imprisonment of thirty-seven years, was raised again to royal
honours, then also might there be accorded not merely a tolerably
comfortable imprisonment to Zedekiah himself, but to the Jews also, at
his death, the permission to bury their king according to their national
custom. Nor is anything to be found elsewhere contrary to this view of
the words. The supposition that Zedekiah caused the prophet to be
imprisoned on account of this message to him, which Ngelsbach has
laboured hard to reconcile with the common acceptation of the passage,
is wholly devoid of foundation in fact, and does not suit the time into
which this message falls; for Jeremiah was not imprisoned till after the
time when the Chaldeans were obliged for a season to raise the siege, on
the approach of the Egyptians, and that, too, not at the command of the
king, but by the watchman at the gate, on pretence that he was a
deserter. "Thou shalt die in peace," in contrast with "thou shalt die by
the sword," marks a peaceful death on a bed of sickness in contrast with
execution, but not (what Graf introduces into the words) in addition,
his being deposited in the sepulchre of his fathers. "With the burnings
of thy fathers," etc., is to be understood, according to [Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014); [Ch2
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#019), of the burning of aromatic
spices in honour of the dead; for the burning of corpses was not
customary among the Hebrews: see on [Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014). On "alas, lord!" see [Jer
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018). This promise is strengthened by
the addition, "for I have spoken the word," where the emphasis lies on
the אני: I the Lord have spoken the word, which therefore shall
certainly be fulfilled. - In [Jer
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#006), [Jer
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#007) it is further remarked in
conclusion, that Jeremiah addressed these words to the king during the
siege of Jerusalem, when all the cities of Judah except Lachish and
Azekah were already in the power of the Chaldeans. ערי is not in
apposition to ערי יהוּדה, but belongs to נשׁארוּ: "they were left among
the towns of Judah as strong cities;" i.e., of the strong cities of
Judah, they alone had not yet been conquered.

[Jeremiah 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 34:8</span></span>

Threatening because of the Re-enslavement of the Liberated Hebrew
Men-and Maid-servants. - [Jer 34:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008)
describe the occasion of the word of the Lord, which follows in [Jer
34:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#012). It came to Jeremiah "after
King Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem, to
proclaim liberty to them, that every one should send away his
man-servant, or his maid-servant, being a Hebrew or Hebrewess, so that
none should impose servitude on any one of them who was a Jew, his
brother. [Jer 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#010). And all the
princes and all the people who entered into the covenant obeyed, each
one setting free his man-servant and his maid-servant, and not imposing
servitude on them any more: they obeyed and each one set them free. [Jer
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#011). But they turned round
afterwards, and brought back the servants and the handmaids whom they
had set free, and brought them under subjection, for servants and for
handmaids." The covenant which Zedekiah concluded with all the people at
Jerusalem, according to what follows, consisted in a solemn vow made
before the Lord in the temple, probably confirmed by sacrifices, to set
free the male and female slaves of Hebrew descent, in conformity with
the law, [Exo 21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#001); [Deu
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012).

The law required the gratuitous manumission of these after seven years
of service. This time, indeed, is not mentioned in our verses, but it is
assumed as well known through the law. But, in the general departure of
the people from the Lord and His commandments, the observance of this
law had probably long been intermitted, so that, in consequence of the
solemn engagement to obey it once more, a great number of Hebrew male
and female slaves received their freedom, inasmuch as very many had
served longer than seven years; however, we need not suppose that all
bond men and women were liberated at once. The resolution, [Jer
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#009), that every one should liberate
his Hebrew man-or maid-servant, and that no one should continue to
impose servitude on a Jew, his brother, i.e., compel him any longer to
serve as a slave, is conditioned by the law, which is assumed as well
known: this also accords with the expression לבלתּי עבד־בּם, which is
used in a general way of the treatment of Hebrew men-and maid-servants,
[Lev 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039). However, it is also
possible that a liberation of all bond men and women took place without
regard to the duration of their servitude, partly for the purpose of
averting, by such obedience to the law, the calamity now threatening the
city, and partly also to employ the liberated slaves in the defence of
the city; for, according to [Jer
34:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#021)., the emancipation took place
during the siege of Jerusalem, and after the departure of the Chaldeans
the solemn promise was revoked. The expression קתא דרור, "to proclaim
liberty," is taken from [Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010),
but it does not prove that the manumission took place on a sabbath-or
jubilee-year. להם refers ad sensum to those who were bondmen and had a
right to be set free. The general expression is explained by שׁלּח
חפשׁים, and this again is more closely defined by לבלתּי עבד־בּם (cf.
[Lev 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039)). אישׁ בּיהוּדי אחיהוּ,
(that no one should labour) "though a Jew, who is his brother," i.e., a
fellow-countryman; i.e., that no one should impose servitude on a Jew,
as being a compatriot. "To enter into a covenant" is to assume its
obligation; cf. [Ch2 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#012); [Eze
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008). The Kethib יכבישׁום receives, in
the Qeri, the vowels of the Kal, since the Hiphil of this verb does not
occur elsewhere, only the Kal, cf. [Ch2
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#010); but the alteration is
unnecessary - the Hiphil may intensify the active meaning.

[Jeremiah 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 34:12</span></span>

The threat of punishment. - [Jer
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#012). "Then came the word of Jahveh
to Jeremiah from Jahveh, saying: [Jer
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#013). Thus saith Jahveh, the God of
Israel, 'I made a covenant with your fathers in the day when I brought
them out of the land of Egypt, from a house of bondmen, saying, [Jer
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#014). At the end of seven years shall
ye set free each man his brother, who is a Hebrew that sold himself to
thee; and he shall serve thee six years, then shalt thou send him away
from thee free: but your fathers hearkened not unto me, nor inclined
their ear. [Jer 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#015). But you had
turned just now, and had done what is right in mine eyes, because each
man proclaimed liberty to his neighbour, ad ye had made a covenant
before me in the house on which my name is called. [Jer
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#016). But ye turned again and
profaned my name, and each one made his man-servant and his handmaid,
whom he had sent away free, at their pleasure, to return, and ye brought
them into subjection, to be men-and maid-servants to you. [Jer
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#017). Therefore, thus saith Jahveh,
Ye have not hearkened unto me in proclaiming liberty each man to his
brother, and each man to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for
you, saith Jahveh, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to famine, and I
will deliver you up for maltreatment to all the kingdoms of the earth.
[Jer 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018). And I shall make the men
who have transgressed my covenant, that have not kept the words of the
covenant which they concluded before me, like the calf which they cut in
two, and between whose pieces they passed. [Jer
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019). The princes of Judah and the
princes of Jerusalem, the courtiers, and the priests, and all he people
of the land, who passed through between the pieces of the calf, [Jer
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#020). Them will I give into the hand
of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life, so
that their corpses shall be for food to the birds of heaven and to the
beasts of the earth. [Jer 34:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#021). And
Zedekiah, king of Judah, and his princes will I give into the hand of
their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life, and into
the hand of the army of the king of Babylon, that has departed from
against you. [Jer 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#022). Behold, I
will command, saith Jahveh, and will make them return to this city, and
they shall fight against it, and shall take it, and shall burn it with
fire; and the cities of Judah will I make a desolation, without an
inhabitant."

[Jer 34:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#013)

In [Jer 34:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#013) the Lord sets before
the people and their rulers their new offence; in [Jer
34:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#017) He announces to them the
punishment for this new deed by which the covenant is broken. In order
to place the transgression in its proper light, He mentions, first of
all, that, when He led Israel out of Egypt, He concluded with them a
covenant to the effect that every one of them should set free his Hebrew
servant at the end of seven years; He also mentions that their fathers
had transgressed this covenant ([Jer
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#013), [Jer
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#014)). The designation of Egypt as a
house of bondmen, as in [Exo 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003),
[Exo 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014); [Exo
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002); [Deu
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#012), etc., possesses a special
emphasis, and points to what is mentioned in [Deu
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#015) as the motive for obeying the
law referred to in the address. Because Israel was a servant in Egypt,
and the Lord has redeemed him out of this house of bondmen, therefore
must they not treat as slaves their brethren who had fallen into
poverty, but set them free after six years of service. The expression
"at the end (after the lapse) of seven years" is to be understood in the
same way as the expression "after eight days." As this just means "when
seven days are completed," so also, according to the law, [Exo
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002); [Deu
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012), the emancipation was to follow
in the seventh year, after six full years of service. "Who sold himself
to thee" is an expression copied from [Deu
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012). - From this sin of their
fathers they had now for a little turned away, and, in a solemn
covenant, resolved to free the bondmen, as the law decreed ([Jer
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#015)); but they have immediately
profaned the name of the Lord again by revoking this decree, viz., by
breaking the covenant made before God. לנפשׁם, "according to their
pleasure," like eלנפשׁהּ, [Deu 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#014).

[Jer 34:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#017)

The announcement of punishment. Because ye have not hearkened, by
proclaiming, every one, liberty to his bondman (this certainly had been
done, but was again undone by annulling the decree), therefore I
proclaim liberty for you; i.e., you, who have hitherto been my servants
([Lev 25:55](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#055)), I discharge from this
relation, - deliver you up to your fate as regards the sword, etc., that
the sword, famine, and pestilence may have power over you. For לזועה see
[Jer 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004). - In [Jer
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018) the construction is disputed.
Many, including Luther, take העגל as the second object to נתתּי: "I will
make the men...the calf," i.e., like the calf. But, though נתן is
frequently construed with a double accusative with the meaning of making
some thing another thing (cf. e.g., [Jer
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#022), [Gen
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005); [Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)), yet in such a case the
predicative-object does not readily take the article. Moreover, נתן, in
the sense required here, to make like = treat as, is joined with כּ, as
in [Isa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002); [Eze
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#002), [Eze
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#006); [Gen
42:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#030); [Kg1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027), etc. Finally, Rosenmller
objects: continuata versu 19 personarum descriptio et repetitio verbi
yṭitanfw̱ [Jer 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#020) vix permittunt,
propositionem hoc versu absolvi. For these reasons, L. de Dieu,
Rosenmller, Ewald, and Graf have taken העגל as being in apposition to
הבּרית, and the enumeration "princes of Judah," etc., [Jer
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019), as a continuation or exposition
of האנשׁים, [Jer 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018), and ונתתּי
אותם, [Jer 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#020), as a resumption of
the same words in [Jer 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018).
According to this view, [Jer 34:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018)
would form a series of appositions: "I will give the men...that have not
kept the words of the covenant which they concluded before me...the
princes of Judah who passed between the parts of the calf, - these will
I give into the hands of their enemies." But, apart from the
consideration that the enumeration of the covenant-breakers (viz., the
princes of Judah, etc.), which is added by way of apposition in [Jer
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019), ought not to come in till after
the apposition to הבּרית, which would be a harsh and complicated
arrangement of the members of the sentence, this construction seems
untenable for the following reasons: (a) "The calf that they cut," etc.,
which forms the explanatory apposition to "the covenant," is separated
from it by the intervening clause, "which they made before me." And (b),
even though we might modify this harshness by repeating את־דּברי before
העגל, yet the mode of expression, "they have not performed the words of
the calf which they cut in two, and between whose parts they passed,"
would be a very stiff and unnatural one for "they have not performed
what they vowed or sware in presence of the parts of the calf which they
had halved, and when they passed through between these pieces." With
Maurer and Hitzig, therefore, we abide by the older view, which takes
העגל as the second object to ונתתּי: "I will make the men...the calf,"
or, better, "like the calf which they cut in two," etc. The article is
used with עגל because this predicate is more exactly determined by
relative clauses, and העגל stands for כּעגל, since, as often happens,
the כּ of likeness is dropped to give more point to the idea. We make
[Jer 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019) begin a new sentence, and
take the names of this verse as objects absolute, which, by אותם
following ונתתּי, are subordinated to the verb: "As for the princes of
Judah...them shall I give...." - From [Jer
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018) we see that, when alliances were
entered into, the contracting parties slaughtered an עגל, "calf," i.e.,
a young bullock, cut it in two halves, and went through between the
pieces that were placed opposite one another. See on [Gen
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#010) for details regarding this most
ancient custom and its meaning: according to the account of Ephraem
Syrus, it is of Chaldean origin. Thus are explained the phrases used to
signify the making of a covenant. כּרת בּרית, to cut a covenant, ὅρκια
τέμνειν, faedus ferire, i.e., ferienda hostia faedus facere. We cannot
with certainty infer, from the threatening pronounced in this passage,
that this rite originally signified nothing more than that he who broke
his promise would be treated like the animal that had been slaughtered.
For the threatening is merely a conclusion drawn from the sacred act;
but this does not exclude a deeper meaning of the rite.

[Jer 34:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019)

[Jer 34:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019) give the real
explanation of the threatening attached to the ritual of the covenant.
Princes, officers of the court, priests and people, who have
transgressed the covenant, shall die by the hand of the enemy, and
perish ignominiously. On [Jer 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#020),
cf. [Jer 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#033); [Jer
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#004), etc. On סריסים see on [Gen
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036). King Zedekiah also, with his
princes, his retinue, shall fall into the hand of his enemies, ay, into
the hands of the Chaldeans, who have now withdrawn from Jerusalem (on
עלה see on [Jer 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002)). See also [Gen
37:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 35](jer035)

</div>
