<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer000)  [Next](jer002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 1:1</span></span>

[Jer 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001) contain the heading to the
whole book of the prophecies of Jeremiah. The heading runs thus:
"Sayings of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests at Anathoth, in
the land of Benjamin, to whom befell the word of Jahveh in the days of
Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his
reign, and in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah,
unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah king of
Judah, until the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month."
The period mentioned in these verses includes the time of Jeremiah's
principal labours, while no reference is here made to the work he at a
later time wrought amidst the ruins of Judah and in Egypt; this being
held to be of but subordinate importance for the theocracy. Similarly,
when the names of the kings under whom he laboured are given, the brief
reigns of Jehoahaz and of Jehoiachin are omitted, neither reign having
lasted over three months. His prophecies are called דברים, words or
speeches, as in [Jer 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010); so with
the prophecies of Amos, [Amo 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001). More
complete information as to the person of the prophet is given by the
mention made of his father and of his extraction. The name ירמיהוּ,
"Jahveh throws," was in very common use, and is found as the name of
many persons; cf. [Ch1 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#024); [Ch1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#004), [Ch1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#010), [Ch1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#013); [Kg2
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031); [Jer
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#003); [Neh
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#003); [Neh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001). Hence we are hardly entitled to
explain the name with Hengstb. by [Exo
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001), to the effect that whoever bore
it was consecrated to the God who with almighty hand dashes to the
ground all His foes, so that in his name the nature of our prophet's
mission would be held to be set forth. His father Hilkiah is taken by
Clem. Alex., Jerome, and some Rabbins, for the high priest of that name
who is mentioned in [Ch2 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#004); but
without sufficient grounds. For Hilkiah, too, is a name that often
occurs; and the high priest is sure to have had his home not in
Anathoth, but in Jerusalem. But Jeremiah and his father belonged to the
priests who lived in Anathoth, now called Anta, a town of the priests,
lying 1 1/4 hours north of Jerusalem (see on [Jos
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#018)), in the land, i.e., the tribal
territory, of Benjamin. In [Jer 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002)
אליו belongs to אשׁר: "to whom befell (to whom came) the word of Jahveh
in the days of Josiah,...in the thirteenth year of his reign." This same
year is named by Jeremiah in [Jer 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#003)
as the beginning of his prophetic labours. ויהי in [Jer
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#003) is the continuation of היה in [Jer
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002), and its subject is דבר יהוה: and
then (further) it came (to him) in the days of Jehoiakim,...to the end
of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, etc. In the fifth month of the year
named, the eleventh of the reign of Zedekiah, Jerusalem was reduced to
ashes by Nebuzar-adan, and its inhabitants carried away to Babylon; cf.
[Jer 52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012)., [Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008). Shortly before, King Zedekiah,
captured when in flight from the Chaldeans during the siege of
Jerusalem, had been deprived of eyesight at Riblah and carried to
Babylon in chains. And thus his kingship was at an end, thought the
eleventh year of his reign might not be yet quite completed.

[Jeremiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 1:4</span></span>

The Call and Consecration of Jeremiah to be a Prophet of the Lord. - The
investiture of Jeremiah with the prophetic office follows in four acts:
the call on the part of the Lord, [Jer
1:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004); Jeremiah's consecration for his
calling in [Jer 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009); and in two
signs, by means of which the Lord assures him of certain success in his
work and of powerful support in the exercise of his office ([Jer
1:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)). The call was given by a word
of the Lord which came to him in this form: [Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005). "Before I formed thee in the womb
I have known thee, and before thou wentest forth from the belly have I
consecrated thee, to be prophet to the nations have I set thee. [Jer
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006). Then said I, Ah, Lord Jahveh!
behold, I know not how to speak; for I am too young. [Jer
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007). Then said Jahveh to me, Say not,
I am too young; but to all to whom I send thee shalt thou go, and all
that I command thee shalt thou speak. [Jer
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008). Fear not before them: for I am
with thee, to save thee, saith Jahveh. This word came to Jeremiah by
means of inspiration, and is neither the product of a reflective musing
as to what his calling was to be, nor the outcome of an irresistible
impulse, felt within him, to come forward as a prophet. It was a
supernatural divine revelation vouchsafed to him, which raised his
spiritual life to a state of ecstasy, so that he both recognised the
voice of God and felt his lips touched by the hand of God ([Jer
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009)). Further, he saw in spirit, one
after another, two visions which God interpreted to him as confirmatory
tokens of his divine commission ([Jer
1:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)). Jeremiah's appointment to be
a prophet for the nations follows upon a decree of God's, fixed before
he was conceived or born. God in His counsel has not only foreordained
our life and being, but has predetermined before our birth what is to be
our calling upon this earth; and He has accordingly so influenced our
origin and our growth in the womb, as to prepare us for what we are to
become, and for what we are to accomplish on behalf of His kingdom. This
is true of all men, but very especially of those who have been chosen by
God to be the extraordinary instruments of His grace, whom He has
appointed to be instruments for the carrying out of the redemptive
schemes of His kingdom; cf. [Jer 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#002),
[Jer 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#024); [Jer
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#005); [Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015). Thus Samson was appointed to be
a Nazarite from the womb, this having been revealed to his mother before
he was conceived, [Jdg 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#003). To other
men of God such divine predestination was made known for the first time
when they were called to that office to which God had chosen them. So
was it with our prophet Jeremiah. In such a case a reminder by God of
the divine counsel of grace, of old time ordained and provided with
means for its accomplishment, should be accepted as an encouragement
willingly to take upon one the allotted calling. For the man God has
chosen before his birth to a special office in His kingdom He equips
with the gifts and graces needed for the exercise of his functions. The
three clauses of [Jer 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005) give the
three moments whereof the choosing consists: God has chosen him, has
consecrated him, and has installed him as prophet. The reference of the
words "I have known thee," Calvin limited to the office, quasi diceret,
priusquam te formarem in utero, destinavi te in hunc usum, nempe ut
subires docendi munus in populo meo. Divine knowing is at the same time
a singling out; and of this, choosing is the immediate consequence. But
the choosing takes place by means of הקדישׁ, sanctifying, i.e., setting
apart and consecrating for a special calling, and is completed by
institution to the office. "To be prophet for the nations have I set
thee" (נתן, ponere, not only appoint, but install). The sense has been
briefly put by Calv. thus: (Jer.) fuisse hac lege creatum hominem, ut
suo tempore manifestaretur propheta. לנוים, to the nations = for the
nations; not for Judah alone, but for the heathen peoples too; cf. [Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010), [Jer
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009), 46ff. The Chethibh אצורך should
apparently be read אצוּרך, from צוּר, equivalent to יצר; the root-form
צוּר, being warranted by [Exo 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004);
[Kg1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#015), and being often found in
Aramaic. It is, however, possible that the Chet. may be only scriptio
plena of אצר, a radice יצר, since the scriptio pl. is found elsewhere,
e.g., [Hos 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012); [Jer
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017); [Eze
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#028), etc.

[Jeremiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 1:6</span></span>

The divine call throws Jeremiah into terror. Knowing well his too great
weakness for such an office, he exclaims: Ah, Lord Jahveh! I know not
how to speak; for I am נער, i.e., young and inexperienced; cf. [Kg1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#007). This excuse shows that לא יד
means something else than לא אישׁ דברים, by which Moses sought to repel
God's summons. Moses was not ready of speech, he lacked the gift of
utterance; Jeremiah, on the other hand, only thinks himself not yet
equal to the task by reason of his youth and want of experience.

[Jeremiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 1:7</span></span>

This excuse God holds of no account. As prophet to the nations, Jeremiah
was not to make known his own thoughts or human wisdom, but the will and
counsel of God which were to be revealed to him. This is signified by
the clauses: for to all to whom I send thee, etc. The על belonging to
תלך stands for אל, and does not indicate a hostile advance against any
one. כל after על is not neuter, but refers to persons, or rather
peoples; since to the relative אשׁר in this connection, עליהם is quite a
natural completion; cf. [Isa 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012), and
Ew. 331, c. Only to those men or peoples is he to go to whom God sends
him; and to them he is to declare only what God commands him. And so he
needs be in no anxiety on this head, that, as a youth, he has no
experience in the matter of speaking.

[Jeremiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 1:8</span></span>

Just as little needs youthful bashfulness or shy unwillingness to speak
before high and mighty personages stand as a hindrance in the way of his
accepting God's call. The Lord will be with him, so that he needs have
no fear for any man. The suffix in מפניהם refers to all to whom God
sends him ([Jer 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007)). These, enraged
by the threatenings of punishment which he must proclaim to them, will
seek to persecute him and put him to death (cf. [Jer
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#019)); but God promises to rescue him
from every distress and danger which the fulfilment of his duties can
bring upon him. Yet God does not let the matter cease with this pledge;
but, further, He consecrates him to his calling.

[Jeremiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 1:9</span></span>

The Consecration. - [Jer 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009). "And
Jahveh stretched forth His hand, and touched my mouth, and Jahveh said
to me, Behold, I put my words into thy mouth. [Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010). Behold, I set thee this day over
the nations, and over the kingdoms, to root up and to ruin, to destroy
and to demolish, to build and to plant." In order to assure him by overt
act of His support, the Lord gives him a palpable pledge. He stretches
out His hand and causes it to touch his mouth (cf. [Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)); while, as explanation of this
symbolical act, He adds: I have put my words in thy mouth. The hand is
the instrument of making and doing; the touching of Jeremiah's mouth by
the hand of God is consequently an emblematical token that God frames in
his mouth what he is to speak. It is a tangible pledge of ἔμπνευσις,
inspiratio, embodiment of that influence exercised on the human spirit,
by means of which the holy men of God speak, being moved by the Holy
Ghost, [Pe2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021) (Nδgelsb.). The act
is a real occurrence, taking place not indeed in the earthly, corporeal
sphere, but experienced in spirit, and of the nature of ecstasy. By
means of it God has consecrated him to be His prophet, and endowed him
for the discharge of his duties; He may now entrust him with His
commission to the peoples and kingdoms, and set him over them as His
prophet who proclaims to them His word. The contents of this proclaiming
are indicated in the following infinitive clauses. With the words of the
Lord he is to destroy and to build up peoples and kingdoms. The word of
God is a power that carries out His will, and accomplishes that whereto
He sends it, [Isa 55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010). Against this
power nothing earthly can stand; it is a hammer that breaks rocks in
pieces, [Jer 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029). What is here said
of the word of Jahveh to be preached by Jeremiah is said of Jahveh
Himself in [Jer 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028). Its power is to
show itself in two ways, in destroying and in building up. The
destroying is not set down as a mere preliminary, but is expressed by
means of four different words, whereas the building is given only in two
words, and these standing after the four; in order, doubtless, to
indicate that the labours of Jeremiah should consist, in the first place
and for the most part, in proclaiming judgment upon the nations. The
assonant verbs נתשׁ and נתץ are joined to heighten the sense; for the
same reason להרוס is added to להאביד, and in the antithesis לנטוע is
joined with לבנות.

(Note: The lxx have omitted להרוסa, and hence Hitz. infers the
spuriousness of this word. But in the parallel passage, [Jer
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028), the lxx have rendered all the
four words by the one καθαιρεῖν; and Hitz. does not then pronounce the
other three spurious.)

[Jeremiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 1:11</span></span>

The Confirmatory Tokens. - The first is given in [Jer
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011) and [Jer
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#012) : "And there came to me the word
of Jahveh, saying, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said, I see an
almond rod. Then Jahveh said to me, Thou hast seen aright: for I will
keep watch over my word to fulfil it." With the consecration of the
prophet to his office are associated two visions, to give him a surety
of the divine promise regarding the discharge of the duties imposed on
him. First, Jeremiah sees in spirit a rod or twig of an almond tree. God
calls his attention to this vision, and interprets it to him as a symbol
of the swift fulfilment of His word. The choice of this symbol for the
purpose given is suggested by the Hebrew name for the almond tree, שׁקד,
the wakeful, the vigilant; because this tree begins to blossom and
expand its leaves in January, when the other trees are still in their
winter's sleep (florat omnium prima mense Januario, Martio vero poma
maturat. Plin. h. n. xvi. 42, and Von Schubert, Reise iii. S. 14), and
so of all trees awakes earliest to new life. Without any sufficient
reason Graf has combated this meaning for שׁקד, proposing to change שׁקד
into שׁקד, and, with Aquil., Sym., and Jerome, to translate מקּל שׁקד
watchful twig, virga vigilans, i.e., a twig whose eyes are open, whose
buds have opened, burst; but he has not even attempted to give any
authority for the use of the verb שׁקד for the bursting of buds, much
less justified it. In the explanation of this symbol between the words,
thou hast seen aright, and the grounding clause, for I will keep watch,
there is omitted the intermediate thought: it is indeed a שׁקד. The twig
thou hast seen is an emblem of what I shall do; for I will keep watch
over my word, will be watchful to fulfil it. This interpretation of the
symbol shows besides that מקּל is not here to be taken, as by Kimchi,
Vatabl., Seb. Schmidt, Ngelsb., and others, for a stick to beat with, or
as a threatening rod of correction. The reasons alleged by Ngelsb. for
this view are utterly inconclusive. For his assertion, that מקּל always
means a stick, and never a fresh, leafy branch, is proved to be false by
[Gen 30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037); and the supposed climax
found by ancient expositors in the two symbols: rod-boiling caldron, put
thus by Jerome: qui noluerint percutiente virga emendari, mittentur in
ollam aeneam atque succensam, is forced into the text by a false
interpretation of the figure of the seething pot. The figure of the
almond rod was meant only to afford to the prophet surety for the speedy
and certain fulfilment of the word of God proclaimed by him. It is the
second emblem alone that has anything to do with the contents of his
preaching.

[Jeremiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 1:13</span></span>

The Seething Pot. - [Jer 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013). "And
there came to me the word of Jahveh for the second time, saying, What
seest thou? And I said: I see a seething-pot; and it looketh hither from
the north. [Jer 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014). Then said Jahveh
to me: From the north will trouble break forth upon all inhabitants of
the land. [Jer 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015). For, behold, I
call to all families of the kingdoms towards the north, saith Jahveh;
that they come and set each his throne before the gates of Jerusalem,
and against all her walls round about, and against all cities of Judah.
[Jer 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#016). And I will pronounce
judgment against them for all their wickedness, in that they have
forsaken me, and have offered odours to other gods, and worshipped the
work of their hands." סיר is a large pot or caldron in which can be
cooked vegetables or meat for many persons at once; cf. [Kg2
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038)., [Eze
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#003). נפוּח, fanned, blown upon, used
of fire, Ezek. 21:36; [Eze 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#020).;
then by transference, seething, steaming, since the caldron under which
fire is fanned steams, its contents boil; cf. [Job
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#012). The פּנים of the pot is the
side turned to the spectator (the prophet), the side towards the front.
This is turned from the north this way, i.e., set so that its contents
will run thence this way. צפונה, properly: towards the north; then, that
which lies towards the north, or the northerly direction. In the
interpretation of this symbol in [Jer
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014), תּפּתח, assonant to נפוּח, is
introduced, just as in [Amo 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#002) קיץ is
explained by קץ; so that there was no occasion for the conjecture of
Houbig. and Graf: תּפּח, it is fanned up; and against this we have
Hitzig's objection that the Hophal of נפח never occurs. Equally uncalled
for is Hitzig's own conjecture, xaw%pt@f, it will steam, fume, be
kindled; while against this we have the fact, that as to xpanf no
evidence can be given for the meaning be kindled, and that we have no
cases of such a mode of speaking as: the trouble is fuming, steaming up.
The Arabian poetical saying: their pot steams or boils, i.e., a war is
being prepared by them, is not sufficient to justify such a figure. We
hold then תּפּתח for the correct reading, and decline to be led astray
by the paraphrastic ἐκκαυθήσεται of the lxx, since תּפּתח gives a
suitable sense. It is true, indeed, that פּתח usually means open; but an
opening of the caldron by the removal of the lid is not (with Graf) to
be thought of. But, again, פּתח has the derived sig. let loose, let off
(cf. ,פּתח בּי [Isa 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017)), from which
there can be no difficulty in inferring for the Niph. the sig. be let
loose, and in the case of trouble, calamity: break forth. That which is
in the pot runs over as the heat increases, and pours itself on the
hearth or ground. If the seething contents of the pot represent
disaster, their running over will point to its being let loose, its
breaking out. are the inhabitants of the land of Judah, as the
interpretation in [Jer 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015) shows. In
[Jer 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015) reference to the figure is
given up, and the further meaning is given in direct statement. The Lord
will call to all families of the kingdoms of the north, and they will
come (= that they are to come). The kingdoms of the north are not merely
the kingdoms of Syria, but in general those of Upper Asia; since all
armies marching from the Euphrates towards Palestine entered the land
from the north. משׁפּחות, families, are the separate races of nations,
hence often used in parallelism with גּוים; cf. [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025); [Nah
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#004). We must not conclude from this
explanation of the vision seen that the seething pot symbolizes the
Chaldeans themselves or the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar; such a figure
would be too unnatural. The seething pot, whose contents boil over,
symbolizes the disaster and ruin which the families of the kingdoms of
the north will pour out on Judah.

[Jeremiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 1:15</span></span>

[Jer 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015) is not the precise
interpretation of the picture seen, but a direct statement of the
afflictions about to fall on the inhabitants of Judah. "They will set
each his throne." The representatives of the kingdoms are meant, the
kings and generals. To set one's throne (נתן or שׂוּם; cf. [Jer
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#010); [Jer
49:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#038)) is a figure for the
establishing of sovereignty. כּסא, seat or throne, is not the seat of
judgment, but the throne of the sovereign; cf. the expression: set the
throne upon these stones, [Jer 43:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#010);
where a passing of judgment on the stones being out of the question, the
only idea is the setting up of dominion, as is put beyond doubt by the
parallel clause; to spread out his state carpet upon the stones. "Before
the gates of Jerusalem:" not merely in order to besiege the city and
occupy the outlets from it (Jerome and others), but to lord it over the
city and its inhabitants. If we take the figurative expression in this
sense, the further statement fits well into it, and we have no need to
take refuge in Hitzig's unnatural view that these clauses are not
dependent on נתנוּ וגו' but on וּבאוּ. For the words: they set up their
dominion against the calls of Jerusalem, and against all cities of
Judah, give the suitable sense, that they will use violence against the
walls and cities.

[Jeremiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 1:16</span></span>

God holds judgment upon the inhabitants of Judah in this very way, viz.,
by bringing these nations and permitting them to set up their lordship
before the gates of Jerusalem, and against all cities of Judah. The
suffix in אותם refers to ישׁבי, [Jer
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014), and אותם stands by later usage
for אתּם, as frequently in Jer.; cf. Ew. 264, b. 'דּבּר משׁפּטים את־פ,
speak judgment, properly, have a lawsuit with one, an expression
peculiar to Jeremiah - cf. [Jer 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#012);
[Jer 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001); [Jer
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005); [Jer
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#009), and [Kg2
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#006) - is in substance equivalent to
נשׁפּט את, plead with one, cf. [Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001) with [Jer
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#035), [Eze
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035)., and signifies not only
remonstrating against wrong doing, but also the passing of condemnation,
and so comprehends trial and sentencing; cf. [Jer
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005); [Jer
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#009). "All their wickedness" is more
exactly defined in the following relative clauses; it consists in their
apostasy from God, and their worship of heathen gods and idols made by
themselves; cf. [Jer 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#004), [Kg1
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033), [Kg2
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#017). קטּר, offer odours, cause to
rise in smoke, used not of the burning of incense alone, but of all
offerings upon the altar, bloody offerings and meat-offerings; hence
frequently in parallelism with זבח; cf. [Hos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013); [Hos
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#002), etc. In the Pentateuch the
Hiphil is used for this sense. Instead of the plural מעשׂי, many MSS
give the singular מעשׂה as the ordinary expression for the productions
of the hand, handiwork; cf. [Jer
25:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#006), [Jer
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#014); [Jer
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030); [Kg2
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#017), etc.; but the plural too is
found in [Jer 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#008); [Ch2
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#025), and is approved by these
passages. The sense is no way affected by this variation.

[Jeremiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 1:17</span></span>

The interpretation of the symbols is followed by a charge to Jeremiah to
address himself stoutly to his duties, and to discharge them fearlessly,
together with still further and fuller assurance of powerful divine
assistance.

"But thou, gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak to them all that I
command thee: be not dismayed before them, lest I dismay thee before
them. [Jer 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018). And I, behold I make
thee this day a strong city, an iron pillar, a brazen wall against the
whole land, the kings of Judah its princes, its priests, and the people
of the land. [Jer 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#019). They shall
strive against thee, but not prevail against thee; for I am with thee,
saith Jahveh, to save thee." To gird up the loins, i.e., to fasten or
tuck up with the girdle the long wide garment, in order to make oneself
fit and ready for labour, for a journey, or a race ([Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011); [Kg1
18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046); [Kg2
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#029); [Kg2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001)), or for battle ([Job
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#003); [Job
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#007)). Meaning: equip thyself and
arise to preach my words to the inhabitants of the land. In 'אל־תּחת and
' אחתּך לthere is a play on words. The Niph. sig. broken in spirit by
terror and anxiety; the Hiph. to throw into terror and anguish. If
Jeremiah appears before his adversaries in terror, then he will have
cause to be terrified for them; only if by unshaken confidence in the
power of the word he preaches in the name of the Lord, will he be able
to accomplish anything. Such confidence he has reason to cherish, for
God will furnish him with the strength necessary for making a stand,
will make him strong and not to be vanquished. This is the meaning of
the pictorial statement in [Jer 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018).
A strong city resists the assaults of the foes; the storm cannot shatter
an iron pillar; and walls of brass defy the enemy's missiles. Instead of
the plural חמות, the parallel passage [Jer
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#020) has the sing. חומת, the plural
being used as frequently as the singular to indicate the wall encircling
the city; cf. [Kg2 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#010) with [Kg1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#001); [Neh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013); [Neh
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001) with [Neh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003), and [Neh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#017); [Neh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#010). With such invincible power will
God equip His prophet "against the whole land," i.e., so that he will be
able to hold his own against the whole land. The mention of the
component parts of "all the land," i.e., the several classes of the
population, is introduced by למלכי, so that "the kings," etc., is to be
taken as an apposition to "against all the land." Kings in the plural
are mentioned, because the prophet's labours are to extend over several
reigns. שׂרים are the chiefs of the people, the heads of families and
clans, and officers, civil and military. "The people of the land" is the
rest of the population not included in these three classes, elsewhere
called men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, [Jer
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#025); [Jer
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#032), and frequently. אליך for עליך;
so in [Jer 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#020), and often. With the
promise in [Jer 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019), cf. [Jer
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 2](jer002)

</div>
