<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer006)  [Next](jer008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 7:0</span></span>

The Vanity of Putting Trust in the Temple and in the Sacrificial
Service, and the Way to Safety and Life - Jeremiah 7-10

This discourse divides itself into three sections. Starting with the
people's confident reliance in the possession of the temple and the
legal sacrificial worship, Jeremiah in the first section, by pointing to
the destruction of Shiloh, where in the old time the sanctuary of the
ark of the covenant had been, shows that Jerusalem and Judah will not
escape the fate of Shiloh and the kingdom of Ephraim, in case they
persist in their stiffneckedness against the Lord their God (Jer
7:1-8:3). For the confirmation of this threatening he goes on, in the
second section, further to tell of the people's determined resistance to
all reformation, and to set forth the terrible visitation which hardened
continuance in sin draws down on itself (Jer 8:4-9:21). To the same end
he finally, in the third section, points out the means of escape from
impending destruction, showing that the way to safety and life lies in
acknowledging the Lord as the only, everlasting, and almighty God, and
in seeing the nothingness of the false gods; and, as the fruit of such
knowledge, he inculcates the fear of the Lord, and self-humiliation
under His mighty hand (Jer 9:22-10:25).

This discourse also was not uttered at any one particular time before
the people in the temple, and in the shape in which it comes before us;
but it has been gathered into one uniform whole, out of several oral
addresses delivered in the temple by Jeremiah upon various occasions in
the days of Josiah. According to Jer 26, Jeremiah, at the beginning of
the reign of Jehoiakim, and in the court of the temple before the
people, uttered the threatening that if they would not hear the words
addressed to them by the prophets, nor reform their lives, the Lord
would make the temple like Shiloh, and make the city a curse to all
nations. For this speech he was found worthy of death by the priests and
false prophets, and was saved only through the interference of the
princes of the people Now the present discourse opposes to the people's
vain confidence in the temple the solemn warning that the temple will
share the fate of Shiloh; and hence many commentators, especially Graf
and Ng., have inferred the identity of this with the discourse in Jer
26, and have referred its composition to the beginning of Jehoiakim's
reign. But the agreement of the two chapters on this one point is not
sufficient to justify such an inference. Jeremiah is wont often to
repeat his leading thoughts in his discourses; and so it is not unlikely
that more than once, during the eighteen years of his ministry under
Josiah, he may have held up the fate of Shiloh and the sanctuary there,
as a warning to the people which built its confidence on the possession
of the temple and the performance of the legal cultus. If the foundation
even of the first section of the present discourse were to be found in
that given in Jer 26, taken in connection with the impression it made on
the priests and prophets, with the violent feeling it excited, and the
storm against Jeremiah which it called forth, then certainly the
continuation of this discourse from [Jer
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016) onwards would have been something
different from what we find it. In writing down the discourse, Jeremiah
would certainly not have passed immediately from threatening the people
with the fate of Shiloh to the repudiation of all intercessory prayers,
and to the statement there made as to the sacrificial service. This we
mention without entering on the discussion of the other portions of the
discourse. In the whole of the rest of the discourse, as continued Jer
8-10, there is not the least trace of hostility against Jeremiah on the
part of priests or people, or any hint of anything that would carry us
beyond the time of Josiah into the reign of Jehoiakim.

Jeremiah 7:1-8:3

Warning against a False Trust in the Temple and the Sacrificial Service.
The temple does not afford protection from the threatened punishment. If
Judah does not change its manner of life, the temple will suffer the
fate of Shiloh, and Judah will, like Ephraim, be rejected by the Lord
([Jer 7:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)). Neither intercession on
behalf of the corrupt race, nor the multitude of its burnt and slain
offerings, will turn aside from Jerusalem the visitation of wrath ([Jer
7:16-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)); for the Lord has cast away
the hardened sinners on account of their idolatry, and will make
Jerusalem and Judah a field of death (v. 29-8:3).

[Jeremiah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 7:1</span></span>

The vanity of trusting in the temple. - [Jer
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001). "The word that came to Jeremiah
from Jahveh, saying, [Jer 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002). Stand
in the gate of the house of Jahveh, and proclaim there this word, and
say, Hear the word of Jahveh, all ye of Judah, that enter these gates to
worship before Jahveh: [Jer 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003). Thus
hath spoken Jahveh of hosts, the God of Israel, Make your ways and your
doings good, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. [Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004). Trust ye not in lying words, when
they say, The temple of Jahveh, the temple of Jahveh, the temple of
Jahveh, is this. [Jer 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005). But if ye
thoroughly make your ways good, and your doings; if ye thoroughly
execute right amongst one another; [Jer
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#006). Oppress not stranger, fatherless,
and widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither follow
after other gods to your hurt; [Jer
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#007). Then I cause you to dwell in this
place, in the land which I have given unto your fathers, from eternity
unto eternity. [Jer 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#008). Behold, ye
trust in lying words, though they profit not. [Jer
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009). How? to steal, to murder, and
commit adultery, and swear falsely, and offer odours to Baal, and to
walk after other gods whom ye know not? [Jer
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010). And then ye come and stand
before my face in this house, upon which my name is named, and think, We
are saved to do all these abominations. [Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011). Is then this house become a den
or murderers, over which my name is named, in your eyes? I too, behold,
have seen it, saith Jahveh. [Jer 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012).
For go ye now to may place which was at Shiloh, where I formerly caused
my name to dwell, and see what I have done unto it for the wickedness of
my people Israel. [Jer 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013). And now,
because ye do all these deeds, saith Jahve, and I have spoken to you,
speaking from early morning on, and ye have not heard; and I have called
you, and ye have not answered; [Jer
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014). Therefore I do unto this house,
over which my name is named, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which
I have given to you and to your fathers, as I have done unto Shiloh.
[Jer 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#015). And cast you away from my
face, as I have cast away all your brethren, the whole seed of Ephraim."

[Jer 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002)

The gate of the temple into which the prophet was to go and stand, is
doubtless one of the three gates of the inner or upper court, in which
he could stand and address the people gathered before him, in the outer
court; perhaps the same in which Baruch read Jeremiah's prophecies to
the people, [Jer 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010) (Schmid,
Hitz.). The gates through which the people entered to worship are those
of the outer court. The form of address: All Judah, ye who enter, etc.,
warrant us in assuming that Jeremiah delivered this discourse at one of
the great annual festivals, when the people were wont to gather to
Jerusalem from the length and breadth of the land.

[Jer 7:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003)

[Jer 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003) contains the central idea of
the discourse: it is only morally good endeavours and deeds that give
the people a sure title to a long lease of the land. היטיב is not
merely, amend one's conduct; but, make one's way good, i.e., lead a good
life. The "ways" mean the tendency of life at large, the "doings" are
the individual manifestations of that tendency; cf. [Jer
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#011); [Jer
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#013). "In this place," i.e., in the
land that I have given to your fathers; cf. [Jer
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#008) and [Jer
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#013) with [Jer
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#015), [Jer
24:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#005). Positive exhortation to a pure
life is followed by negative dehortation from putting trust in the
illusion: The temple, etc. The threefold repetition of the same word is
the most marked way of laying very great emphasis upon it; cf. [Jer
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#029), [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003). "These," these halls, the whole
complex mass of buildings (Hitz.), as in [Ch2
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#011); and here המּה has the force of
the neuter; cf. Ew. 318, b. The meaning of this emphatic way of
mentioning the temple of the Lord is, in this connection, the following:
Jerusalem cannot be destroyed by enemies, because the Lord has
consecrated for the abode of His name that temple which is in Jerusalem;
for the Lord will not give His sanctuary, the seat of His throne, to be
a prey to the heathen, but will defend it, and under its protection we
too may dwell safely. In the temple of the Lord we have a sure pledge
for unbroken possession of the land and the maintenance of the kingdom.
Cf. the like discourse in [Mic 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#011),
"Jahveh is in our midst, upon us none evil can come." This passage
likewise shows that the "lying words" quoted are the sayings of the
false prophets, whereby they confirmed the people in their secure
sinfulness; the mass of the people at the same time so making these
sayings their own as to lull themselves into the sense of security.

[Jer 7:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005)

Over against such sayings Jeremiah puts that which is the indispensable
condition of continued sojourn in the land. כּי, [Jer
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005), after a preceding negative
clause, means: but on the contrary. This condition is a life morally
good, that shall show itself in doing justice, in putting away all
unrighteousness, and in giving up idolatry. With אם begins a list of the
things that belong to the making of one's ways and doings good. The
adjunct to משׁפּט, right, "between the man and his neighbour," shows
that the justice meant is that they should help one man to his rights
against another. The law attached penalties to the oppression of those
who needed protection - strangers, orphans, widows; cf. [Exo
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021)., [Deu
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#017)., [Jer
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019); and the prophets often denounce
the same; cf. [Isa 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017), [Isa
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023); [Isa
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#002); [Eze
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#007); [Zac
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#010); [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005); [Psa
94:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#006), etc. for 'לא־ת is noteworthy,
but is not a simple equivalent for it. Like ου ̓ μή, כ̓ב implies a deeper
interest on the part of the speaker, and the sense here is: and ye be
really determined not to shed innocent blood (cf. Ew. 320, b). Hitz.'s
explanation, that אל is equal to אשׁר לא or אם לא, and that it her
resumes again the now remote אם, is overturned by the consideration that
אל is not at the beginning of the clause; and there is not the slightest
probability in Graf's view, that the אל must have come into the text
through the copyist, who had in his mind the similar clause in [Jer
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#003). Shedding innocent blood refers
in part to judicial murders (condemnation of innocent persons), in part
to violent attacks made by the kings on prophets and godly men, such as
we hear of in Manasseh's case, [Kg2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016). In this place ([Jer
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#007)), i.e., first and foremost
Jerusalem, the metropolis, where moral corruption had its chief seat; in
a wider sense, however, it means the whole kingdom of Judah ([Jer
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003) and [Jer
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#007)). "To your hurt" belongs to all
the above-mentioned transgressions of the law; cf. [Jer
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#007). "In the land," etc., explains
"this place." "From eternity to eternity" is a rhetorically heightened
expression for the promise given to the patriarchs, that God would give
the land of Canaan to their posterity for an everlasting possession,
[Gen 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008); although here it belongs
not to the relative clause, "that I gave," but to the principal clause,
"cause you to dwell," as in [Exo
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013).

[Jer 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#008)

In [Jer 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#008) there is a recurrence to
the warning of [Jer 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004), under the
form of a statement of fact; and in [Jer
7:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009) it is expanded to this effect:
The affirmation that the temple of the Lord affords protection is a
sheer delusion, so long as all God's commandments are being audaciously
broken. לבלתּי הועיל, lit., to no profiting: ye rely on lying words,
without there being any possibility that they should profit you.

[Jer 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009)

The query before the infin. absoll. is the expression of wonder and
indignation; and the infinitives are used with special emphasis for the
verb. fin.: How? to steal, kill, etc., is your practice, and then ye
come....

[Jer 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010)

Breaches of almost all the commandments are specified; first the eighth,
sixth, and seventh of the second table, and then two commandments of the
first table; cf. [Hos 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#002). Swearing
falsely is an abuse of God's name. In "offer odours to Baal," Baal is
the representation of the false gods. The phrase, other gods, points to
the first commandment, [Exo 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003); and
the relative clause: whom ye knew not, stands in opposition to: I am
Jahveh your God, who hath brought you out of Egypt. They knew not the
other gods, because they had not made themselves known to them in
benefits and blessings; cf. [Jer 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#004).
While they so daringly break all God's commands, they yet come before
His face in the temple which Jahveh has chosen to reveal His name there.
'אשׁר נקרא is not: which bears my name (Hitz.); or: on which my name is
bestowed, which is named after me (Graf). The name of Jahveh is the
revelation of Himself, and the meaning is: on which I have set my glory,
in which I have made my glorious being known; see on [Deu
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010) and [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012). We are saved, sc. from all the
evils that threaten us, i.e., we are concealed, have nothing to fear;
cf. [Eze 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016), [Eze
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#018); [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012). The perfect denotat firmam
persuasionem incolumitatis. Chr. B. Mich. By changing נצּלנוּ into
נצּלנוּ, as Ewald, following the Syr., reads, the sense is weakened.
'למען עשׂות וגו is neither: as regards what we have done, nor: because =
while or whereas ye have done (Hitz.), but: in order to do that ye may
do. למען with the infin., as with the perf., has never the signif.,
because of or in reference to something past and done, but always means,
with the view of doing something; English: to the end that. The thought
is simply this: Ye appear in my temple to sacrifice and worship,
thinking thus to appease my wrath and turn aside all punishment, that so
ye may go on doing all these (in [Jer
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009) enumerated) abominations. By
frequenting the temple, they thought to procure an indulgence for their
wicked ongoings, not merely for what they had already done, but for what
they do from day to day.

[Jer 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)

To expose the senselessness of such an idea, God asks if they take the
temple for a den of robbers? "In your eyes" goes with היה : is it become
in your eyes, i.e., do ye take it for such? If thieves, murderers,
adulterers, etc., gathered to the temple, and supposed that by appearing
there they procured the absolution of their sins, they were in very act
declaring the temple to be a robbers' retreat. פּריץ, the violent, here:
the house-breaker, robber. I, too, have seen, sc. that the temple is
made by you a den of thieves, and will deal accordingly. This completion
of the thought appears from the context.

[Jer 7:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)

The temple is to undergo the fate of the former sanctuary at Shiloh.
This threat is introduced by a grounding כּי, for. This for refers to
the central idea of the last verse, that they must not build their
expectations on the temple, hold it to be a pledge for their safety. For
since the Lord has seen how they have profaned and still profane it, He
will destroy it, as the sanctuary at Shiloh was destroyed. The
rhetorical mode of utterance, Go to the place, etc., contributes to
strengthen the threatening. They were to behold with their own eyes the
fate of the sanctuary at Shiloh, that so they might understand that the
sacredness of a place does not save it from overthrow, if men have
desecrated it by their wickedness. We have no historical notice of the
event to which Jeremiah refers. At Shiloh, now Seiln (in ruins) the
Mosaic tabernacle was erected after the conquest of Canaan ([Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)), and there it was still standing
in the time of the high priest Eli, [Sa1
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001); but the ark, which had fallen
into the hands of the Philistines at the time of their victory (1 Sam
4), was not brought back to the tabernacle when it was restored again to
the Israelites. In the reign of Saul we find the tabernacle at Nob ([Sa1
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#002).). The words of [Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012) intimate, that at that time "the
place of God at Shiloh" was lying in ruins. As Hitz. justly remarks, the
destruction of it is not to be understood of its gradual decay after the
removal of the ark ([Sa1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011); [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001).); the words imply a devastation
or destruction, not of the place of God at Shiloh only, but of the place
Shiloh itself. This is clearly seen from [Jer
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014) : I will do unto this house (the
temple), and the place which I gave to your fathers, as I have done unto
Shiloh. This destruction did not take place when the Assyrians overthrew
the kingdom of the ten tribes, but much earlier. It may, indeed, be
gathered from [Jdg 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#020), [Jdg
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031) (see the comment. on this
passage), that it was as early as the time of Saul, during a Syrian
invasion. By the destruction of the place of God at Shiloh, we need not
understand that the tabernacle itself, with its altar and other sacred
furniture (except the ark), was swept away. Such a view is contradicted
by the statement in [Ch1 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#029); [Ch2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#003), according to which the tabernacle
built by Moses in the wilderness was still standing at Gibeon in David's
time, and in the beginning of Solomon's reign; cf. with [Ch2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#005), when the brazen altar of
burnt-offering is expressly mentioned as that which was made by
Bezaleel. Hence it is clear that the Mosaic tabernacle, with its altar
of burnt-offering, had been preserved, and consequently that it must
have been moved first from Shiloh to Nob, and then, when Saul sacked
this town (1 Sam 22), to Gibeon. The destruction of the place of God in
Shiloh must accordingly have consisted in this, that not only was the
tabernacle with the altar carried off from thence, but the buildings
necessary in connection with the maintenance of the public worship which
surrounded it were swept away when the city was plundered, so that of
the place of the sanctuary nothing was left remaining. It is clear that
about the tabernacle there were various buildings which, along with the
tabernacle and its altars, constituted "the house of God at Shiloh;" for
in 1 Sam 3 we are told that Samuel slept in the temple of Jahveh ([Sa1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#003)), and that in the morning he
opened the doors of the house of God ([Sa1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#015)). Hence we may gather, that round
about the court of the tabernacle there were buildings erected, which
were used partly as a dwelling-place for the officiating priests and
Levites, and partly for storing up the heave-offerings, and for
preparing the thank-offerings at the sacrificial meals ([Sa1
2:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011)). This whole system of
buildings surrounding the tabernacle, with its court and altar of
burnt-offering, was called the "house of God;" from which name Graf
erroneously inferred that there was at Shiloh a temple like the one in
Jerusalem. The wickedness of my people, is the Israelites' fall into
idolatry in Eli's time, because of which the Lord gave up Israel into
the power of the Philistines and other enemies ([Jdg
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001); cf. [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003)). "These deeds" ([Jer
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013)) are the sins named in [Jer
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009). ואדבּר is a continuation of the
infinitive sentence, and is still dependent on יען. Speaking from early
morn, i.e., speaking earnestly and unremittingly; cf. Gesen. 131, 3, b.
I have called you, i.e., to repent, and ye have not answered, i.e., have
not repented and turned to me.

[Jer 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#015)

I cast you out from my sight, i.e., drive you forth amongst the heathen;
cf. [Deu 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#027); and with the second
clause cf. [Kg2 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#020). The whole seed
of Ephraim is the ten tribes.

[Jeremiah 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 7:16</span></span>

This punishment will be turned aside, neither by intercession, because
the people re2fuses to give up its idolatry, nor by sacrifice, which God
desires not, because for long they have turned to Him the back and not
the face, and have not hearkened to His words. - [Jer
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016). "But thou, pray not for this
people, and lift not up for them cry and prayer; and urge me not, for I
do not hear thee. [Jer 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017). Seest
thou not what they do in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem? [Jer 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018). The sons gather
sticks, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead dough, to
make cakes for the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto
other gods, to provoke me. [Jer 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#019).
Provoke they me, saith Jahveh, not themselves, to the shaming of their
face? [Jer 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#020). Therefore thus saith
the Lord Jahveh, Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out on
this place, upon man, upon beast, upon the trees of the field, and upon
the fruit of the ground; and shall burn, and not be quenched. [Jer
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021). Thus saith Jahveh of hosts, the
God of Israel: Your burnt-offerings add to your slain-offerings, and eat
flesh. [Jer 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022). For I spake not with
your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of
the land of Egypt, concerning the matters of burnt-offering or
slain-offering. [Jer 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023). But this
word commanded I them, saying, Hearken to my voice, and I will be your
God, and ye shall be my people; and walk in the way which I command you,
that it may be well with you. [Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024). But they hearkened not, nor
inclined their ear, and walked in the counsels, in the stubbornness of
their evil heart, and turned to me the back, and not the face. [Jer
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025). Since the day that your fathers
went forth of the land of Egypt until this day, I sent to you all my
servants the prophets, daily from early morn sending them; [Jer
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#026). But they hearkened not to me,
nor inclined their ear, and were stiffnecked, and did worse than their
fathers. [Jer 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#027). And though thou
speakest all these words unto them, yet will they not hearken unto thee;
and though thou callest unto them, yet will they not answer thee. [Jer
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028). Thus speak to them: This is the
people that hearken not unto the voice of Jahveh its God, and that
receive not correction. Perished is faithfulness, cut off from their
mouth."

The purport of [Jer 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016), that God
will not suffer Himself to be moved by any entreaties to revoke the doom
pronounced on the wicked people, is expressed by way of a command from
God to the prophet not to pray for the people. That Jeremiah did
sometimes pray thus, however, we see from [Jer
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019). (cf. [Jer
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#020)), when to his prayer the same
answer is given as we have here, and all intercession for the corrupt
race is characterized as in vain. The second clause: lift not up for
them crying, i.e., supplicatory prayer, expresses the same, only more
strongly; while the third clause: urge me not, cuts off all hope of
success from even the most importunate intercession. The reason for this
command to desist is shown in [Jer
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017), by a reference to the idolatry
which was openly practised throughout the land by young and old, men and
women. Each takes part according to strength and capacity: the sons
gather wood together, the fathers set the fire in order, etc. The deity
so zealously worshipped by the people is called the Queen of heaven, and
is mentioned only by Jeremiah. Besides here, there is reference to her
in [Jer 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017), where we see that her
worship was very diligently cultivated, and that she was adored as the
bestower of earthly possessions. (מלכת is stat. constr., either from the
Chald. form מלך, or from מליכה, after the analogy of גּברת, st. constr.
of גּבירה; but perhaps it has מלכת in stat. abs.) This worship was
combined with that of the stars, the host of heaven, which especially
prevailed under Manasseh ([Kg2 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005)).
Thence it may be presumed that the Queen of heaven was one of the
deities who came to Western Asia with the Assyrians, and that she
corresponds to the Assyrian-Persian Tanais and Artemis, who in the
course of time took the place once occupied by the closely related
Phoenician Astarte. She is originally a deification of the moon, the
Assyrian Selene and Virgo caelestis, who, as supreme female deity, was
companion to Baal-Moloch as sun-god; cf. Movers, Phnizier, i. S. 623ff.
With this accords the statement of Steph. Byz., that σελήνη is also
πήπανον τι τῷ ἄστρω παραπλήσιον. The offerings which, acc. to this verse
and [Jer 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019), were brought to her,
are called כּוּנים, a word which would appear to have come to the
Hebrews along with the foreign cultus. By the lxx it was Grecized into
χαυῶνας, for which we find in glossators and codd. καυῶνας and χαβῶνας.
They were, acc. to the Etymol. magn. and Suidas, ἄρτοι ἐλαίῳ
ἀναφυραθέντες or λάχανα ὄπτα (? cooked vegetables); acc. to Jerome,
χαυῶνας, quas nos placentas interpretati sumus. In any case, they were
some kind of sacrificial cakes, which Vitr. put alongside of the πόπανα
of Aristophanes and Lucian; cf. the various interpretations in
Schleussner, Lexic. in lxx s.v. χαυών. These cakes were kindled on the
altar (cf. מקטּרים, [Jer 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019)) as a
kind of Minchah (meat-offering), and with this Minchah a libation or
drink-offering (נסכים) was combined. הסּך corresponds to לעשׂות, so that
ל has to be repeated; cf. [Jer 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019),
[Jer 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#025), where we find libations
poured out to the Queen of heaven. In the 18th verse the expression is
generalized into "other gods," with reference to the fact that the
service of the Queen of heaven was but one kind of idolatry along with
others, since other strange gods were worshipped by sacrifices and
libations. To provoke me; cf. [Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029); [Deu
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016), etc.

[Jeremiah 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 7:19</span></span>

But instead of vexing Him (Jahveh) they rather vex themselves, inasmuch
as God causes the consequences of their idolatry to fall on their own
head. אתם is used reflexively: se ipsos; cf. Ew. 314, c; Gesen. 124, 1,
b. For the cause of the shame of their face, i.e., to prepare for
themselves the shame of their face, to cover their face with shame; cf.
[Jer 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#025). - For ([Jer
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#020)) because of this idolatrous work,
the wrath of the Lord will pour itself over the land in the consuming
fire of war (cf. [Jer 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004) with [Jer
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#017), [Nah
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#006), etc.), so as to cut off men and
beasts, trees and fruit.

[Jeremiah 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 7:21</span></span>

The multiplication of burnt and slain offerings will not avert judgment.
Your burnt-offerings add to your slain-offerings. In the case of the
זבחים, the greater part of the flesh was eaten at the sacrificial meals
by those who brought them. Along with these they might put the
burnt-offerings, which were wont to be burnt entire upon the altar, and
eat them also. The words express indignation at the sacrifices of those
who were so wholly alienated from God. God had so little pleasure in
their sacrifices, that they might eat of the very burnt-offerings.

To show the reason of what is here said, Jeremiah adds, in [Jer
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022), that God had not commanded their
fathers, when He led them out of Egypt, in the matter of burnt and slain
offerings, but this word: "Hearken to my voice, and I will be your God,"
etc. The Keri הוציאי is a true exegesis, acc. to [Jer
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#004); [Jer
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#013), but is unnecessary; cf. [Gen
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#030); [Gen
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026), etc. This utterance has been
erroneously interpreted by the majority of commentators, and has been
misused by modern criticism to make good positions as to the late origin
of the Pentateuch. To understand it aright, we must carefully take into
consideration not merely the particular terms of the present passage,
but the context as well. In the two verses as they stand there is the
antithesis: Not על דּברי did God speak and give command to the fathers,
when He led them out of Egypt, but commanded the word: Hearken to my
voice, etc. The last word immediately suggests [Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005) : If ye will hearken to my voice,
then shall ye be my peculiar treasure out of all peoples; and it points
to the beginning of the law-giving, the decalogue, and the fundamental
principles of the law of Israel, in Ex 20-23, made known in order to the
conclusion of the covenant in 24, after the arrival at Sinai of the
people marching from Egypt. The promise: Then will I be your God, etc.,
is not given in these precise terms in [Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005).; but it is found in the account
of Moses' call to be the leader of the people in their exodus, [Exo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#007); and then repeatedly in the
promises of covenant blessings, if Israel keep all the commandments of
God, [Lev 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012); [Deu
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#018). Hence it is clear that Jeremiah
had before his mind the taking of the covenant, but did not bind himself
closely to the words of [Exo 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005),
adopting his expression from the passages of Leviticus and Deuteronomy
which refer to and reaffirm that transaction. If there be still any
doubt on this head, it will be removed by the clause: and walk in all
the way which I command you this day (והלכתם is a continuation of the
imper. שׁמעוּ). The expression: to walk in all the way God has
commanded, is so unusual, that it occurs only once besides in the whole
Old Testament, viz., [Deu 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#030), after
the renewed inculcation of the ten commandments. And they then occur
with the addition (למען תּחיוּן וטוב, in which we cannot fail to
recognise the למען ייטב לכם of our verse. Hence we assume, without fear
of contradiction, that Jeremiah was keeping the giving of the law in
view, and specially the promulgation of the fundamental law of the book,
namely of the decalogue, which was spoken by God from out of the fire on
Sinai, as Moses in [Deu 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#023) repeats
with marked emphasis. In this fundamental law we find no prescriptions
as to burnt or slain offerings. On this fact many commentators,
following Jerome, have laid stress, and suppose the prophet to be
speaking of the first act of the law-giving, arguing that the Torah of
offering in the Pentateuch was called for first by the worship of the
golden calf, after which time God held it to be necessary to give
express precepts as to the presenting of offerings, so as to prevent
idolatry. But this view does not at all agree with the historical fact.
For the worship of the calf was subsequent to the law on the building of
the altar on which Israel was to offer burnt and slain offerings, [Exo
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024); to the institution of the daily
morning and evening sacrifice, [Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038).; and to the regulation as to
the place of worship and the consecration of the priests, Ex 25-31. But
besides, any difficulty in our verses is not solved by distinguishing
between a first and a second law-giving, since no hint of any such
contrast is found in our verse, but is even entirely foreign to the
precise terms of it. The antithesis is a different one. The stress in
[Jer 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023) lies on: hearken to the
voice of the Lord, and on walking in all the way which God commanded to
the people at Sinai. "To walk in all the way God commanded" is in
substance the same as "not to depart from all the words which I command
you this day," as Moses expands his former exhortation in [Deu
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#014), when he is showing the
blessings of keeping the covenant. Hearkening to God's voice, and
walking in all His commandments, are the conditions under which Jahveh
will be a God to the Israelites, and Israel a people to Him, i.e., His
peculiar people from out of all the peoples of the earth. This word of
God is not only the centre of the act of taking the covenant, but of the
whole Sinaitic law-giving; and it is so both with regard to the moral
law and to the ceremonial precepts, of which the law of sacrifice
constituted the chief part. If yet the words demanding the observance of
the whole law be set in opposition to the commandments as to sacrifices,
and if it be said that on this latter head God commanded nothing when He
led Israel out of Egypt, then it may be replied that the meaning of the
words cannot be: God has given no law of sacrifice, and desires no
offerings. The sense can only be: When the covenant was entered into,
God did not speak על דּברי, i.e., as to the matters of burnt and slain
offerings. על דּברי is not identical with דּברי עולה .על־דּבר are words
or things that concern burnt and slain offerings; that is, practically,
detailed prescriptions regarding sacrifice.

The purport of the two verses is accordingly as follows: When the Lord
entered into covenant with Israel at Sinai, He insisted on their
hearkening to His voice and walking in all His commandments, as the
condition necessary for bringing about the covenant relationship, in
which He was to be God to Israel, and Israel a people to Him; but He did
not at that time give all the various commandments as to the presenting
of sacrifices. Such an intimation neither denies the divine origin of
the Torah of sacrifice in Leviticus, nor discredits its character as a
part of the Sinaitic legislation.

(Note: After Vatke's example, Hitz. and Graf find in our verses a
testimony against the Mosaic origin of the legislation of the Pentateuch
as a whole, and they conclude "that at the time of Jeremiah nothing was
known of a legislation on sacrifice given by God on Sinai." Here,
besides interpreting our verses erroneously, they cannot have taken into
account the fact that Jeremiah himself insists on the law of the
Sabbath, [Jer 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#020).; that amongst the
blessings in which Israel will delight in Messianic times yet to come,
he accounts the presenting of burnt, slain, and meat offerings, [Jer
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026); [Jer
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#014); [Jer
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#011), [Jer
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#018). It is consequently impossible
that, without contradicting himself, Jeremiah could have disallowed the
sacrificial worship. The assertion that he did so is wholly incompatible
with the fact recorded in 2 Kings 22, the discovery of the book of the
law of Moses in the temple, in the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign;
and that, too, whether, justly interpreting the passage, we hold the
book of the law to be the Pentateuch, or whether, following the view
maintained by the majority of modern critics, we take it to be the book
of Deuteronomy, which was then for the first time composed and given to
the king as Moses' work. For in Deuteronomy also the laws on sacrifice
are set forth as a divine institution. Is it credible or conceivable,
that in a discourse delivered, as most recent commentators believe, in
the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, Jeremiah should have spoken of the
laws on sacrifice as not commanded by God? For in so doing he would have
undermined the authority of the book of the law, on which his entire
prophetic labours were based.)

All it implies is, that the giving of sacrifices is not the thing of
primary importance in the law, is not the central point of the covenant
laws, and that so long as the cardinal precepts of the decalogue are
freely transgressed, sacrifices neither are desired by God, nor secure
covenant blessings for those who present them. That this is what is
meant is shown by the connection in which our verse stands. The words:
that God did not give command as to sacrifice, refer to the sacrifices
brought by a people that recklessly broke all the commandments of the
decalogue ([Jer 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009).), in the thought
that by means of these sacrifices they were proving themselves to be the
covenant people, and that to them as such God was bound to bestow the
blessings of His covenant. It is therefore with justice that Oehler, in
Herzog's Realencykl. xii. S. 228, says: "In the sense that the
righteousness of the people and the continuance of its covenant
relationship were maintained by sacrifice as such - in this sense Jahveh
did not ordain sacrifices in the Torah." Such a soulless service of
sacrifice is repudiated by Samuel in [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022), when he says to Saul: Hath
Jahveh delight in burnt and slain offerings, as in hearkening to the
voice of Jahveh? Behold, to hearken is better than sacrifice, etc. So in
[Psa 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007); [Psa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008)., [Jer
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#018), and [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)., [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020); [Amo
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#022). What is here said differs from
these passages only in this: Jeremiah does not simply say that God has
no pleasure in such sacrifices, but adds the inference that the Lord
does not desire the sacrifices of a people that have fallen away from
Him. This Jeremiah gathers from the history of the giving of the law,
and from the fact that, when God adopted Israel as His people, He
demanded not sacrifices, but their obedience to His word and their
walking in His ways. The design of Jeremiah's addition was the more
thoroughly to crush all such vain confidence in sacrifices.

[Jeremiah 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 7:24</span></span>

But they have not regarded that which was foremost and most cardinal in
the law. They hearkened not, sc. to my voice; and instead of walking in
the ways commanded, they walked in the counsels of the stubbornness of
their evil heart. בּמעצות is stat. absol., and בּשׁררוּת is co-ordinated
with it in apposition, instead of being subordinated; cf. Ew. 289, c.
The lxx have not seen their way to admit such a co-ordination, and so
have omitted the second term; and in this, Movers, Hitz., and Graf have
followed them, deleting the word as a mere gloss. As to "the
stubbornness of their evil heart," see on [Jer
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017). יהיוּ לאחור, they were
backwards, not forwards, i.e., they so walked as to turn to me the back
and not the face. היה with ל expresses the direction or aim of a thing.
The subject to these clauses is the Israelites from the time of Moses
down to that of Jeremiah. This is shown by the continuation of the same
idea in [Jer 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025) and [Jer
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#026). From the time the fathers were
led out of Egypt till the present time, God has with anxious care been
sending prophets to exhort and warn them; but they have not hearkened,
they have made their neck hard, i.e., were stiffnecked, and did worse
than their fathers, i.e., each succeeding generation did more wickedly
than that which preceded it. On למן היּום, (the period) from the
day...until...cf. the remarks on [Hag
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#018). The ל gives to the mention of
the time the value of an independent clause, to which that which is said
regarding that time is joined by ו consec. יום is adverbial accusative:
by the day, i.e., daily, in early morn, i.e., with watchful care sending
(on this expression, see at [Jer
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013)). יום acquires this sense, not in
virtue of its standing for יום יום, but by reason of its connection with
the two infinitives absoll.

[Jeremiah 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 7:27</span></span>

Just as little will they listen to Jeremiah's words. ודבּרתּ with ו
consec. is properly: Speak to them, and they will not hearken to thee,
for: Even if thou speakest to them, they will not hearken to thee.

[Jeremiah 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 7:28</span></span>

Hence the prophet will be bound to say to them: This is the people that
hath not hearkened to the voice of God. On this Chr. B. Mich. makes this
remark: Etsi adhortationibus tuis non obedient, tamen, ut sciant quales
sint et quae paenae ipsos maneant, dicas eis. Perished or gone is
faithfulness, and cut off out of their mouth. They have violated the
fidelity they owed to God, by not hearkening to His voice, by breaking
all His commandments (cf. [Jer 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023)
and [Jer 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009)). "Out of their mouth" is
used instead of "out of the heart," because they continually make
profession with their mouth of their devotion to God, e.g., swear by
Jahveh, but always lyingly, [Jer 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002).

[Jeremiah 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 7:29</span></span>

Therefore the Lord has rejected the backsliding people, so that it shall
perish shamefully. - [Jer 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029). "Cut
off thy diadem (daughter of Zion), and cast it away, and lift up a
lamentation on the bald peaked mountains; for the Lord hath rejected and
cast out the generation of His wrath. [Jer
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030). For the sons of Judah have done
the evil in mine eyes, saith Jahveh, have put their abominations in the
house on which my name is named, to pollute it; [Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031). And have built the high places
of Tophet, which is in the valley of Benhinnom, to burn their sons and
daughters in the fire; which I have not commanded, neither came it into
my heart. [Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032). Therefore,
behold, the days come, saith Jahveh, that they shall no longer say,
Tophet and Valley of Benhinnom, but, The valley of slaughter; and they
shall bury in Tophet for want of room. [Jer
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#033). And the carcases of this people
shall be meat for the fowls of heaven and the beasts of the earth, with
no one to fray them away. [Jer 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#034).
And I make to cease out of the cities of Judah and from the streets of
Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of
the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; for a waste shall the land
become. [Jer 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001). At that time, saith
Jahveh, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah and the
bones of his princes, the bones of the priests and the bones of the
prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their
graves. [Jer 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#002). And they shall
spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven,
which they have loved, and which they have served, after which they have
walked, and which they have sought and worshipped: they shall not be
gathered nor buried; for dung upon the face of the earth shall they be.
[Jer 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#003). And death shall be chosen
rather than life by all the residue which is left of this evil race, in
all the places whither I have driven them that are left, saith Jahveh of
hosts."

In these verses the judgment of [Jer
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#020) is depicted in all its horror,
and the description is introduced by a call upon Zion to mourn and
lament for the evil awaiting Jerusalem and the whole land. It is not any
particular woman that is addressed in [Jer
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029), but the daughter of Zion (cf.
[Jer 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023)), i.e., the capital city
personified as a woman, as the mother of the whole people. Cut off נזרך,
thy diadem. There can be no doubt that we are by this to understand the
hair of the woman; but the current opinion, that the words simply and
directly means the hair, is without foundation. It means crown,
originally the diadem of the high priest, [Exo
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006); and the transference of the same
word to the hair of the head is explained by the practice of the
Nazarites, to wear the hair uncut as a mark of consecration to the Lord,
[Num 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005). The hair of the Nazarite is
called in [Num 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#007) the consecration
(נזר) of his God upon his head, as was the anointing oil on the head of
the high priest, [Lev 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#012). In this
sense the long hair of the daughter of Zion is called her diadem, to
mark her out as a virgin consecrated to the Lord. Cutting off this hair
is not only in token of mourning, as in [Job
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020); [Mic
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016), but in token of the loss of the
consecrated character. The Nazarite, defiled by the sudden occurrence of
death near to his person, was bound to cut off his long hair, because by
this defilement his consecrated hair had been defiled; and just so must
the daughter of Zion cut off her hair and cast it from her, because by
her sins she had defiled herself, and must be held as unconsecrate.
Venema and Ros. object to this reference of the idea to the consecrated
hair of the Nazarite: quod huc non quadrat, nec in faeminis adeo suetum
erat; but this objection is grounded on defective apprehension of the
meaning of the Nazarite's vow, and on misunderstanding of the figurative
style here employed. The allusion to the Nazarite order, for the purpose
of representing the daughter of Zion as a virgin consecrated to the
Lord, does not imply that the Nazarite vow was very common amongst
women. Deprived of her holy ornament, Zion is to set up a lament upon
bare hill-tops (cf. [Jer 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021)), since
the Lord has rejected or cast out ([Jer
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030)) the generation that has drawn
His wrath down on it, because they have set idols in the temple in which
He has revealed His glory, to profane it. The abominations are the image
of Asherah which Manasseh set up in the temple, and the altars he had
built to the host of heaven in both the courts ([Kg2
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005), [Kg2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007)). Besides the desecration of the
temple of the Lord by idolatry, Jeremiah mentions in [Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031), as an especially offensive
abomination, the worship of Moloch practised in the valley of Benhinnom.
Here children were burnt to this deity, to whom Manasseh had sacrificed
his son, [Kg2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006). The expression
"high altars of Tophet" is singular. In the parallel passages, where
Jeremiah repeats the same subject, [Jer
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#005) and [Jer
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035), we find mentioned instead high
altars of Baal; and on this ground, Hitz. and Graf hold התפת in our
verse to be a contemptuous name for Baal Moloch. תּפת is not derived
from the Persian; nor is it true that, as Hitz. asserts, it does not
occur till after the beginning of the Assyrian period, since we have it
in [Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006). It is formed from תּוּף,
to spit out, like נפת from נוּף; and means properly a spitting out, then
that before or on which one spits (as in [Job
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)), object of deepest abhorrence.
It is transferred to the worship of Moloch here and [Jer
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006), [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013)., and in [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010). In the latter passage the word
is unquestionably used for the place in the valley of Benhinnom where
children were offered to Moloch. So in [Jer
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006), [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013) (the place of Tophet), and [Jer
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#014); and so also, without a doubt,
in [Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032) of the present chapter.
There is no valid reason for departing from this well-ascertained local
signification; "high altars of the Tophet" may perfectly well be the
high altars of the place of abominable sacrifices. With the article the
word means the ill-famed seat of the Moloch-worship, situated in the
valley of Ben or Bne Hinnom, to the south of Jerusalem. Hinnom is nomen
propr. of a man of whom we know nothing else, and בּן( בּני הנּום) is
not an appellative: son of sobbing, as Hitz., Graf, Bttcher explain
(after Rashi), rendering the phrase by "Valley of the weepers," or "of
groaning, sobbing," with reference to the cries of the children slain
there for sacrifices. For the name Ben-hinnom is much older than the
Moloch-worship, introduced first by Ahaz and Manasseh. We find it in
[Jos 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008); [Jos
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016), in the topographical account of
the boundaries of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. As to
Moloch-worship, see on [Lev 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021) and
[Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020). At the restoration of the
public worship of Jahveh, Josiah had extirpated Moloch-worship, and had
caused the place of the sacrifice of abominations in the valley of
Ben-hinnom to be defiled ([Kg2 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#020));
so that it is hardly probable that it had been again restored
immediately after Josiah's death, at the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign.
Nor does the present passage imply this; for Jer. is not speaking of the
forms of idolatry at that time in favour with the Jews, but of the
abominations they had done. That he had Manasseh's doings especially in
view, we may gather from [Jer 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004),
where the coming calamities are expressly declared to be the punishment
for Manasseh's sins. Neither is it come into my heart, i.e., into my
mind, goes to strengthen: which I have not commanded.

[Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032)

Therefore God will make the place of their sins the scene of judgment on
the sinners. There shall come days when men will call the valley of
these abominations the valley of slaughter, i.e., shall make it into
such a valley. Where they have sacrificed their children to Moloch, they
shall themselves be slaughtered, massacred by their enemies. And in this
valley, as an unclean place ([Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013)), shall they be buried "for want
of room;" since, because of the vast numbers of the slain, there will be
nowhere else to put them.

[Jer 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#033)

Even the number of the dead will be so great that the corpses shall
remain unburied, shall become food for beasts of prey, which no one will
scare away. This is taken almost literally from [Deu
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#026).

[Jer 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#034)

Thus the Lord will put an end to all joyfulness in life throughout the
land: cf. [Hos 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013); [Eze
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#013). The voice of the bridegroom and
the bride is a circumlocution for the mirth of marriage festivities; cf.
1 Macc. 9:39. All joy will be dumb, for the land shall become a waste;
as the people had been warned, in [Lev
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031), [Lev
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033), would be the case if they
forsook the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 8](jer008)

</div>
