<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer012)  [Next](jer014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 13:0</span></span>

The Humiliation of Judah's Pride. - The first section of this chapter
contains a symbolical action which sets forth the corruptness of Judah
([Jer 13:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)), and shows in
figurative language how the Lord will bring Judah's haughtiness to
nothing ([Jer 13:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012)). Upon the back
of this comes the warning to repent, and the threatening addressed to
the king and queen, that the crown shall fall from their head, that
Judah shall be carried captive, and Jerusalem dishonoured, because of
their disgraceful idolatry ([Jer
13:15-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#015)).

[Jeremiah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 13:1</span></span>

The spoilt girdle. - [Jer 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001). "Thus
spake Jahveh unto me: Go and buy thee a linen girdle, and put it upon
thy loins, but into the water thou shalt not bring it. [Jer
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#002). So I bought the girdle,
according to the word of Jahveh, and put it upon my loins, [Jer
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#003). Then came the word of Jahveh to
me the second time, saying: [Jer 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#004).
Take the girdle which thou hast bought, which is upon thy loins, and
arise, and go to the Euphrates, and hide it there in a cleft of the
rock. [Jer 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#005). So I went and hid it,
as Jahveh had commanded me. [Jer 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#006).
And it came to pass after many days, that Jahveh said unto me: Arise, go
to the Euphrates, and bring thence the girdle which I commanded thee to
hide there. [Jer 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#007). And I went to
the Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from the place where I
had hid it; and, behold, the girdle was marred, was good for nothing.
[Jer 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#008). And the word of Jahveh came
to me, saying: [Jer 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009). Thus hath
Jahveh said, After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the
great pride of Jerusalem. [Jer 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#010).
This evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the
stubbornness of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve them
and to worship them, it shall be as this girdle which is good for
nothing. [Jer 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011). For as the girdle
cleaves to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the
whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith Jahveh; that
it might be to me for a people and for a name, for a praise and for an
ornament; but they hearkened not."

With regard to the symbolical action imposed on the prophet and
performed by him, the question arises, whether the thing took place in
outward reality, or was only an occurrence in the spirit, in the inward
vision. The first view seems to be supported by the wording of the
passage, namely, the twice repeated account of the prophet's journey to
the Phrat on the strength of a twice repeated divine command. But on the
other hand, it has been found very improbable that "Jeremiah should
twice have made a journey to the Euphrates, merely to prove that a linen
girdle, if it lie long in the damp, becomes spoilt, a thing he could
have done much nearer home, and which besides everybody knew without
experiment" (Graf.). On this ground Ros., Graf, etc., hold the matter
for a parable or an allegorical tale, But this view depends for support
on the erroneous assumption that the specification of the Euphrates is
of no kind of importance for the matter in hand; whereas the contrary
may be gathered from the four times repeated mention of the place. Nor
is anything proved against the real performance of God's command by the
remark, that the journey thither and back on both occasions is spoken of
as if it were a mere matter of crossing a field. The Bible writers are
wont to set forth such external matters in no very circumstantial way.
And the great distance of the Euphrates - about 250 miles - gives us no
sufficient reason for departing from the narrative as we have it before
us, pointing as it does to a literal and real carrying out of God's
command, and to relegate the matter to the inward region of spiritual
vision, or to take the narrative for an allegorical tale. - Still less
reason is to be found in arbitrary interpretations of the name, such as,
after Bochart's example, have been attempted by Ven., Hitz., and Ew. The
assertion that the Euphrates is called נהר פּרת everywhere else,
including [Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002), [Jer
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#006),[Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010), loses its claim to
conclusiveness from the fact that the prefaced rhn is omitted in [Gen
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#014); [Jer
51:63](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#063). And even Ew. observes, that
"fifty years later a prophet understood the word of the Euphrates at
[Jer 51:63](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#063)." Now even if [Jer
51:63](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#063) had been written by another
prophet, and fifty years later (which is not the case, see on Jer
50ff.), the authority of this prophet would suffice to prove every other
interpretation erroneous; even although the other attempts at
interpretation had been more than the merest fancies. Ew. remarks, "It
is most amazing that recent scholars (Hitz. with Ven. and Dahl.) could
seriously come to adopt the conceit that פּרת is one and the same with
אפּרת ([Gen 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007)), and so with
Bethlehem;" and what he says is doubly relevant to his own rendering.
פּרת, he says, is either to be understood like Arab. frt, of fresh water
in general, or like frdt, a place near the water, a crevice opening from
the water into the land - interpretations so far fetched as to require
no serious refutation.

More important than the question as to the formal nature of the
emblematical action is that regarding its meaning; on which the views of
commentators are as much divided. from the interpretation in [Jer
13:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009) thus much is clear, that the
girdle is the emblem of Israel, and that the prophet, in putting on and
wearing this girdle, illustrates the relation of God to the folk of His
covenant (Israel and Judah). The further significance of the emblem is
suggested by the several moments of the action. The girdle does not
merely belong to a man's adornment, but is that part of his clothing
which he must put on when about to undertake any laborious piece of
work. The prophet is to buy and put on a linen girdle. פּשׁתּים, linen,
was the material of the priests' raiment, [Eze
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#017)., which in [Exo
28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040); [Exo
39:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#027). is called שׁשׁ, white byssus,
or בּד, linen. The priest's girdle was not, however, white, but woven
parti-coloured, after the four colours of the curtains of the sanctuary,
[Exo 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040); [Exo
39:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#029). Wool (צמר) is in [Eze
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#018) expressly excluded, because it
causes the body to sweat. The linen girdle points, therefore, to the
priestly character of Israel, called to be a holy people, a kingdom of
priests ([Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)). "The purchased
white girdle of linen, a man's pride and adornment, is the people bought
out of Egypt, yet in its innocence as it was when the Lord bound it to
Himself with the bands of love" (Umbr.). The prohibition that follows,
"into water thou shalt not bring it," is variously interpreted. Chr. B.
Mich. says: forte ne madefiat et facilius dein computrescat; to the same
effect Dahl., Ew., Umbr., Graf: to keep it safe from the hurtful effects
of damp. A view which refutes itself; since washing does no kind of harm
to the linen girdle, but rather makes it again as good as new. Thus to
the point writes Ng., remarking justly at the same time, that the
command not to bring the girdle into the water plainly implies that the
prophet would have washed it when it had become soiled. This was not to
be. The girdle was to remain dirty, and as such to be carried to the
Euphrates, in order that, as Ros. and Maur. observed, it might symbolize
sordes quas contraxerit populus in dies majores, mores populi magis
magisque lapsi, and that the carrying of the soiled girdle to the
Euphrates might set forth before the eyes of the people what awaited it,
after it had long been borne by God covered with the filth of its sins.
- The just appreciation of this prohibition leads us easily to the true
meaning of the command in [Jer 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#004),
to bring the girdle that was on his loins to the Euphrates, and there to
conceal it in a cleft in the rock, where it decays. But it is signifies,
as Chr. B. Mich., following Jerome, observes, populi Judaici apud
Chaldaeos citra Euphratem captivitas et exilium. Graf has objected: "The
corruptness of Israel was not a consequence of the Babylonish captivity;
the latter, indeed, came about in consequence of the existing
corruptness." But this objection stands and falls with the amphibolia of
the word corruptness, decay. Israel was, indeed, morally decayed before
the exile; but the mouldering of the girdle in the earth by the
Euphrates signifies not the moral but the physical decay of the covenant
people, which, again, was a result of the moral decay of the period
during which God had, in His long-suffering, borne the people
notwithstanding their sins. Wholly erroneous is the view adopted by Gr.
from Umbr.: the girdle decayed by the water is the sin-stained people
which, intriguing with the foreign gods, had in its pride cast itself
loose from its God, and had for long imagined itself secure under the
protection of the gods of Chaldea. The hiding of the girdle in the
crevice of a rock by the banks of the Euphrates would have been the most
unsuitable emblem conceivable for representing the moral corruption of
the people. Had the girdle, which God makes to decay by the Euphrates,
loosed itself from him and imagined it could conceal itself in a foreign
land? as Umbr. puts the case. According to the declaration, [Jer
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009), God will mar the great pride of
Judah and Jerusalem, even as the girdle had been marred, which had at
His command been carried to the Euphrates and hid there. The carrying of
the girdle to the Euphrates is an act proceeding from God, by which
Israel is marred; the intriguing of Israel with strange gods in the land
of Canaan was an act of Israel's own, against the will of God.

[Jer 13:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#006)

After the course of many days - these are the seventy years of the
captivity - the prophet is to fetch the girdle again. He went, digged
(חפר, whence we see that the hiding in the cleft of the rock was a
burying in the rocky soil of the Euphrates bank), and found the girdle
marred, fit for nothing. These words correspond to the effect which the
exile was designed to have, which it has had, on the wicked, idolatrous
race. The ungodly should as Moses' law, [Lev
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036), [Lev
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#039), declared, perish in the land of
their enemies; the land of their enemies will devour them, and they that
remain shall pine or moulder away in their iniquities and in the
iniquities of their fathers. This mouldering (ימּקּוּ) is well
reproduced in the marring (נשׁחת) of the girdle. It is no contradiction
to this, that a part of the people will be rescued from the captivity
and brought back to the land of their fathers. For although the girdle
which the prophet had put on his loins symbolized the people at large,
yet the decay of the same at the Euphrates sets forth only the physical
decay of the ungodly part of the people, as [Jer
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#010) intimates in clear words: "This
evil people that refuses to hear the word of the Lord, etc., shall be as
this girdle." The Lord will mar the גּאון of Judah and Jerusalem. The
word means highness in both a good and in an evil sense, glory and
self-glory. Here it is used with the latter force. This is shown both by
the context, and by a comparison of the passage [Lev
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019), that God will break the נּאון
of the people by sore judgments, which is the foundation of the present
[Jer 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009). - In [Jer
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011) the meaning of the girdle is
given, in order to explain the threatening in [Jer
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009) and [Jer
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#010). As the girdle lies on the loins
of a man, so the Lord hath laid Israel on Himself, that it may be to Him
for a people and for a praise, for a glory and an adornment, inasmuch as
He designed to set it above all other nations and to make it very
glorious; cf. [Deu 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019), whither
these words point back.

[Jeremiah 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 13:12</span></span>

How the Lord will destroy His degenerate people, and how they may yet
escape the impending ruin. - [Jer
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012). "And speak unto them this word:
Thus hath Jahveh the God of Israel said, Every jar is filled with wine.
And when they say to thee, Know we not that every jar is filled with
wine? [Jer 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#013). Then say to them:
Thus hath Jahve said: Behold, I fill all inhabitants of this land - the
kings that sit for David upon his throne, and the priests, and the
prophets, and all inhabitants of Jerusalem - with drunkenness, [Jer
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#014). And dash them one against
another, the fathers and the sons together, saith Jahve; I will not
spare, nor pity, nor have mercy, not to destroy them. - [Jer
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#015). Hear ye and give ear! Be not
proud, for Jahveh speaketh. [Jer
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016). Give to Jahveh, your God,
honour, ere He bring darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the
mountains of dusk, and ye look for light, but He turn it into the shadow
of death and make it darkness. [Jer
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017). But if ye hear it not, then in
concealment shall my soul weep for the pride, and weep and run down
shall mine eye with tears, because the flock of Jahve is carried away
captive."

To give emphasis to the threatening conveyed in the symbolical action,
the kind and manner of the destruction awaiting them is forcibly set
before the various ranks in Judah and Jerusalem by the interpretation,
in [Jer 13:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012), of a proverbial
saying and the application of it to them. The circumstantial way in
which the figurative saying is brought in in [Jer
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012), is designed to call attention
to its import. נבל, an earthenware vessel, especially the wine jar (cf.
[Isa 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#024); [Lam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002)), is here the emblem of man; cf.
[Jer 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006); [Isa
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#016). We must not, as Ng. does,
suppose the similar to be used because such jars are an excellent emblem
of that carnal aristocratic pride which lacked all substantial merit, by
reason of their being of bulging shape, hollow within and without
solidity, and of fragile material besides. No stress is laid on the
bulging form and hollowness of the jars, but only on their fulness with
wine and their brittleness. Nor can aristocratic haughtiness be
predicated of all the inhabitants of the land. The saying: Every jar is
filled with wine, seemed so plain and natural, that those addressed
answer: Of that we are well aware. "The answer is that of the psychical
man, who dreams of no deeper sense" (Hitz.). Just this very answer gives
the prophet occasion to expound the deeper meaning of this word of
God's. As one fills all wine jars, so must all inhabitants of the land
be filled by God with wine of intoxication. Drunkenness is the effect of
the intoxicating wine of God's wrath, [Psa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005). This wine Jahveh will give them
(cf. [Jer 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015); [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), etc.), so that, filled with
drunken frenzy, they shall helplessly destroy one another. This spirit
will seize upon all ranks: upon the kings who sit upon the throne of
David, not merely him who was reigning at the time; upon the priests and
prophets as leaders of the people; and upon all inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the metropolis, the spirit and temper of which exercises an
unlimited influence upon the temper and destiny of the kingdom at large.
I dash them one against the other, as jars are shivered when knocked
together. Here Hitz. finds a foreshadowing of civil war, by which they
should exterminate one another. Jeremiah was indeed thinking of the
staggering against one another of drunken men, but in "dash them," etc.,
adhered simply to the figure of jars or pots. But what can be meant by
the shivering of pots knocked together, other than mutual destruction?
The kingdom of Judah did not indeed fall by civil war; but who can deny
that the fury of the various factions in Judah and Jerusalem did really
contribute to the fall of the realm? The shattering of the pots does not
mean directly civil war; it is given as the result of the drunkenness of
the inhabitants, under which they, no longer capable of self-control,
dash against and so destroy one another. But besides, the breaking of
jars reminds us of the stratagem of Gideon and his 300 warriors, who, by
the sound of trumpets and the smashing of jars, threw the whole
Midianite camp into such panic, that these foes turned their swords
against one another and fled in wild confusion: [Jdg
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#019)., cf. too [Sa1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#020). Thus shall Judah be broken
without mercy or pity. To increase the emphasis, there is a cumulation
of expressions, as in [Jer 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007); [Jer
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005), cf. [Eze
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011); [Eze
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#004), [Eze
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#009), etc.

[Jeremiah 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 13:15</span></span>

With this threatening the prophet couples a solemn exhortation not to
leave the word of the Lord unheeded in their pride, but to give God the
glory, ere judgment fall on them. To give God the glory is, in this
connection, to acknowledge His glory by confession of apostasy from Him
and by returning to Him in sincere repentance; cf. [Jos
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019); [Mal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002). "Your God," who has attested
Himself to you as God. The Hiph. יחשׁך is not used intransitively,
either here or in [Psa 139:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#012), but
transitively: before He brings or makes darkness; cf. [Amo
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009). Mountains of dusk, i.e.,
mountains shrouded in dusk, are the emblem of unseen stumbling-blocks,
on which one stumbles and falls. Light and darkness are well-known
emblems of prosperity and adversity, welfare and misery. The suffix in
שׂמהּ goes with אור, which is construed feminine here as in [Job
36:32](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#032). Shadow of death = deep
darkness; ערפל, cloudy night, i.e., dark night. The Chet. ישׁית is
imperf., and to be read ישׁית; the Keri ושׁית is uncalled for and
incorrect.

[Jeremiah 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 13:17</span></span>

Knowing their obstinacy, the prophet adds: if ye hear it (what I have
declared to you) not, my soul shall weep. In the concealment, quo
secedere lugentes amant, ut impensius flere possint (Chr. B. Mich.). For
the pride, sc. in which ye persist. With tears mine eye shall run down
because the flock of Jahveh, i.e., the people of God (cf. [Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003)), is carried away into captivity
(perfect. proph).

[Jeremiah 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 13:18</span></span>

The fall of the kingdom, the captivity of Judah, with upbraidings
against Jerusalem for her grievous guilt in the matter of idolatry. -
[Jer 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018). "Say unto the king and to
the sovereign lady: Sit you low down, for from your heads falls the
crown of your glory. [Jer 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#019). The
cities of the south are shut and no man openeth; Judah is carried away
captive all of it, wholly carried away captive. [Jer
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020). Lift up your eyes and behold
them that come from midnight! Where is the flock that was given thee,
thy glorious flock? [Jer 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#021). What
wilt thou say, if He set over thee those whom thou hast accustomed to
thee as familiar friends, for a head? Shall not sorrows take thee, as a
woman in travail? [Jer 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022). And if
thou say in thine heart, Wherefore cometh this upon me? for the plenty
of thine iniquity are thy skirts uncovered, thy heels abused. [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023). Can an Ethiopian change his
skin, and a leopard his spots? Then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to doing evil. [Jer 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#024).
Therefore will I scatter them like chaff that flies before the wind of
the wilderness. [Jer 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#025). This is
thy lot, thine apportioned inheritance from me, because thou hast
forgotten me and trustedst in falsehood. [Jer
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#026). Therefore will I turn thy
skirts over thy face, that thy shame be seen. [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027). Thine adultery and thy
neighing, the crime of thy whoredom upon the ills, in the fields, I have
seen thine abominations. Woe unto thee, Jerusalem! thou shalt not be
made clean after how long a time yet!"

From [Jer 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018) on the prophet's
discourse is addressed to the king and the queen-mother. The latter as
such exercised great influence on the government, and is in the Books of
Kings mentioned alongside of almost all the reigning kings (cf. [Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013); [Kg2
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#013), etc.); so that we are not
necessarily led to think of Jechoniah and his mother in especial. To
them he proclaims the loss of the crown and the captivity of Judah. Set
yourselves low down (cf. Gesen. 142, 3, b), i.e., descend from the
throne; not in order to turn aside the threatening danger by
humiliation, but, as the reason that follows show, because the kingdom
is passing from you. For fallen is מראשׁתיכם, your head-gear, lit., what
is about or on your head (elsewhere pointed מראשׁות, [Sa1
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013); [Sa1
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#007)), namely, your splendid crown.
The perf. here is prophetic. The crown falls when the king loses country
and kingship. This is put expressly in [Jer
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#019). The meaning of the first half
of the verse, which is variously taken, may be gathered from the second.
In the latter the complete deportation of Judah is spoken of as an
accomplished fact, because it is as sure to happen as if it had taken
place already. Accordingly the first clause cannot bespeak expectation
merely, or be understood, as it is by Grotius, as meaning that Judah
need hope for no help from Egypt. This interpretation is irreconcilable
with "the cities of the south." "The south" is the south country of
Judah, cf. [Jos 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040); [Gen
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001), etc., and is not to be taken
according to the prophetic use of "king of the south," [Dan
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005), [Dan
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#009). The shutting of the cities is
not to be taken, with Jerome, as siege by the enemy, as in [Jos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001). There the closedness is otherwise
illustrated: No man was going out or in; here, on the other hand, it is:
No man openeth. "Shut" is to be explained according to [Isa
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#010) : the cities are shut up by
reason of ruins which block up the entrances to them; and in them is
none that can open, because all Judah is utterly carried away. The
cities of the south are mentioned, not because the enemy, avoiding the
capital, had first brought the southern part of the land under his
power, as Sennacherib had once advanced against Jerusalem from the
south, [Kg2 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)., [Jer
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#008) (Graf, Ng., etc.), but because
they were the part of the kingdom most remote for an enemy approaching
from the north; so that when they were taken, the land was reduced and
the captivity of all Judah accomplished. For the form הגלת see Ew. 194,
a, Ges. 75, Rem. 1. שׁלומים is adverbial accusative: in entirety, like
מישׁרים, [Psa 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002), etc. For this cf.
גּלוּת, [Amo 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006), [Amo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009).

The announcement of captivity is carried on in [Jer
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020), where we have first an account
of the impression which the carrying away captive will produce upon
Jerusalem ([Jer 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020) and [Jer
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#021)), and next a statement of the
cause of that judgment ([Jer
13:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022)). In שׂאי and ראי a feminine
is addressed, and, as appears from the suffix in עיניכם, one which is
collective. The same holds good of the following verses on to [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027), where Jerusalem is named,
doubtless the inhabitants of it, personified as the daughter of Zion - a
frequent case. Ng. is wrong in supposing that the feminines in [Jer
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020) are called for by the previously
mentioned queen-mother, that [Jer
13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020) are still addressed to her,
and that not till [Jer 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023) is there
a transition from her in the address to the nation taken collectively
and regarded as the mother of the country. The contents of [Jer
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020) do not tally with Ng.'s view;
for the queen-mother was not the reigning sovereign, so that the
inhabitants of the land could have been called her flock, however great
was the influence she might exercise upon the king. The mention of foes
coming from the north, and the question coupled therewith: Where is the
flock? convey the thought that the flock is carried off by those
enemies. The flock is the flock of Jahveh ([Jer
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017)), and, in virtue of God's choice
of it, a herd of gloriousness. The relative clause: "that was given
thee," implies that the person addressed is to be regarded as the
shepherd or owner of the flock. This will not apply to the capital and
its citizens; for the influence exerted by the capital in the country is
not so great as to make it appear the shepherd or lord of the people.
But the relative clause is in good keeping with the idea of the idea of
the daughter of Zion, with which is readily associated that of ruler of
land and people. It intimates the suffering that will be endured by the
daughter of Zion when those who have been hitherto her paramours are set
up as head over her. The verse is variously explained. The old transll.
and comm. take פּקד על in the sense of visit, chastise; so too Chr. B.
Mich. and Ros.; and Ew. besides, who alters the text acc. to the lxx,
changing יפקד into the plural יפקדוּ. For this change there is no
sufficient reason; and without such change, the signif. visit, punish,
gives us no suitable sense. The phrase means also: to appoint or set
over anybody; cf. e.g., [Jer 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#003). The
subject can only be Jahveh. The words from ואתּ onwards form an
adversative circumstantial clause: and yet thou hast accustomed them
עליך, for אליך rof ,, to thee (cf. for למּד c. אל, [Jer
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002)). The connection of the words
אלּפים לראשׁ depends upon the sig. assigned to אלּפים. Gesen. (thes.)
and Ros. still adhere to the meaning taken by Luther, Vat., and many
others, viz., principes, princes, taking for the sense of the whole:
whom thou hast accustomed (trained) to be princes over thee. This word
is indeed the technical term for the old Edomitish chieftains of clans,
[Gen 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015)., and is applied as an
archaic term by [Zac 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007) to the tribal
princes of Judah; but it does not, as a general rule, mean prince, but
familiar, friend, Ps. 655:14, [Pro
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#028), [Mic
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005); cf. [Jer
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019). This being the well-attested
signification, it is, in the first place, not competent to render עליך
over or against thee (adversus te, Jerome); and Hitz.'s exposition: thou
hast instructed them to thy hurt, hast taught them a disposition hostile
to thee, cannot be justified by usage. In the second place, אלפים cannot
be attached to the principal clause, "set over thee," and joined with
"for a head:" if He set over thee - as princes for a head; but it
belongs to "hast accustomed," while only "for a head" goes with "if He
set" (as de Wet., Umbr., Ng., etc., construe). The prophet means the
heathen kings, for whose favour Judah had hitherto been intriguing, the
Babylonians and Egyptians. There is no cogent reason for referring the
words, as many comm. do, to the Babylonians alone. For the statement is
quite general throughout; and, on the one hand, Judah had, from the days
of Ahaz on, courted the alliance not of the Babylonians alone, but of
the Egyptians too (cf. [Jer 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018));
and, on the other hand, after the death of Josiah, Judah had become
subject to Egypt, and had had to endure the grievous domination of the
Pharaohs, as Jeremiah had threatened, [Jer
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#016). If God deliver the daughter of
Zion into the power of these her paramours, i.e., if she be subjected to
their rule, then will grief and pain seize on her as on a woman in
childbirth; cf. [Jer 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024); [Jer
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#023), etc. אשׁת לדה, woman of
bearing; so here, only, elsewhere יולדה (cf. the passages cited); לדה is
infin., as in [Isa 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#003); [Kg2
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#003); [Hos
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011).

[Jeremiah 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 13:22</span></span>

This will befall the daughter of Zion for her sore transgressions.
Therefore will she be covered with scorn and shame. The manner of her
dishonour, discovery of the skirts (here and esp. in [Jer
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#026)), recalls [Nah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005), cf. [Isa
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#003); [Hos
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005). Chr. B. Mich. and others
understand the violent treatment of the heels to be the loading of the
feet with chains; but the mention of heels is not in keeping with this.
Still less can the exposure of the heels by the upturning of the skirts
be called maltreatment of the heels; nor can it be that, as Hitz. holds,
the affront is simply specialized by the mention of the heels instead of
the person. The thing can only mean, that the person will be driven
forth into exile barefoot and with violence, perhaps under the rod; cf.
[Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052).

[Jeremiah 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 13:23</span></span>

Judah will not escape this ignominious lot, since wickedness has so
grown to be its nature, that it can as little cease therefrom and do
good, as an Ethiopian can wash out the blackness of his skin, or a
panther change it spots. The consequential clause introduced by גּם אתּם
connects with the possibility suggested in, but denied by, the preceding
question: if that could happen, then might even ye do good. The one
thing is as impossible as the other. And so the Lord must scatter Judah
among the heathen, like stubble swept away by the desert wind, lit.,
passing by with the desert wind. The desert wind is the strong east wind
that blows from the Arabian Desert; see on [Jer
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011).

[Jeremiah 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 13:25</span></span>

In [Jer 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#025) the discourse draws to a
conclusion in such a way that, after a repetition of the manner in which
Jerusalem prepares for herself the doom announced, we have again, in
brief and condensed shape, the disgrace that is to befall her. This
shall be thy lot. Hitz. renders מנת מדּיך: portion of thy garment, that
is allotted for the swelling folds of thy garment (cf. Ruth. [Jer
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015); [Kg2
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#039)), on the ground that מד never
means mensura, but garment only. This is, however, no conclusive
argument; since so many words admit of two plural forms, so that מדּים
might be formed from מדּה; and since so many are found in the singular
in the forms of both genders, so that, alongside of מדּה, מד might also
be used in the sense of mensura; especially as both the signiff. measure
and garment are derived from the same root meaning of מדד. We therefore
adhere to the usual rendering, portio mensurae tuae, the share portioned
out to thee. אשׁר, causal, because. Trusted in falsehood, i.e., both in
delusive promises ([Jer 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004), [Jer
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#008)) and in the help of beingless gods
([Jer 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019)). - In the וגם־אני lies
the force of reciprocation: because thou hast forgotten me, etc., I too
have taken means to make retribution on your unthankfulness (Calv.). The
threatening of this verse is word for word from [Nah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005). - For her lewd idolatry Jerusalem
shall be carried off like a harlot amid mockery and disgrace. In [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027) the language is cumulative, to
lay as great stress as possible on Jerusalem's idolatrous ongoings. Thy
lewd neighing, i.e., thy ardent longing for and running after strange
gods; cf. [Jer 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008); [Jer
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024). זמּה, as in [Eze
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027); [Eze
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#009), etc., of the crime of
uncleanness, see on [Lev 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#017). The
three words are accusatives dependent on ראיתי, though separated from it
by the specification of place, and therefore summed up again in "thine
abominations." The addition: in the field, after "upon the hills," is
meant to make more prominent the publicity of the idolatrous work. The
concluding sentence: thou shalt not become clean for how long a time
yet, is not to be regarded as contradictory of [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023), which affirms that the people
is beyond the reach of reformation; [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023) is not a hyperbolical statement,
reduced within its true limits here. What is said in [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023) is true of the present
generation, which cleaves immoveably to wickedness. It does not exclude
the possibility of a future reform on the part of the people, a
purification of it from idolatry. Only this cannot be attained for a
long time, until after sore and long-lasting, purifying judgments. Cf.
[Jer 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)., [Jer
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 14](jer014)

</div>
