<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer040)  [Next](jer042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 41:1</span></span>

Murder of Gedaliah and his followers, as well as other Jews, by Ishmael.
- [Jer 41:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001). The warning of Johanan
had been only too well founded. In the seventh month - only two months,
therefore, after the destruction of Jerusalem and the appointment of
Gedaliah as governor - Ishmael came with the men to Mizpah, and was
hospitably received by Gedaliah and invited to his table. Ishmael is
here more exactly described as to his family descent, for the purpose of
throwing a stronger light upon the exceeding cruelty of the murders
afterwards ascribed to him. He was the son of Nethaniah, the son of
Elishama - perhaps the secretary of state mentioned [Jer
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012), or more likely the son of David
who bore this name, [Sa2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006); [Ch1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#008); [Ch1
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#007); so that Ishmael would belong to
a lateral branch of the house of David, be of royal extraction, and one
of the royal lords. ורבּי המּלך cannot be joined with Ishmael as the
subject, because in what follows there is no further mention made of the
royal lords, but only of Ishmael and his ten men; it belongs to what
precedes, מזּרע המּלוּכּה, so that we must repeat מן before רבּי. The
objections of Ngelsbach to this view will not stand examination. It is
not self-evident that Ishmael, because he was of royal blood, was
therefore also one of the royal nobles; for the רבּים certainly did not
form a hereditary caste, but were perhaps a class of nobles in the
service of the king, to which class the princes did not belong simply in
virtue of their being princes. But the improbability that Ishmael should
have been able with ten men to overpower the whole of the Jewish
followers of Gedaliah, together with the Chaldean warriors, and
(according to [Jer 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#007)) out of eighty
men to kill some, making prisoners of the rest, is not so great as to
compel us to take רבּי המּלך in such a meaning as to make it stand in
contradiction with the statement, repeated twice, over, that Ishmael,
with his ten men, did all this. Eleven men who are determined to commit
murder can kill a large number of persons who are not prepared against
such an attempt, and may also keep a whole district in terror.

(Note: There is still less ground, with Hitzig, Graf, and Ngelsbach, for
assuming that ורבּי המּלך is a gloss that has crept into the text. The
fact that רבּים, which is used here, is elsewhere applied only to
Chaldean nobles, is insufficient to show this; and even Ewald has
remarked that "the last king (Zedekiah) may well be supposed to have
appointed a number of grandees, after the example of the Chaldeans, and
given them, too, Chaldean names.")

"And they did eat bread there together," i.e., they were invited by
Gedaliah to his table. While at meat, Ishmael and his ten men rose and
slew Gedaliah with the sword. On account of ויּמת אתו, which comes
after, Hitzig and Graf would change ויּכּוּ into ויּכּוּ, he slew him,
Gedaliah; this alteration is possibly warranted, but by no means
absolutely necessary. The words 'ויּמת אתו וגו, "and he killed him,"
contain a reflection of the narrator as to the greatness of the crime;
in conformity with the facts of the case, the murder is ascribed only to
the originator of the deed, since the ten men of Ishmael's retinue were
simply his executioners. Besides Gedaliah, Ishmael killed "all the Jews
that were with him, with Gedaliah in Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were
found there, the men of war." The very expression shows that, of the
Jews, only those are meant who were present in the house with Gedaliah,
and, of the Chaldean soldiers, only those warriors who had been allowed
him as a guard, who for the time being were his servants, and who,
though they were not, as Schmidt thinks, hausto liberalius vino
inebriati, yet, as Chr. B. Michaelis remarks, were tunc temporis inermes
et imparati. The Jews of post-exile times used to keep the third day of
the seventh month as a fast-day, in commemoration of the murder of
Gedaliah; see on [Zac 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#003).

[Jeremiah 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 41:4</span></span>

On the next day after the murder of Gedaliah, "when no man knew it,"
i.e., before the deed had become known beyond Mizpah, "there came eighty
men from Shechem, Shiloh, and Samaria," having all the tokens of
mourning, "with their beards shaven, their clothes rent, and with cuts
and scratches on their bodies (מתגּדדים, see on [Jer
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#006)), and a meat-offering and
frankincense in their hand, to bring them into the house of Jahveh." The
order in which the towns are named is not geographical; for Shiloh lay
south from Shechem, and a little to the side from the straight road
leading from Shechem to Jerusalem. Instead of שׁלו, the lxx (Cod. Vat.)
have Σαλήμ; they use the same word as the name of a place in [Gen
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018), although the Hebrew שׁלם is
there an adjective, meaning safe, in good condition. According to
Robinson (Bibl. Res. iii. 102), there is a village named Slim three
miles east from Nabls (Shechem); Hitzig and Graf, on the strength of
this, prefer the reading of the lxx, to preserve the order of the names
in the text. But Hitzig has renounced this conjecture in the second
edition of his Commentary, "because Slim in Hebrew would be שׁולם, not
שׁלם." There is absolutely no foundation for the view in the lxx and in
[Gen 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018); the supposition, moreover,
that the three towns are given in their topographical order, and must
have stood near each other, is also unfounded. Shechem may have been
named first because the greater number of these men came from that city,
and other men from Shiloh and Samaria accompanied them. These men were
pious descendants of the Israelites who belonged to the kingdom of
Israel; they dwelt among the heathen colonists who had been settled in
the country under Esarhaddon ([Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024).), but, from the days of
Hezekiah or Josiah, had continued to serve Jahveh in Jerusalem, where
they used to attend the feasts ([Ch2
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009), cf. [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)). Nay, even after the
destruction of Jerusalem, at the seasons of the sacred feasts, they were
still content to bring at least unbloody offerings - meat-offerings and
incense - on the still sacred spot where these things used to be offered
to Jahveh; but just because this could now be done only on the ruins of
what had once been the sanctuary, they appeared there with all the signs
of deep sorrow for the destruction of this holy place and the cessation
of sacrificial worship. In illustration of this, Grotius has adduced a
passage from Papinian's instit. de rerum divis. sacrae: "Locus in quo
aedes sacrae sunt aedificatae, etiam diruto aedificio, sacer adhuc
manet."

[Jeremiah 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 41:6</span></span>

Ishmael went out from Mizpah to meet these men, always weeping as he
went (הלך הלך וּבכה, cf. Ges. 131, ab; Ew. 280, b). If they came from
Ephraim by way of Gibeon (el Jb), the road on to Jerusalem passed close
by Mizpah. When Ishmael met them, he asked them to come to Gedaliah (to
Mizpah). But when they had entered the city, "Ishmael slew them into the
midst of the pit" (which was there), i.e., killed them and cast their
corpses into the pit.

[Jeremiah 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 41:8</span></span>

Only ten men out of the eighty saved their lives, and this by saying to
Ishmael, "Do not kill us, for we have hidden stores in the field -
wheat, and barley, and oil, and honey." מטמנים are excavations in the
form of cisterns, or subterranean storehouses in the open country, for
keeping grain; the openings or entrances to these are so concealed that
the eye of a stranger could not perceive them. Such places are still
universally employed in Palestine at the present day (Robinson's
Palestine, i. pp. 324-5), and are also to be found in other southern
countries, both in ancient and modern times; see proofs of this in
Rosenmller's Scholia ad hunc locum. It is remarked, in [Jer
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009), of the pit into which Ishmael
threw the corpses, that it was the same that King Asa had made, i.e.,
had caused to be made, against, i.e., for protection against, Baasha the
king of Israel. In the historical books there is no mention made of this
pit in the account of the war between Asa and Baasha, [Kg1
15:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#016) and [Ch2
16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001); it is only stated in [Kg1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#022) and [Ch2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#006) that, after Baasha, who had
fortified Ramah, had been compelled to return to his own land because of
the invasion of Benhadad the Syrian king, whom Asa had called to his
aid, the king of Judah ordered all his people to carry away from Ramah
the stones and timber which Baasha had employed in building, and
therewith fortify Geba and Mizpah. The expression מפּני בעשׁא certainly
implies that the pit had been formed as a protection against Baasha, and
belonged to the fortifications raised at that time. However, הבּור
cannot mean the burial-place belonging to the city (Grotius), but only a
cistern (cf. [Kg2 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#014)); and one such
as could contain a considerable store of water was as necessary as a
wall and a moat for the fortification of a city, so that it might be
able to endure a long siege (Graf). Hitzig, on the other hand, takes
בּור to mean a long and broad ditch which cut off the approach to the
city from Ephraim, or which, forming a part of the fortifications, made
a break in the road to Jerusalem, though it was bridged over in times of
peace, thus forming a kind of tunnel. This idea is certainly incorrect;
for, according to [Jer 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#007), the
"ditch" was inside the city (בּתוך). The expression בּיד גּדליהוּ is
obscure, and cannot be explained with any of certainty. בּיד cannot mean
"through the fault of" Gedaliah (Raschi), or "because of" Gedaliah - for
his sake (Kimchi, Umbreit), or "coram" Gedaliah (Venema), but must
rather be rendered "by means of, through the medium of," or "at the side
of, together with." Ngelsbach has decided for the rendering "by means
of," giving as his reason the fact that Ishmael had made use of the name
of Gedaliah in order to decoy these men into destruction. He had called
to them, "Come to Gedaliah" ([Jer
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#006)); and simply on the authority of
this name, they had followed him. But the employment of the name as a
means of decoy can hardly be expressed by בּיד. We therefore prefer the
meaning "at the hand = at the side of" (following the Syriac, L. de
Dieu, Rosenmller, Ewald), although this signification cannot be
established from the passages cited by Rosenm. ([Sa1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#034); [Sa1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#002); [Ezr
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#023)), nor can the meaning "together
with" (Ewald) be shown to belong to it. On the other hand, a passage
which is quite decisive for the rendering "by the hand of, beside," is
[Job 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023) : "there stands ready at
his hand (בּידו, i.e., close to him) a day of darkness." If we take this
meaning for the passage now before us, then בּיד גּדליהוּ cannot be
connected with אשׁר , in accordance with the Masoretic accents, but with
השׁליך שׁם, "where Ishmael cast the bodies of the men whom he had slain,
by the side of Gedaliah;" so that it is not stated till here and now,
and only in a casual manner, what had become of Gedaliah's corpse.
Nothing that admits of being proved can be brought against this view.

(Note: Because the lxx have, for בּיד גּדליהוּ הוּא, φρέαρ μέγα τοῦτό
ἐστιν, J. D. Michaelis, Dahler, Movers, Hitzig, and Graf would change
the text, and either take ryb lwdg 'wh (Dahler, Movers) or בּיר הגּדול
הוּא (= בּור) as the original reading, inasmuch as one codex of De
Rossi's also has בור. But apart from the improbability of בּור גּדול or
הגּדול being incorrectly changed into בּיד גּדליהוּ, we find that הוּא
stands provokingly in the way; for it would be superfluous, or introduce
an improper emphasis into the sentence. The lxx have but been attempting
to guess at a translation of a text they did not understand. What Hitzig
further supposes has no foundation, viz., that this "ditch" is identical
with that mentioned [Sa1 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#022), in
שׂכוּ, and with τὸ φρέαρ τὸ μέγα of 1 Macc. 7:19; for the ditch at Sechu
was near Ramah, which was about four miles from Mizpah, and the large
fountain 1 Macc. 7:19 was ἐν Βηζέθ, an unknown place in the vicinity of
Jerusalem.)

The הוּא which follows is a predicate: "the ditch wherein...was that
which Asa the king had formed."

The motive for this second series of assassinations by Ishmael is
difficult to discover. The supposition that he was afraid of being
betrayed, and for this reason killed these strangers, not wishing to be
troubled with them, is improbable, for the simple reason that these
strangers did not want to go to Mizpah, but to Jerusalem. For the
supposition of Thenius (on [Kg2 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#023))
and of Schmieder, that the people had intended going to Mizpah to a
house of God that was there, is very properly rejected by Hitzig,
because no mention is made in history of a place of worship at Mizpah;
and, according to the express statement of [Jer
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#006)., Ishmael had enticed them into
this city only by inviting them to come and see Gedaliah. Had Ishmael
wished merely to conceal the murder of Gedaliah from these strangers, he
ought to have done anything but let them into Mizpah. As little can we
regard this deed (with Graf) as an act of revenge on these Israelites by
Ishmael for the murder of his relations and equals in rank by
Nebuchadnezzar ([Jer 52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010)), because
these men, who had now for a long time been living together with
heathens, were Assyrian and Chaldean subjects. For we cannot comprehend
how he could look on these Israelites as friends of the Chaldeans, and
vent his anger against the Chaldean rule by murdering them; the mournful
procession which they formed, and the offerings they were carrying to
present, proclaimed them faithful adherents of Judah. Ngelsbach,
accordingly, is of opinion that Ishmael had simply intended robbery. As
it is evident that he, a rough and wild man, had assassinated the noble
Gedaliah from personal jealousy, and in order to further the political
interest of his Ammonite patron, he must have been seeking to put
himself in the position of his victim, or to flee. "When we find,
moreover, that he soon murdered a peaceable caravan of pilgrims, and
preserved the lives only of a few who offered to show him hidden
treasures; when, finally, we perceive that the whole turba imbellis of
Mizpah were seized and carried off into slavery, Ishmael proves himself
a mere robber." But, though the fact that Ishmael spared the lives of
the ten men who offered to show him hidden treasures seems to support
this view, yet the supposition that nothing more than robbery was
intended does not suffice to explain the double murder. The two series
of assassinations plainly stand in the closest connection, and must have
been executed from one and the same motive. It was at the instigation of
the Ammonite king that Ishmael murdered Gedaliah; moreover, as we learn
from the report brought to Gedaliah by Johanan ([Jer
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#015)), the crime was committed in the
expectation that the whole of Judah would then be dispersed, and the
remnant of them perish. This murder was thus the work of the Ammonite
king, who selected the royally-descended Ishmael as his instrument
simply because he could conveniently, for the execution of his plans,
employ the personal envy of one man against another who had been
preferred by the king of Babylon. There can be no doubt that the same
motive which urged him to destroy the remnant of Judah, i.e., to
frustrate the attempt to gather and restore Judah, was also at work in
the massacre of the pilgrims who were coming to the temple. If Ishmael,
the leader of a robber-gang, had entered into the design of the Ammonite
king, then everything that might serve for the preservation and
consolidation of Judah must have been a source of pain to him; and this
hatred of his towards Judah, which derived its strength and support from
his religious views, incited him to murder the Jewish pilgrims to the
temple, although the prospect of obtaining treasures might well
cooperate with this in such a way as to make him spare the ten men who
pretended they had hidden stores. With this, too, we can easily connect
the hypocritical dealing on the part of Ishmael, in going forth, with
tears, to meet these pious pilgrims, so that he might deceive them by
making such a show of grief over the calamity that had befallen Judah;
fore the wicked often assume an appearance of sanctity for the more
effectual accomplishment of their evil deeds. The lxx evidently did not
know what to make of this passage as it stands; hence, in [Jer
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#006), they have quite dropped the
words "from Mizpah," and have rendered הלך הלך by αὐτοὶ ἐπορεύοντο καὶ
ἔκλαιον. Hitzig and Graf accept this as indicating the original text,
since Ishmael had no ostensible ground for weeping. But the reasons
which are supposed to justify this conjecture are, as Ngelsbach well
remarks, of such a nature that one can scarcely believe they are
seriously held.

[Jeremiah 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 41:10</span></span>

After executing these murderous deeds, Ishmael led away into captivity
all the people that still remained in Mizpah, the king's daughters and
all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had committed to the care of
Gedaliah, intending to go over with them to the Ammonites. As the object
of ויּשׁבּ is very far removed through the intervention of a relative
clause, the connection is resumed by ויּשׁבּם. "The king's daughters"
are not only the daughters of Zedekiah, but female members generally of
the royal house, princesses, analogous to בּן־מלך, king's son = prince,
[Jer 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026); [Jer
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 41:11</span></span>

\- [Jer 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#011). When Johanan and the
rest of the captains heard of what had taken place in Mizpah, they
marched out with all their men to fight Ishmael, and came on him at the
great water at Gibeon, i.e., by the pool at Gibeon which is mentioned
[Sa2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#013), one of the large
receptacles for water which are still found there; see on [Sa2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#013). Gibeon, now called el Jib (see
on [Jos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003)), was situated only about
two miles north from Mizpah; from which we may conclude that it was soon
known what had happened, and the captains quickly assembled their men
and marched after Ishmael.

[Jeremiah 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 41:13</span></span>

When those who had been carried off by Ishmael saw these captains, they
were glad, since they had followed their captor merely because they were
forced to do so. They all turned, and went over to Johanan; but Ishmael
escaped from Johanan, with eight men, - having thus lost two in the
fight with Johanan, - and went to the Ammonites.

[Jeremiah 41:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 41:16</span></span>

After the escape of Ishmael, it was to be feared that the Chaldeans
would avenge the murder of the governor, and make the Jews who remained
atone for the escape of the murderer by executing them or carrying them
away to Babylon. Accordingly, Johanan and the other captains determined
to withdraw to Egypt with the men, women, and children that had been
carried off by Ishmael; these they conducted first to Bethlehem, where
they encamped for the purpose of deliberating as to the rest of the
journey, and taking due precautions. The account given in [Jer
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#016) is clumsily expressed,
especially the middle portion, between "whom he had brought back" and
"the son of Ahikam;" and in this part the words "from Mizpah" are
particularly troublesome in breaking the connection: "whom he (Johanan)
had brought back from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after
he (Ishmael) had slain Gedaliah," while it is more correctly stated in
the second relative clause, "whom he had brought back from Gibeon."
Hitzig and Graf accordingly suppose that, originally, instead of אשׁר
השׁיב מאת, there stood in the text אשׁר שׁבה, "whom he (Ishmael) had led
captive from Mizpah, after he had slain Gedaliah." Thus the whole
becomes clear. Against this conjecture there only stands the fact that
the lxx translate οὕς ἀπέστρεψεν ἀπὸ ̓Ισμαήλ; they must thus have read
אשׁר השׁיב מאת, and omitted merely המּצפּה as unsuited to the passage.
However, the error may be even older than the lxx, and השׁיב מאת may
easily have arisen through a scribe having glanced at the words אשׁר
השׁיב of the last clause. The words from "men" to "chamberlains" form
the more exact specification of the general expression "all the remnant
of the people:" "men, viz., men of war, women (including the king's
daughters, [Jer 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#010)), and children
and chamberlains" (סריסים, guardians and servants of the female members
of the royal family).

[Jeremiah 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 41:17</span></span>

"They marched and stopped (made a half) at the inn if Chimham, which is
near Bethlehem." גּרוּת, ἅπ.λεγ., considered etymologically, must mean
diversorium, hospitium, an inn, khan, or caravanserai. Instead of the
Kethib כמוהם, many codices read כּמהם (like the Qeri); nor, have any of
the old translators read וּ or וׁ in the word. The Qeri is evidently
correct, and we are to read כּמהם, the name of a son of Barzillai the
rich Gileadite, [Sa2 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#038), [Sa2
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#041), who is supposed to have built
or founded this caravanserai for the convenience of travellers. The
words "because of the Chaldeans" in the beginning of [Jer
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#018) depend on "to go to Egypt" at
the end of the preceding verse: "to go to Egypt for fear of the
Chaldeans," on account of the murder of Gedaliah by Ishmael.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 42](jer042)

</div>
