<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer005)  [Next](jer007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 6:1</span></span>

The Judgment is Irrevocably Decreed. - A hostile army approaches from
the north, and lays siege to Jerusalem, in order to storm the city ([Jer
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001)). None is spared, since the
people rejects all counsels to reform ([Jer
6:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009)). Since it will not repent, it
will fall by the hands of the enemy, in spite of the outward sacrificial
service ([Jer 6:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016)). The enemy will
smite Zion without mercy, seeing that the trial of the people has
brought about no change for the better in them ([Jer
6:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022)).

[Jer 6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001)

The judgment breaking over Jerusalem. - [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001). "Flee, ye sons of Benjamin, out
of the midst of Jerusalem, and in Tekoa blow the trumpet, and over
Beth-haccerem set up a sign; for evil approaCheth from the north, and
great destruction. [Jer 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#002). The
comely and the delicate - I lay waste the daughter of Zion. [Jer
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#003). To her come shepherds with their
flocks, pitch their tents about her round about, and devour each his
portion. [Jer 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004). Sanctify war
against her; arise, let us go up at noon. Woe unto us! for the day
declineth; for the shadows of evening lengthen. [Jer
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#005). Arise, let us go up by night, and
destroy her palaces. [Jer 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#006). For
thus hath Jahveh of hosts spoken, Hew down wood, and pile up against
Jerusalem a rampart; she is the city that is (to be) punished, she is
all full of oppression in her midst. [Jer
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#007). As a fountain pours forth its
water, so pours she forth her wickedness: violence and spoiling is heard
in her; before my face continually, wounds and smiting. [Jer
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#008). Be warned, Jerusalem, lest my
soul tear herself from thee, lest I make thee a waste, a land
uninhabited."

In graphic delineation of the enemy's approach against Jerusalem, the
prophet calls on the people to flee. As regarded its situation,
Jerusalem belonged to the tribe of Benjamin; the boundary between the
tribal domain of Judah and Benjamin passed through the valley of
Ben-hinnom on the south side of Jerusalem, and then ran northwards to
the west of the city ([Jos 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008); [Jos
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016).). The city was inhabited by
Judeans and Benjamites, [Ch1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#002). The
summons is addressed to the Benjamites as the prophet's
fellow-countrymen. Tekoa lay about two hours' journey southwards from
Bethlehem, according to Jerome, on a hill twelve Roman miles south of
Jerusalem; see on [Jos 15:59](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#059). This
town is mentioned because its name admits of a play on the word תּקעוּ.
The alarm is given in the country south of Jerusalem, because the enemy
is coming from the north, so that the flight will be directed
southwards. Beth-haccerem, acc. to Jerome, was a hamlet (vicus) between
Jerusalem and Tekoa, qui lingua Syra et Hebraic Bethacharma nominatur,
et ipse in monte positus, apparently on what is now called the Frank's
Hill, Jebel Fureidis; see on [Neh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014). משׂאת, the lifting up, that
which raises itself up, or is raised; here a lofty beacon or signal, the
nature of which is not further made known. The meaning, fire-signal, or
ascending column of smoke, cannot be made good from [Jdg
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038), [Jdg
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040), since there עשׁן is appended;
nor from the statements of classical authors (in Ros.), that in time of
war bodies of troops stationed in different places made their positions
known to one another by masses of rising flame during the night, and by
columns of smoke in the day time. As to the last clause, cf. [Jer
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014). "Great destruction," as in [Jer
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006). - In [Jer
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#002) the impending judgment is further
described. It falls on the daughter of Zion, the capital and its
inhabitants, personified as a beautiful and delicately reared woman.
נוה, defectively written for נאוה, contracted from נאוה, lovely,
beautiful. The words are not vocatives, O fair and delicate, but
accusatives made to precede their governing verb absolutely, and are
explained by "the daughter of Zion," dependent on "I destroy:" the fair
and the delicate, namely, the daughter of Zion, I destroy. דּמה as in
[Hos 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#005). The other meaning of this
verb, to be like, to resemble, is wholly unsuitable here; and, besides,
in this signification it is construed with אל or ל. Ew.'s translation, I
mean the daughter of Zion, is not justifiable by the usage of the word,
the Piel only, and not the Kal, being capable of this interpretation.

[Jer 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#003)

The destruction comes about by means of shepherds with their flocks, who
set up their tents round the city, and depasture each his portion. We
need hardly observe that the shepherds and their flocks are a figure for
princes, who with their peoples besiege and sack Jerusalem; with this
cf. [Jer 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015). The figure does not
point to a nomad swarm, or the Scythian people, as Ew. supposes. "Each
his hand," i.e., what lies to his hand, or next him.

[Jer 6:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004)

The description passes from figure to reality, and the enemies appear
before us as speaking, inciting one another to the combat, encouraging
one another to storm the city. To sanctify a war, i.e., prepare
themselves for the war by religious consecration, inasmuch as the war
was undertaken under commission from God, and because the departure of
the army, like the combat itself, was consecrated by sacrifice and other
religious ceremonies; see on [Joe 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009).
עלה, to go up against a place as an enemy, not, go up upon, in which
case the object, them (the city or walls), could not be omitted. It is
plainly the storming or capture of the town that is meant by the going
up; hence we may understand what follows: and we will destroy her
palaces. We have a rousing call to go up at noon or in clear daylight,
joined with "woe to us," a cry of disappointment that they will not be
able to gain their ends so soon, not indeed till night; in these we see
the great eagerness with which they carry on the assault. יום פּנה, the
day turns itself, declines towards its end; cf. [Psa
90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009). The enemies act under a
commission from God, who has imposed on them the labour of the siege, in
order to punish Jerusalem for her sins. Jahveh is here most fittingly
called the God of hosts; for as God of the world, obeyed by the armies
of heaven, He commands the kings of the earth to chastise His people.
Hew wood, i.e., fell trees for making the siege works, cf. [Deu
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020), both for raising the attacking
ramparts,

(Note: Agger ex terra lignisque attollitur contra murum, de quo tela
jactantur. Veget. de re milit. iv. 15.)

and for the entire apparatus necessary for storming the town. עצה is not
a collective form from עץ, like דּגה from דּג; but the ה is a suffix in
spite of the omission of the Mappik, which is given by but a few of the
codd., eastern and western, for we know that Mappik is sometimes
omitted, e.g., [Num 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#028), [Num
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031); cf. Ew. 247, d. We are
encouraged to take it so by [Deu
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019), where עצה are the trees in the
vicinity of the town, of which only the fruit trees were to be spared in
case of siege, while those which did not bear eatable fruit were to be
made use of for the purposes of the siege. And thus we must here, too,
read עצה, and refer the suffix to the next noun (Jerusalem). On "pile up
a rampart," cf. [Sa2 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#005); [Eze
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002), etc. הפקד is used as passive of
Kal, and impersonally. The connection with העיר is to be taken like חנה
in [Isa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001) : the city where it is
punished, or perhaps like [Psa 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006),
the relative being supplied: that is punished. כּלּהּ is not to be
joined, contrary to the accents, with הפקד (Ven., J. D. Mich.), a
connection which, even if it were legitimate, would give but a feeble
thought. It belongs to what follows, "she is wholly oppression in her
midst," i.e., on all sides in her there is oppression. This is expanded
in [Jer 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#007). lxx and Jerome have taken
הקיר from קרר, and translate: like as a cistern keeps its water cool
(ψύχει, frigidam facit), so she keeps her wickedness cool. Hitz. has
pronounced in favour of this interpretation, but changes "keep cool"
into "keep fresh," and understands the metaphor thus: they take good
care that their wickedness does not stagnate or become impaired by
disuse. But it would be a strange metaphor to put "keep wickedness
cool," for "maintain it in strength and vigour." We therefore, along
with Luth. and most commentators, prefer the rabbinical interpretation:
as a well makes its water to gush out, etc.; for there is no sufficient
force in the objection that מקור from קוּר, dig, is not a spring but a
well, that הקיר has still less the force of making to gush forth, and
that בּור wholly excludes the idea of causing to spring out. The first
assertion is refuted by [Jer 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013),
מקור, fountain of living water; whence it is clear that the word does
mean a well fed by a spring. It is true, indeed, that the word בּור, a
later way of writing בּאר (cf. [Ch1
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#017). 22 with [Sa2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#015). 20), means usually, a pit, a
cistern dug out; but this form is not substantially different from בּאר,
well, puteus, which is used for בּור in Ps. 55:24 and [Psa
69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016). Accordingly, this latter form
can undoubtedly stand with the force of בּאר, as has been admitted by
the Masoretes when they substituted for it בּאר; cf. the Arab. bi'run.
The noun מקור puts beyond doubt the legitimacy of giving to הקיר, from
קוּר, to dig a well, the signification of making water to gush forth.

The form הקרה is indeed referable to קרר, but only shows, as is
otherwise well known, that no very strict line of demarcation can be
drawn between the forms of verbs 'עע and 'הקיר ;עו, again, is formed
regularly from קוּר. Violence and spoiling; cf. [Jer
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#008), and [Amo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010); [Hab
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003). "Before my face," before mine
eyes, corresponds to "is heard," as wounds and smitings are the
consequences of violence. On that head, cf. [Psa
55:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#010).

[Jer 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#008)

If Jerusalem cease not from these sins and crimes, the Lord must devote
it to spoliation. Let thyself be corrected, warned; cf. [Psa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010); [Lev
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#023). תּקע from יקע, tear oneself
loose, estrange oneself, as in [Eze
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017). "A land uninhabited" is an
apposition giving greater expressiveness to "a waste," [Jer
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 6:9</span></span>

This judgment will fall unsparingly on Jerusalem, because they listen to
no warning, but suffer themselves to be confirmed in their shameless
courses by false prophets and wicked priests. - [Jer
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009). "Thus hath Jahveh of hosts said:
They shall have a gleaning of the remnant of Israel as of a vine: lay
thine hand again as a vine-dresser on the soots. [Jer
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#010). To whom shall I speak, and
testify, that they may hear? Behold, uncircumcised is their ear, and
they cannot give heed: behold, the word of Jahveh is become to them a
reproach; they have no pleasure in it. [Jer
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011). But of the fury of Jahveh am I
full, am weary with holding it in. Pour it out upon the child on the
street, and upon the group of young men together; for even the husband
with the wife shall be taken, the old man with him that is full of days.
[Jer 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#012). And their houses shall pass
unto others, fields and wives together; for I stretch out mine hand
against the inhabitants of the land, saith Jahveh. [Jer
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013). For great and small are all of
them greedy for gain; and from the prophet to the priest, all use
deceit. [Jer 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014). And they heal the
breach of the daughter of my people lightly, saying, Peace, peace, when
there is no peace. [Jer 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015). They are
put to shame because they have done abomination, yet they take not shame
to themselves, neither know they disgrace; therefore they shall fall
among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall stumble,
hath Jahveh said."

The threatening of [Jer 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009) is closely
connected with the foregoing. The Lord will make Jerusalem an
uninhabited waste, because it will not take warning. The enemy will make
a gleaning like vine-dressers, i.e., they will yet search out eve that
which is left of the people, and crush it or carry it captive. This
still sterner threat does come into contradiction with the repeated
pledge, that Israel is not to be wholly extirpated, not to be made an
utter end of ([Jer 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027); [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010), [Jer
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018)). For even at the gleaning odd
clusters are left, which are not noticed or set store by. The words
convey the idea that the enemy will not have done with it after one
devastating campaign, but will repeat his inroads. עולל is construed
with the accus. of the vineyard in [Lev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010). The "remnant of Israel" is not
the kingdom of Judah at large, but Judah already reduced by judgments.
In the second clause the idea of the first is repeated in the form of a
command to the gleaners. The command is to be looked on as addressed to
the enemy by God; and this turn of the expression serves to put the
thought with a positiveness that excludes the faintest doubt. To bring
back the hand means: yet again to turn it, stretch it out against a
person or thing; cf. [Amo 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#008); [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025). סלסלּות is not baskets, like
סלּים, [Gen 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016), but like זלזלּים,
[Isa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#005), vine-shoots, prop. waving
twigs, like תּלתּלּים, [Sol 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#011), from
סלל = זלל and תּלל, wave (Ew., Hitz.).

[Jer 6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#010)

Well might Jeremiah warn the people once more (cf. [Jer
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#008)), in order to turn sore judgment
away from it; but it cannot and will not hear, for it is utterly
hardened. Yet can he not be silent; for he is so filled with the fury of
God, that he must pour it forth on the depraved race. This is our view
of the progress of the thought in these verses; whereas Hitz. and Graf
make what is said in [Jer 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011) refer
to the utterance of the dreadful revelation received in [Jer
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009). But this is not in keeping with
"testify that they may hear," or with the unmistakeable contrast between
the pouring out of the divine fury, [Jer
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011), and the testifying that they may
hear, [Jer 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#010). Just because their
ear is uncircumcised to that they cannot hear, is it in vain to speak to
them for the purpose of warning them; and the prophet has no alternative
left but to pour out on the deaf and seared people that fury of the Lord
with which he is inwardly filled. The question: to whom should I speak?
etc. (על for אל, as [Psa 111:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#002) and
often), is not to be taken as a question to God, but only as a
rhetorical turn of the thought, that all further speaking or warning is
in vain. "Testify," lay down testimony by exhibiting the sin and the
punishment it brings with it. "That they may hear," ut audiant, the
Chald. has well paraphrased: ut accipiant doctrinam. Uncircumcised is
their ear, as it were covered with a foreskin, so that the voice of
God's word cannot find its way in; cf. [Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024); [Jer
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004). The second clause, introduced by
הנּה, adduces the reason of their not being able to hear. The word of
God is become a reproach to them; they are determined not to hearken to
it, because it lashes their sins. [Jer
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011) comes in adversatively: But the
fury of the Lord drives him to speak. חמת יהוה is not a holy ardour for
Jahveh (Graf and many ancient comm.), but the wrath of God against the
people, which the prophet cannot contain, i.e., keep to himself, but
must pour out. Because they will not take correction, he must inflict
the judgment upon them, not merely utter it. The imper. שׁפך is to be
taken like השׁב, [Jer 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009), not as an
expression of the irresistible necessity which, in spite of all his
efforts against it, compels the prophet to pour forth, in a certain
sense, the wrath of the Lord on all classes of the people by the very
publishing of God's word (Graf); but it is the command of God, to be
executed by him, as is shown by "for I stretch out mine hand," [Jer
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#012). The prophet is to pour out the
wrath of God by the proclamation of God's word, which finds its
fulfilment in judgments of wrath; see on [Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010). Upon all classes of the people:
the children that play in the street (cf. [Jer
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020)), the young men gathered together
in a cheerful company, the men and women, old men and them that are full
of days, i.e., those who have reached the furthest limit of old age. כּי
tells why the prophet is so to speak: for upon the whole population will
God's wrath be poured out. ילּכד, not, be taken captive, but, be taken,
overtaken by the wrath, as in [Jer
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009); cf. [Sa1
14:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#041).

[Jer 6:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#012)

[Jer 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#012) gives the result of being
thus taken: their houses, fields, and wives will be handed over to
others, descend to others. Wives are mentioned along with houses and
fields, as in the commandment, [Exo
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017); cf. [Deu
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#018). The loss of all one's
possessions is mentioned in connection with reproof, following in [Jer
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013), of greed and base avarice. The
threatening is confirmed in [Jer 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#012)
by the clause: for I (Jahveh) stretch my hand out, etc. Then in [Jer
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013) and [Jer
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014) the cause of the judgment is
adduced. The judgment falls upon all, for all, great and little, i.e.,
mean and powerful (cf. [Jer 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004), [Jer
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#005)), go after base gain; and the
teachers, who ought to lead the people on the true way ([Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)), sue deceit and dishonesty.
They heal the breach of the daughter of my people, i.e., the infirmities
and injuries of the state, after a light and frivolous fashion (נקלּה is
partic.Niph. faem., and על is of the thing that covers another); - in
this, namely, that they speak of peace and healing where there is no
peace; that they do not uncover the real injuries so as to heal them
thoroughly, but treat them as if they were trifling and in no way
dangerous infirmities.

[Jer 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015)

For this behaviour they are put to shame, i.e., deceived in their hope.
The perf. is prophetic, representing the matter as being equally certain
as if it had been already realized. It cannot bear to be translated
either: they should be ashamed (Ros., Umbr. after the Chald.), or: they
would be ashamed (Ew.). The following grounding clause adduces the cause
of their being put to shame: because they have done abomination; and the
next clauses bring in a contrast: yet on the contrary, shame and
disgrace they know not; therefore on the day of visitation they will
fall with the rest. When these verses are repeated in [Jer
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#012), the Niph. הכּלם is used in place
of the Hiph. הכלים. It does not, however, follow from this that the
Hiph. has here the force of the Niph., but only thus much, that the
Hiph. is here used, not in a transitive, but in a simply active meaning:
to have shame or disgrace. For פּקדתּים with the relative omitted, time
when I visit, we have in [Jer 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#012) the
simpler form of the noun פּקדּת, as in [Jer
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#015); [Jer
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021), and often. Such divergencies do
not justify the accommodation of the present passage to these others,
since on occasions of repetitions the expression in matters of
subordinate importance is often varied. The perf. of the verb has here
the force of the fut. exact.

[Jeremiah 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 6:16</span></span>

The judgment cannot be turned aside by mere sacrifice without a change
of heart. - [Jer 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016). "Thus hath
Jahveh said: Stand on the ways, and look, and ask after the everlasting
paths, which (one) is the way of good, and walk therein; so shall ye
find rest for your souls. But they say, We will not go. [Jer
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017). And I have set over you
watchmen, (saying): Hearken to the sound of the trumpet; but they say,
We will not hearken. [Jer 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#018).
Therefore hear, ye peoples, and know, thou congregation, what happens to
them. [Jer 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019). Hear, O earth!
Behold, I bring evil on this people, the fruit of their thoughts; for to
my words they have not hearkened, and at my law they have spurned. [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020). To what end, then, is their
incense coming to me from Sheba, and the good spice-cane from a far
land? Your burnt-offerings are not a pleasure, and your slain-offerings
are not grateful to me. [Jer 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#021).
Therefore thus hath Jahveh said: Behold, I lay stumbling-blocks for this
people, that thereon fathers and sons may stumble, at once the neighbour
and his friend shall perish."

[Jer 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016)

The Lord has not left any lack of instruction and warning. He has marked
out for them the way of salvation in the history of the ancient times.
It is to this reference is made when they, in ignorance of the way to
walk in, are called to ask after the everlasting paths. This thought is
clothed thus: they are to step forth upon the ways, to place themselves
where several ways diverge from one another, and inquire as to the
everlasting paths, so as to discover which is the right way, and then on
this they are to walk. נתיבות עולם are paths that have been trod in the
hoary time of old, but not all sorts of ways, good and bad, which they
are to walk on indiscriminately, so that it may be discovered which of
them is the right one (Hitz.). This meaning is not to be inferred from
the fact, that in [Jer 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015)
everlasting paths are opposed to untrodden ways; indeed this very
passage teaches that the everlasting ways are the right ones, from which
through idolatry the people have wandered into unbeaten paths. Thus the
paths of the old time are here the ways in which Israel's godly
ancestors have trod; meaning substantially, the patriarchs' manner of
thinking and acting. For the following question, "which is the way,"
etc., does not mean, amongst the paths of old time to seek out that
which, as the right one, leads to salvation, but says simply thus much:
ask after the paths of the old time, so as thus to recognise the right
way, and then, when ye have found it, to walk therein. דּרך הטּוב, not,
the good way; for הטּוב cannot be an objective appended to דּרך, since
immediately after, the latter word is construed in בּהּ as faem. "The
good" is the genitive dependent on "way:" way of the good, that leads to
the good, to salvation. This way Israel might learn to know from the
history of antiquity recorded in the Torah. Graf has brought the sense
well out in this shape: "Look inquiringly backwards to ancient history
([Deu 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007)), and see how success and
enduring prosperity forsook your fathers when they left the way
prescribed to them by God, to walk in the ways of the heathen ([Jer
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015)); learn that there is but one
way, the way of the fear of Jahveh, on which blessing and salvation are
to be found ([Jer 32:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039))." Find
(with ו consec.), and find thus = so shall ye find; cf. Ew. 347, b; Ges.
130, 2. To "we will not go," we may supply from the context: on the way
of good.

[Jer 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017)

But God does not let the matter end here. He caused prophets to rise up
amongst them, who called their attention to the threatening evil.
Watchers are prophets, [Eze 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017), who
stand upon the watch-tower to keep a lookout, [Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001), and to give the people warning,
by proclaiming what they have seen in spirit. "Hearken to the sound,"
etc., are not the words of the watchmen (prophets), for it is they who
blow the trumpet, but the words of God; so that we have to supply, "and
I said." The comparison of the prophets to watchmen, who give the alarm
of the imminent danger by means of the sound of the trumpet, involves
the comparison of the prophets' utterances to the clang of the
signal-horn-suggested besides by [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006).

[Jer 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#018)

Judah being thus hardened, the Lord makes known to the nations what He
has determined regarding it; cf. [Mic
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002). The sense of "Know, thou
congregation," etc., is far from clear, and has been very variously
given. Ros., Dahl., Maur., Umbr., and others, understand עדה of the
congregation or assembly of the foreign nations; but the word cannot
have this meaning without some further qualifying word. Besides, a
second mention of the nations is not suitable to the context. the
congregation must be that of Israel. The only question can be, whether
we are by this to think of the whole people (of Judah), (Chald, Syr.,
Ew., and others), or whether it is the company of the ungodly that is
addressed, as in the phrase עדת קרח(Hitz.). But there is little
probability in the view, that the crew of the ungodly is addressed along
with the nations and the earth. Not less open to debate is the
construction of את־אשׁר־בּם. In any case little weight can be attached
to Hitz.'s assumption, that את is used only to mark out the אשׁר as
relative pronoun: observe it, O company that is amidst them. The
passages, [Jer 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#016) (Chet.), and [Ecc
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#003), where את seems to have this
force, are different in kind; for a definite noun precedes, and to it
the relation את־אשׁרis subjoined. And then what, on this construction,
is the reference of בּם, amidst them? Hitz. has said nothing on this
point. But it could only be referred to "peoples:" the company which is
amidst the peoples; and this gives no reasonable sense. These three
words can only be object to "know:" know what is amongst (in) them; or:
what is or happens to them (against them). It has been taken in the
first sense by Chald. (their sins), Umbr., Maur.: what happens in or
amongst them; in the second by Ros., Dahl.: what I shall do against
them. Ewald, again, without more ado, changes בּם into בּא: know, thou
congregation, what is coming. By this certainly a suitable sense is
secured; but there are no sufficient reasons for a change of the text,
it is the mere expedient of embarrassment. All the ancient translators
have read the present text; even the translation of the lxx: καὶ οἱ
ποιμαίνοντες τὰ ποίμνια αὐτῶν, has been arrived at by a confounding of
letters (דעי עדה with רעי עדר). We understand "congregation" of Israel,
i.e., not of the whole people of Judah, but of those to whom the title
"congregation" was applicable, i.e., of the godly, small as their number
might be. Accordingly, we are not to refer את־אשׁר בּםto "peoples:" what
is occurring amidst the peoples, viz., that they are coming to besiege
Jerusalem, etc. ([Jer 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#003).). Nor is it
to be referred to those in Judah who, according to [Jer
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016) and [Jer
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017), do not walk in the right way,
and will not give ear to the sound of the trumpet. The latter reference,
acc. to which the disputed phrase would be translated: what will happen
to them (against them), seems more feasible, and corresponds better to
the parallelism of [Jer 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#018) and [Jer
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019), since this corresponds better to
the parallelism of [Jer 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#018) and [Jer
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019), since this same phrase is then
explained in [Jer 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019) by: I bring
evil upon this people.

(Note: So that we cannot hold, with Graf, that the reading of the text
is "manifestly corrupted;" still less do we hold as substantiated or
probable his conjectural reading: וּדעוּ אשׁר הע, and know what I have
testified against them.)

[Jer 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019)

In [Jer 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019) the evil is characterized
as a punishment drawn down by them on themselves by means of the
apposition: fruit of their thoughts. "Fruit of their thoughts," not of
their deeds ([Isa 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)), in order to
mark the hostility of the evil heart towards God. God's law is put in a
place of prominence by the turn of the expression: My law, and they
spurned at it; cf. Ew. 344, b, with 309, b.

[Jer 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020)

The people had no shortcoming in the matter of sacrifice in the temple;
but in this service, as being mere outward service of works, the Lord
has no pleasure, if the heart is estranged from Him, rebels against His
commandments. Here we have the doctrine, to obey is better than
sacrifice, [Sa1 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022). The Lord
desires that men do justice, exercise love, and walk humbly with Him,
[Mic 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008). Sacrifice, as opus operatum,
is denounced by all the prophets: cf. [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006); [Amo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021)., [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011); [Psa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008). Incense from Sheba (see on [Eze
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022)) was required partly for the
preparation of the holy incense ([Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034)), partly as an addition to the
meat-offerings, [Lev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), [Lev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#015), etc. Good, precious cane, is the
aromatic reed, calamus odoratus ([Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023)), calamus from a far country -
namely, brought from India - and used in the preparation of the
anointing oil; see on [Exo 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023).
לרצון is from the language of the Torah; cf. [Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)., [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019)., [Exo
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038); and with לא: not to
well-pleasing, sc. before Jahveh, i.e., they cannot procure for the
offerers the pleasure or favour of God. With לא ערבוּ לי cf. [Hos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004).

[Jer 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#021)

Therefore the Lord will lay stumbling-blocks before the people, whereby
they all come to grief. The stumbling-blocks by which the people are to
fall and perish, are the inroads, of the enemies, whose formidableness
is depicted in [Jer 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022). The idea of
totality is realized by individual cases in "fathers and sons, neighbour
and his friend." יחדּו belongs to the following clause, and not the
Keri, but the Cheth. יאבדוּ, is the true reading. The Keri is formed
after the analogy of [Jer 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#006) and
[Jer 50:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#032); but it is unsuitable,
since then we would require, as in the passages cited, to have נפל in
direct connection with כּשׁל.

[Jeremiah 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 6:22</span></span>

A distant, cruel people will execute the judgment, since Judah, under
the trial, has proved to be worthless metal. - [Jer
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022). "Thus hath Jahveh said: Behold,
a people cometh from the land of the north, and a great nation raises
itself from the furthermost sides of the earth. [Jer
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023). Bows and javelins they bear;
cruel it is, and they have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea;
and on horses they ride, equipped as a man for the war against thee,
daughter of Zion. [Jer 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024). We heard
the rumour thereof: weak are our hands: anguish hath taken hold of us,
and pain, as of a woman in travail. [Jer
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#025). Go not forth into the field, and
in the way walk not; for a sword hath the enemy, fear is all around.
[Jer 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#026). O daughter of my people,
gird thee with sackcloth, and besprinkle thee with ashes; make mourning
for an only son, butter lamentation: for suddenly shall the spoiler come
upon us. [Jer 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027). For a trier have I
set thee among my people as a strong tower, that thou mightest know and
try their way. [Jer 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#028). They are all
revolters of revolters; go about as slanderers; brass and iron; they are
all dealing corruptingly. [Jer 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#029).
Burned are the bellows by the fire, at an end is the lead; in vain they
melt and melt; and wicked ones are not separated. [Jer
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030). Rejected silver they call them,
for Jahveh hath rejected them."

In [Jer 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022) the stumbling-blocks of
[Jer 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#021) are explained. At the end of
this discourse yet again the invasion of the enemy from the far north is
announced, cf. [Jer 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013) and [Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015), and its terribleness is
portrayed with new colours. The farther the land is from which the enemy
comes, the more strange and terrible he appears to the imagination. The
farthest (hindmost) sides of the earth (cf. [Jer
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#032)) is only a heightening of the
idea: land of the north, or of the far distance ([Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015)); in other words, the far
uttermost north (cf. [Isa 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)). In
this notice of their home, Hitz. finds a proof that the enemies were the
Scythians, not the Chaldeans; since, acc. to [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006), [Eze
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#015), and [Eze
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#002), Gog, i.e., The Scythians, come
"from the sides of the north." But "sides of the earth" is not a
geographical term for any particular northern country, but only for very
remote lands; and that the Chaldeans were reckoned as falling within
this term, is shown by the passage [Jer
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#008), according to which Israel is to
be gathered again from the land of the north and from the sides of the
earth. Here any connection with Scythia in "sides of the earth" is not
to be thought of, since prophecy knows nothing of a captivity of Israel
in Scythia, but regards Assur and Babylon alone as the lands of the
exile of Israelites and Jews. As weapons of the enemy then are mentioned
bows (cf. [Jer 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#029); [Jer
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#016)), and the javelin or lance
(כּידון, not shield; see on [Sa1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006)). It is cruel, knows no pity, and
is so numerous and powerful, that its voice, i.e., the tumult of its
approach, is like the roaring of the sea; cf. [Isa
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#030); [Isa
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012). On horses they ride; cf. [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013); [Jer
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016); [Hab
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008). ערוּך in the singular, answering
to "cruel it is," points back to גּוי or כּאישׁ . is not for כּאישׁ אחד
(Ros.), but for כּאישׁ מלחמה, cf. [Sa1
17:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#033); [Isa
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013); and the genitive is omitted
only because of the למלחמה coming immediately after (Graf). "Against
thee" is dependent on ערוּך: equipped as a warrior is equipped for the
war, against the daughter of Zion. In [Jer
6:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024) are set forth the terrors and
the suspense which the appearance of the foe will spread abroad. In [Jer
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024) the prophet, as a member of the
people, gives utterance to its feelings. As to the sense, the clauses
are to be connected thus: As soon as we hear the rumour of the people,
i.e., of its approach, our hands become feeble through dread, all power
to resist vanishes: cf. [Isa 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#007); and
for the metaphor of travail, [Isa
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008); [Mic
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009), etc. In v. 28 the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, personified as the daughter of Zion, are warned not to go
forth of the city into the field or about the country, lest they fall
into the enemies' hands and be put to death. מגור מסּביב, often used by
Jeremiah, cf. [Jer 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#003), [Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010); [Jer
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005); [Jer
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#029), and, as [Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010) shows, taken from [Psa
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014). Fear or terrors around, i.e.,
on all sides danger and destruction threaten.

[Jeremiah 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 6:26</span></span>

Sorest affliction will seize the inhabitants of Jerusalem. As to
"daughter of my people," cf. [Jer
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011); on "gird thee with sackcloth,"
cf. [Jer 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008). To bestrew the head with
ashes is a mode of expressing the greatest affliction; cf. [Eze
27:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#030); [Mic
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010). אבל as in [Amo
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010); [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010).

The closing verses of this discourse ([Jer
6:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027)) are regarded by Hitz. as a
meditation upon the results of his labours. "He was to try the people,
and he found it to be evil." But in this he neglects the connection of
these verses with the preceding. From the conclusion of [Jer
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030), "Jahveh hath rejected them," we
may see that they stand connected in matter with the threatening of the
spoiler; and the fact is put beyond a doubt when we compare together the
greater subdivisions of the present discourse. The [Jer
6:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027) correspond in substance with
the view given in [Jer 5:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#030) of the
moral character of the people. As that statement shows the reasons for
the threatening that God must take vengeance on such a people ([Jer
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#029)), so what is said in the verses
before us explain why it is threatened that a people approaching from
the north will execute judgment without mercy on the daughter of Zion.
For these verses do not tell us only the results of the prophet's past
labours, but they at the same time indicate that his further efforts
will be without effect. The people is like copper and iron, unproductive
of either gold or silver; and so the smelting process is in vain. The
illustration and the thing illustrated are not strictly discriminated in
the statement. בּחון is adject. verb. with active force: he that tries
metal, that by smelting separates the slag from the gold and silver ore;
cf. [Zac 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009); [Job
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#010). מבצר creates a difficulty, and
is very variously understood. The ancient comm. have interpreted it,
according to [Jer 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018), as either in a
fortress, or as a fortress. So the Chald., changing בחון for בחור:
electum dedi te in populo meo, in urbe munita forti. Jerome: datur
propheta populo incredulo probator robustus, quod ebraice dicitur מבצר,
quod vel munitum juxta Aquil., vel clausum atque circumdatum juxta Symm.
et lxx sonat. The extant text of the lxx has ἐν λαοῖς δεδοκιμασμένοις.
Following the usage of the language, we are justified only in taking
מבצר as apposition to בּחון, or to the suffix in נתתּיך; in which case
Luther's connection of it with עמּי, "among my people, which is so
hard," will appear to be impossible. But again, it has been objected,
not without reason, that the reference of "fortress" to Jeremiah is here
opposed to the context, while in [Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018) it falls well in with it;
consequently other interpretations have been attempted. Gaab, Maur.,
Hitz., have taken note of the fact that בּצר occurs in [Job
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#019), like בּצר in the signification
of gold; they take מבצר as a contraction for מן בצר, and expound:
without gold, i.e., although then was there no gold, to try for which
was thy task. To this view Graf has objected: the testing would be
wholly purposeless, if it was already declared beforehand that there was
no noble metal in the people. But this objection is not conclusive; for
the testing could only have as its aim to exhibit the real character of
the people, so as to bring home to the people's apprehension what was
already well known to God. These are weightier considerations: 1. We
cannot make sure of the meaning gold-ore for בּצר by means of [Job
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#019), since the interpretation there
is open to dispute; and בּצר, [Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024), does not properly mean gold,
but unworked ore, though in its connection with the context we must
understand virgin gold and silver ore in its natural condition. Here,
accordingly, we would be entitled to translate only: without virgin ore,
native metal. 2. The choice of a word so unusual is singular, and the
connection of מבצר with עמּי htiw is still very harsh. Yet less
satisfactory is the emendation defended by J. D. Mich., Dahl, Ew., and
Graf, מבצּר: "for a trier have I made thee among my people, for a
separater;" for בּצר has in Heb. only the meaning cut off and fortify,
and the Pi. occurs in [Isa 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#010) and
[Jer 51:53](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#053) in the latter meaning,
whereas the signif. separate, discriminate, can be maintained neither
from Hebrew nor Arabic usage. The case being so, it seems to us that the
interpretation acc. to [Jer 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018) has
most to be said for it: To be a trier have I set thee amid my people "as
a strong tower;" and to this Ges., Dietr. in Lex. s.v., adhere.

[Jeremiah 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 6:28</span></span>

[Jer 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#028) gives a statement as to the
moral character of the people. "Revolters of revolters" is a kind of
superlative, and סרי is to be derived from סרר, not from סוּר, perverse
of perverse; or, as Hitz., imitating the Heb. phrase, rebels of the
rebellious. Going about as slanderers, see on [Lev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#016), in order to bring others into
difficulties; cf. [Eze 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#009). To this
is subjoined the figurative expression: brass and iron, i.e., ignoble
metal as contrasted with gold and silver, cf. [Eze
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#018); and to this, again, the
unfigurative statement: they are all dealing corruptingly. משׁחיתים, cf.
[Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004); [Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029). There is no sufficient reason
for joining כּלּם with the preceding: brass and iron, as Hitz. and Graf
do in defiance of the accents.

[Jeremiah 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 6:29</span></span>

The trial of the people has brought about no purification, no separation
of the wicked ones. The trial is viewed under the figure of a
long-continued but resultless process of smelting. נחר, Niph. from חרר,
to be burnt, scorched, as in [Eze
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#004). מאשׁתּם is to be broken up, as
in the Keri, into two words: מאשׁ and תּם (from תמם). For there does not
occur any feminine form אשּׁה from אשׁ, nor any plural אשּׁת (even אשּׁה
forms the plur. אשּׁים), so as to admit of our reading מאשּׁתם or
מאשּׁתם. Nor would the plur., if there were one, be suitable; Ew.'s
assertion that אשּׁות means flames of fire is devoid of all proof. We
connect מאשׁ with what precedes: Burnt are the bellows with fire, at an
end is the lead. Others attach "by the fire" to what follows: By the
fire is the lead consumed. The thought is in either case the same, only
תּם is not the proper word for: to be consumed. Sense: the smelting has
been carried on so perseveringly, that the bellows have been scorched by
the heat of the fire, and the lead added in order to get the ore into
fusion is used up; but they have gone on smelting quite in vain. צרף
with indefinite subject, and the infin. absol. added to indicate the
long duration of the experiment. In the last clause of the verse the
result is mentioned in words without a figure: The wicked have not been
separated out (prop., torn asunder from the mass).

[Jeremiah 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 6:30</span></span>

The final statement of the case: They call them (the whole people)
rejected silver, i.e., they are recognised as such; for Jahveh has
rejected them, has given over trying to make anything of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 7](jer007)

</div>
