<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer025)  [Next](jer027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 26:0</span></span>

Accusation and Acquittal of Jeremiah in the Matter of His Prophesying
Threatenings. The Prophet Urijah Put to Death

This chapter is separated from the discourses that precede and follow by
a heading of its own, and dates from the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim; whereas the following Jer 27-29 fall into the earlier years
of Zedekiah's reign. In point of matter, however, the present chapter is
closely connected with these latter, though the connection between them
is certainly not that held to exist by Ew. His view is, that Jer 27-29
furnish "three historical supplements regarding true and false
prophethood," in each of which we are told in the first place how the
prophet himself acted, the account being concluded with notices of
prophets who either prophesied what was directly false, or who
vindicated the truth with but insufficient stedfastness. As again this,
Graf justly observes, "that this is in keeping neither with the real
contents of Jer 27-29 nor with Jer 26; for Micah was far from being a
false prophet, and Urijah was as little wanting in courage as was
Jeremiah, who hid himself from Jehoiakim, [Jer
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#019), [Jer
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026)." - Jer 27-29 are related in the
closest possible manner to Jer 25; for all that is said by Jeremiah in
these chapters has manifestly for its aim to vindicate the truth of his
announcement, that Judah's captivity in Chaldea would last seventy
years, as against the false prophets, who foretold a speedy return of
the exiles into their fatherland. To this the contents of Jer 26 form a
sort of prelude, inasmuch as here we are informed of the attitude
assumed by the leaders of the people, by the priests and prophets, and
by King Jehoiakim towards the prophet's announcement of judgment about
to fall on Judah. Thus we are put in a position to judge of the
opposition on the part of the people and its leaders, with which his
prophecy of the seventy years' bondage of Judah was likely to meet. For
this reason Jer 26, with its historical notices, is inserted after Jer
25 and before Jer 27-29.

[Jeremiah 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 26:1</span></span>

Accusation and Acquittal of Jeremiah. - [Jer
26:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#001). His prophecy that temple and
city would be destroyed gave occasion to the accusation of the prophet.
- [Jer 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#001). "In the beginning of the
reign of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah king of Judah, came this word from
Jahveh, saying: [Jer 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#002). Thus said
Jahveh: Stand in the court of the house of Jahveh, and speak to all the
cities of Judah which come to worship in Jahveh's house, all the words
that I have commanded thee to speak to them; take not a word therefrom.
[Jer 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003). Perchance they will hearken
and turn each from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil which
I purpose to do unto them for the evil of their doings. [Jer
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#004). And say unto them: Thus saith
Jahveh: If ye hearken not to me, to walk in my law which I have set
before you, [Jer 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#005). To hearken to
the words of my servants the prophets whom I sent unto you, from early
morning on sending, but ye have not hearkened. [Jer
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#006). Then I make this house like
Shiloh, and this city a curse to all the peoples of the earth. [Jer
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#007). And the priests and the prophets
and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of
Jahveh."

In the discourse of Jer 7, where he was combating the people's false
reliance upon the temple, Jeremiah had already threatened that the
temple should share the fate of Shiloh, unless the people turned from
its evil ways. Now, since that discourse was also delivered in the
temple, and since [Jer 26:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#002) of the
present chapter manifestly communicate only the substance of what the
prophet said, several comm. have held these discourses to be identical,
and have taken it for granted that the discourse here referred to,
belonging to the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, was given in full in
Jer 7, while the history of it has been given in the present chapter by
way of supplement (cf. the introductory remarks to Jer 7). But
considering that it is a peculiarity of Jeremiah frequently to repeat
certain of the main thoughts of his message, the saying of God, that He
will do to the temple as He has done to Shiloh, is not sufficient to
warrant this assumption. Jeremiah frequently held discourses in the
temple, and more than once foretold the destruction of Jerusalem; so
that it need not be surprising if on more than one occasion he
threatened the temple with the fate of Shiloh. Between the two
discourses there is further this distinction: Whereas in Jer 7 the
prophet speaks chiefly of the spoliation or destruction of the temple
and the expulsion of the people into exile, here in brief incisive words
he intimates the destruction of the city of Jerusalem as well; and the
present chapter throughout gives the impression that by this, so to
speak, peremptory declaration, the prophet sought to move the people
finally to decide for Jahveh its God, and that he thus so exasperated
the priests and prophets present, that they seized him and pronounced
him worthy of death. - According to the heading, this took place in the
beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim. The like specification in the
heading of Jer 27 does not warrant us to refer the date to the fourth
year of this king. "The beginning" intimates simply that the discourse
belongs to the earlier period of Jehoiakim's reign, without minuter
information as to year and day. "To Jeremiah" seems to have been dropped
out after "came this word," [Jer 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#001).
The court of the house of God is not necessarily the inner or priests'
court of the temple; it may have been the outer one where the people
assembled; cf. [Jer 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#014). All the
"cities of Judah" for their inhabitants, as in [Jer
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#012). The addition: "take not a word
therefrom," cf. [Deu 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002); [Deu
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001), indicates the peremptory
character of the discourse. In full, without softening the threat by the
omission of anything the Lord commanded him, i.e., he is to proclaim the
word of the Lord in its full unconditional severity, to move the people,
if possible, to repentance, acc. to [Jer
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003). With [Jer
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003), cf. [Jer
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#008), etc. - In [Jer
26:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#004) we have the contents of the
discourse. If they hearken not to the words of the prophet, as has
hitherto been the case, the Lord will make the temple as Shiloh, and
this city, i.e., Jerusalem, a curse, i.e., an object of curses (cf. [Jer
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009)), for all peoples. On this cf.
[Jer 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012). But ye have not hearkened.
The Chet. הזּאתה Hitz. holds to be an error of transcription; Ew. 173,
g, and Olsh. Gramm. 101, c, and 133, a paragogically lengthened form;
Bttcher, Lehrb. 665. iii. and 897, 3, a toneless appended suffix,
strengthening the demonstrative force: this (city) here.

[Jer 26:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008)

The behaviour of the priests, prophets, and princes of the people
towards Jeremiah on account of this discourse. - [Jer
26:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#007). When the priests and prophets
and all the people present in the temple had heard this discourse, they
laid hold of Jeremiah, saying, "Thou must die. Wherefore prophesiest
thou in the name of Jahveh, saying, Like Shiloh shall this house become,
and this city shall be desolate, without inhabitant? And all the people
gathered to Jeremiah in the house of Jahveh." This last remark is not so
to be understood, when compared with [Jer
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#007) and [Jer
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008), as that all the people who,
according to [Jer 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#007), had been
hearing the discourse, and, according to [Jer
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008), had with the priests and
prophets laid hold on Jeremiah, gathered themselves to him now. It
means, that after one part of the people present had, along with the
priests and prophets, laid hold on him, the whole people gathered around
him. "All the people," [Jer 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#009), is
accordingly to be distinguished from "all the people," [Jer
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008); and the word כּל, all, must not
be pressed, in both cases meaning simply a great many. When it is thus
taken, there is no reason for following Hitz., and deleting "all the
people" in [Jer 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008) as a gloss.
Jeremiah's special opponents were the priests and prophets after their
own hearts. But to them there adhered many from among the people; and
these it is that are meant by "all the people," [Jer
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#008). But since these partisans of the
priests and pseudo-prophets had no independent power of their own to
pass judgment, and since, after Jeremiah was laid hold of, all the rest
of the people then in the temple gathered around him, it happens that in
[Jer 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#011) the priests and prophets
are opposed to "all the people," and are mentioned as being alone the
accusers of Jeremiah. - When the princes of Judah heard what had
occurred, they repaired from the king's house (the palace) to the
temple, and seated themselves in the entry of the new gate of Jahve, sc.
to investigate and decide the case. The new gate was, according to [Jer
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010), by the upper, i.e., inner
court, and is doubtless the same that Jotham caused to be built ([Kg2
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#035)); but whether it was identical
with the upper gate of Benjamin, [Jer
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#002), cannot be decided. The princes
of Judah, since they came up into the temple from the palace, are the
judicial officers who were at that time about the palace. the judges
were chosen from among the heads of the people; cf. my Bibl. Archol. ii.
149.

[Jer 26:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#010)

Before these princes, about whom all the people gathered, Jeremiah is
accused by the priests and prophets: "This man is worthy of death;"
literally: a sentence of death (cf. [Deu
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#006)), condemnation to death, is due
to this man; "for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard
with your ears." With these last words they appeal to the people
standing round who had heard the prophecy, for the princes had not
reached the temple till after Jeremiah had been apprehended. [Jer
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#012). To this Jeremiah answered in
his own defence before the princes and all the people: "Jahveh hath sent
me to prophesy against (אל for על) this house and against this city all
the words which ye have heard. [Jer
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#013). And now make your ways good and
your doings, and hearken to the voice of Jahveh your God, and Jahveh
will repent Him of the evil that He hath spoken against you. [Jer
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#014). But I, behold, I am in your
hand; do with me as seemeth to you good and right. [Jer
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#015). Only ye must know, that if ye
put me to death, ye bring innocent blood upon you, and upon this city,
and upon her inhabitants; for of a truth Jahveh hath sent me to you to
speak in your ears all these words." - As to "make your ways good," cf.
[Jer 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003). This defence made an
impression on the princes and on all the people. From the intimation
that by reform it was possible to avert the threatened calamity, and
from the appeal to the fact that in truth Jahveh had sent him and
commanded him so to speak, they see that he is a true prophet, whose
violent death would bring blood-guiltiness upon the city and its
inhabitants. They therefore declare to the accusers, [Jer
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#016) : "This man is not worthy of
death, for in the name of Jahveh our God hath he spoken unto us."

[Jer 26:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#017)

To justify and confirm this sentence, certain of the elders of the land
rise and point to the like sentence passed on the prophet Micah of
Moresheth-Gath, who had foretold the destruction of the city and temple
under King Hezekiah, but had not been put to death by the king;
Hezekiah, on the contrary, turning to prayer to the Lord, and thus
succeeding in averting the catastrophe. The "men of the elders of the
land" are different from "all the princes," and are not to be taken, as
by Graf, for representatives of the people in the capacity of assessors
at judicial decisions, who had to give their voice as to guilt or
innocence; nor are they necessarily to be regarded as local authorities
of the land. They come before us here solely in their character as
elders of the people, who possessed a high authority in the eyes of the
people. The saying of the Morasthite Micah which they cite in [Jer
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018) is found in [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012), verbally agreeing with [Jer
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018); see the exposition of that
passage. The stress of what they say lies in the conclusion drawn by
them from Micah's prophesy, taken in connection with Hezekiah's attitude
towards the Lord, [Jer 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#019) : "Did
Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him to death? Did he not fear
Jahveh and entreat Jahveh, and did not Jahveh repent Him of the evil
which He had spoken concerning them? and we would commit a great evil
against our souls?" Neither in the book of Micah, nor in the accounts of
the books of Kings, nor in the chronicle of Hezekiah's reign are we told
that, in consequence of that prophecy of Micah, Hezekiah entreated the
Lord and so averted judgment from Jerusalem. There we find only that
during the siege of Jerusalem by the Assyrians, Hezekiah besought the
help of the Lord and protection from that mighty enemy. The elders have
combined this fact with Micah's prophecy, and thence drawn the
conclusion that the godly king succeeded by his prayer in averting the
mischief. Cf. the remarks on this passage at [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010). 'חלּה , lit., stroke the face of
Jahveh, i.e., entreat Him, cf. [Exo
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011). "And we would commit," are
thinking of doing, are on the point of doing a great evil against our
souls; inasmuch as by putting the prophet to death they would bring
blood-guiltiness upon themselves and hasten the judgment of God. - The
acquittal of Jeremiah is not directly related; but it may be gathered
from the decision of the princes: This man is not worthy of death.

[Jeremiah 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 26:20</span></span>

The prophet Urijah put to death. - While the history we have just been
considering gives testimony to the hostility of the priests and false
prophets towards the true prophets of the Lord, the story of the prophet
Urijah shows the hostility of King Jehoiakim against the proclaimers of
divine truth. For this purpose, and not merely to show in how great
peril Jeremiah then stood (Gr., Nהg.), this history is introduced into
our book. It is not stated that the occurrence took place at the
beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, nor can we infer so much from its being
placed directly after the events of that time. The time is not
specified, because it was irrelevant for the case in hand. [Jer
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#020). A man, Urijah the son of
Shemaiah - both unknown - from Kirjath-Jearim, now called Kuriyet el
'Enab, about three hours to the north-west of Jerusalem, on the
frontiers of the tribe of Benjamin (see on [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017)), prophesied in the name of
Jahveh against Jerusalem and Judah very much in the same terms as
Jeremiah had done. When King Jehoiakim and his great men heard this,
discourse, he sought after the prophet to kill him. Urijah, when he
heard of it, fled to Egypt; but the king sent men after him, Elnathan
the son of Achbor with some followers, and had him brought back thence,
caused him to be put to death, and his body to be thrown into the graves
of the common people. Hitz. takes objection to "all his mighty men,"
[Jer 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#021), because it is not found in
the lxx, and is nowhere else used by Jeremiah. But these facts do not
prove that the words are not genuine; the latter of the two, indeed,
tells rather in favour of their genuineness, since a glossator would not
readily have interpolated an expression foreign to the rest of the book.
The "mighty men" are the distinguished soldiers who were about the king,
the military commanders, as the "princes" are the supreme civil
authorities. Elnathan the son of Achbor, according to [Jer
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012), [Jer
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#025), one of Jehoiakim's princes, was
a son of Achbor who is mentioned in [Kg2
22:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#012) as amongst the princes of
Josiah. Whether this Elnathan was the same as the Elnathan whose
daughter Nehushta was Jehoiachin's mother ([Kg2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008)), and who was therefore the
king's father-in-law, must remain an undecided point, since the name
Elnathan is of not unfrequent occurrence; of Levites, [Ezr
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#016). בּני העם (see on [Jer
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019)) means the common people here,
as in [Kg2 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#006). The place of burial
for the common people was in the valley of the Kidron; see on [Kg2
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 26:24</span></span>

The narrative closes with a remark as to how, amid such hostility
against the prophets of God on the part of king and people, Jeremiah
escaped death. This was because the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan
was with him. This person is named in [Kg2
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#012), [Kg2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014), as one of the great men sent by
King Josiah to the prophetess Hulda to inquire of her concerning the
book of the law recently discovered. According to [Jer
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#014); [Jer
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#005), etc., he was the father of the
future Chaldean governor Gedaliah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 27](jer027)

</div>
