<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer046)  [Next](jer048) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 47:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord against the Philistines came to Jeremiah "before
Pharaoh smote Gaza." If we understand this time-definition in such a way
that "the prophecy would refer to the conquest of Gaza by Pharaoh," as
Graf thinks, and as Hitzig also is inclined to suppose, then this
portion of the title does not accord with the contents of the following
prophecy; for, according to [Jer 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002),
the devastator of Philistia approaches from the north, and the
desolation comes not merely on Gaza, but on all Philistia, and even Tyre
and Sidon ([Jer 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004), [Jer
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005)). Hence Graf thinks that, if any
one is inclined to consider the title as utterly incorrect, only two
hypotheses are possible: either the author of the title overlooked the
statement in [Jer 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002), that the
hostile army was to come from the north; in which case this conquest
might have taken place at any time during the wearisome struggles,
fraught with such changes of fortune, between the Chaldeans and the
Egyptians for the possession of the border fortresses, during the reign
of Jehoiakim (which is Ewald's opinion): or he may possibly have noticed
the statement, but found no difficulty in it; in which case, in spite of
all opposing considerations (see M. von Niebuhr, Gesch. Assyr. und Bab.
p. 369), it must be assumed that the conquest was effected by the
defeated army as it was returning from the Euphrates, when Necho, on his
march home, reduced Gaza (Hitzig), and by taking this fortress from the
enemy, barred the way to Egypt. Of these two alternatives, we can accept
neither as probable. The neglect, on the part of the author of the
title, to observe the statement that the enemy is to come from the
north, would show too great carelessness for us to trust him. But if he
did notice the remark, then it merely follows that Pharaoh must have
reduced Gaza on his return, after being defeated at Carchemish. Nor is
it legitimate to conclude, as Ewald does, from the statement in [Kg2
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007) ("The king of Egypt went no more
out of his land; for the king of Babylon had taken all that had belonged
to the king of Egypt, from the river of Egypt unto the river
Euphrates"), that the wars between the Chaldeans and the Egyptians for
the possession of the border fortresses, such as Gaza, were tedious, and
attended with frequent changes of fortune. In the connection in which it
stands, this statement merely shows that, after Nebuchadnezzar had made
Jehoiakim his vassal, the latter could not receive any help from Egypt
in his rebellion, after he had ruled three years, because Pharaoh did
not venture to march out of his own territory any more. But it plainly
follows from this, that Pharaoh cannot have taken the fortress of Gaza
while retreating before Nebuchadnezzar. For, in this case,
Nebuchadnezzar would have been obliged to drive him thence before ever
he could have reduced King Jehoiakim again to subjection. The assumption
is difficult to reconcile with what Berosus says regarding the campaign
of Nebuchadnezzar, viz., that the continued in the field till he heard
of the death of his father. Add to this, that, as M. von Niebuhr very
rightly says, "there is every military probability against it" (i.e.,
against the assumption that Gaza was reduced by Necho on his retreat).
"If this fortress had stood out till the battle of Carchemish, then it
is inconceivable that a routed eastern army should have taken the city
during its retreat, even though there were, on the line of march, the
strongest positions on the Orontes, in Lebanon, etc., where it might
have taken its stand." Hence Niebuhr thinks it "infinitely more
improbable either that Gaza was conquered before the battle of
Carchemish, about the same time as Ashdod, and that Jeremiah, in [Jer
47:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001), predicts the approach of the
army which was still engaged in the neighbourhood of Nineveh; or that
the capture of the fortress did not take place till later, when
Nebuchadnezzar was again engaged in Babylon, and that the prophet
announces his return, not his first approach."

Rosenmller and Ngelsbach have declared in favour of the first of these
suppositions. Both of them place the capture of Gaza in the time of
Necho's march against the Assyrians under Josiah; Rosenmller before the
battle of Megiddo; Ngelsbach after that engagement, because he assumes,
with all modern expositors, that Necho had landed with his army at the
Bay of Acre. He endeavours to support this view by the observation that
Necho, before marching farther north, sought to keep the way clear for a
retreat to Egypt, since he would otherwise have been lost after the
battle of Carchemish, if he did not previously reduce Gaza, the key of
the high road to Egypt. In this, Ngelsbach rightly assumes that the
heading, "before Pharaoh smote Gaza," was not intended to show the
fulfilment of the prophecy in the conquest of Gaza by Necho soon
afterwards, but merely states that Jeremiah predicts to the Philistines
that they will be destroyed by a foe from the north, at a time when
conquest by a foe from the north was impending over them. Rightly, too,
does Niebuhr remark that, in support of the view that Gaza was taken
after the battle at Carchemish, there is nothing more than the
announcement of the attack from the north, and the arrangement of the
prophecies in Jeremiah, in which that against the Philistines is placed
after that about the battle of Carchemish. Hitzig and Graf lay great
weight upon this order and arrangement, and thence conclude that all the
prophecies against the nations in Jer 46-49, with the exception of that
regarding Elam, were uttered in the fourth year of Jehoiakim. There are
no sufficient grounds for this conclusion. The agreement between this
prophecy now before us and that in Jer 46, as regards particular figures
and expressions (Graf), is too insignificant to afford a proof that the
two belong to the same time; nor is much to be made out of the point so
strongly insisted on by Hitzig, that after the Egyptians, as the chief
nation, had been treated of, the author properly brings forward those
who, from the situation of their country, must be visited by war
immediately before it is sent on the Egyptians. The main foundation for
this view is taken from the notice by Herodotus (ii. 159), that Necho,
after the battle at Magdolos, took the large Syrian city Κάδυτις.
Magdolos is here taken as a variation of Megiddo, and Kadytis of Gaza.
But neither Hitzig nor Stark have proved the identity of Kadytis with
Gaza, as we have already remarked on [Kg2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033); so that we cannot safely draw
any conclusion, regarding the time when Gaza was taken, from that
statement of Herodotus. In consequence of the want of evidence from
other sources, the date of this event cannot be more exactly determined.

From the contents of this prophecy and its position among the oracles
against the nations, we can draw no more than a very probable inference
that it was not published before the fourth year of Jehoiakim, inasmuch
as it is evidently but a further amplification of the sentence
pronounced in that year against all the nations, and recorded in Jer 25.
Thus all conjectures as to the capture of Gaza by Necho on his march to
the Euphrates, before the battle at Carchemish, become very precarious.
But the assumption is utterly improbable also, that Necho at a later
period, whether in his flight before the Chaldeans, or afterwards, while
Nebuchadnezzar was occupied in Babylon, undertook an expedition against
Philistia: such a hypothesis is irreconcilable with the statement given
in 2 Kings 24; 7. There is thus no course left open for us, but to
understand, by the Pharaoh of the title here, not Necho, but his
successor Hophra: this has been suggested by Rashi, who refers to [Jer
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#005), [Jer
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#011), and by Perizonius, in his
Origg. Aegypt. p. 459, who founds on the notices of Herodotus (ii. 261)
and of Diodorus Siculus, i. 68, regarding the naval battle between
Apries on the one hand and the Cyprians and Phoenicians on the other.
From these notices, it appears pretty certain that Pharaoh-Hophra sought
to avenge the defeat of Necho on the Chaldeans, and to extend the power
of Egypt in Asia. Hence it is also very probable that he took Gaza, with
the view of getting into his hands this key of the highway to Egypt.
This assumption we regard as the most probable, since nothing has been
made out against it; there are no sufficient grounds for the opinion
that this prophecy belongs to the same time as that in Jer 46.

Contents of the Prophecy. - From the north there pours forth a river,
inundating fields and cities, whereupon lamentation begins. Every one
flees in haste before the sound of the hostile army, for the day of
desolation is come on all Philistia and Phoenicia ([Jer
47:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002)). The cities of Philistia
mourn, for the sword of the Lord is incessantly active among them ([Jer
47:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005)). This brief prophecy thus
falls into two strophes: in the first ([Jer
47:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002)), the ruin that is breaking
over Philistia is described; in the second ([Jer
47:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005)), its operation on the country
and on the people.

[Jeremiah 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 47:2</span></span>

"Thus saith Jahveh: Behold, waters shall rise up out of the north, and
shall become an inundating stream, and they shall inundate the land and
its fulness, cities and those who dwell in them; and men shall cry, and
all the inhabitants of the land shall howl. [Jer
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#003). Because of the sound of the
trampling of the hoofs of his strong horses, because of the din of his
chariots, the noise of his wheels, fathers to not look back to their
children from weakness of hands; [Jer
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004). Because of the day that cometh
to destroy all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Zidon every one
remaining as a helper; for Jahveh destroyeth the Philistines, the
remnant of the coast of Caphtor. [Jer
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005). Baldness is come upon Gaza;
Ashkelon is destroyed, the rest of their plain. How long wilt thou cut
thyself? [Jer 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006). O sword of Jahveh,
how long wilt thou not rest? Draw thyself back into thy sheath; rest,
and be still. [Jer 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#007). How canst
thou be quiet, when Jahveh hath commanded thee? Against Ashkelon and
against the sea-coast, there hath He appointed it."

The address opens with a figure. The hostile army that is to devastate
Philistia is represented as a stream of water, breaking forth from the
north, and swelling to an overflowing winter-torrent, that inundates the
country ad cities with their inhabitants. The figure is often used: cf.
[Jer 46:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007), where the Egyptian host
is compared to the waves of the Nile; and [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007), where the Assyrian army is
likened to the floods of the Euphrates. The simile is applied here in
another way. The figure is taken from a strong spring of water, coming
forth in streams out of the ground, in the north, and swelling to an
overflowing winter-torrent, that pours out its floods over Philistia,
laying it waste. "From the north" is used here as in [Jer
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020), and points back to [Jer
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013). "An inundating stream" is
here employed as in [Isa 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020); "earth
and its fulness, a city and those who dwell in it," as in [Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016). In [Jer
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#003) follows the application of the
figure. It is a martial host that overflows the land, and with its
mighty noise puts the inhabitants in such terror that they think only of
a hasty flight; even fathers do not turn back to save their children.
שׁעטהἅπ. λεγ., Syriac se‛aṭ, incedere, gradi, hence probably the
stamping of hoofs. אבּירים, strong horses, as in [Jer
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016). לרכבּו, instead of the construct
state, has perhaps been chosen only for the sake of introducing a
variation; cf. Ewald, 290, a. הפנה, to turn the back, as in [Jer
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005). "Slackness of hands," i.e.,
utter loss of courage through terror; cf. [Jer
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024) (the form רפיון only occurs
here). In [Jer 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004) the deeper source
of fear is mentioned; "because of the day," i.e., because the day has
come to destroy all the Philistines, namely, the day of the judgment
determined by the Lord; cf. [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010). "In order to destroy every
remnant helping Tyre and Zidon." שׂריד עזר are the Philistines, who
could afford help to the Phoenicians in the struggle against the
Chaldean power. This implies that the Phoenicians also shall perish
without any one to help them. This indirect mention of the Phoenicians
appears striking, but it is to be explained partly on the ground that
Jeremiah has uttered special prophecies only against the chief enemies
of Judah, and partly also perhaps from the historical relations, i.e.,
from the fact that the Philistines might have afforded help to the
Phoenicians in the struggles against the great powers of the world.
Hitzig unnecessarily seeks to take לצר וּלצידון as the object, and to
expunge כּל־שׂריד עזר as a gloss. The objections which he raises against
the construction are groundless, as is shown by such passages as [Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007); [Isa
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#022); [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010), etc. "The remaining helper" is
the expression used, because the other nations that could help the
Egyptians, viz., the Syrians and Phoenicians, had already succumbed to
the Chaldean power. The destruction will be so great as this, because it
is Jahveh who destroys the Philistines, the remnant of the coast of
Caphtor. According to [Amo 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007); [Deu
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023), the Philistines came from
Caphtor; hence שׁארית אי can only mean "what still remains of the people
of Philistia who come from the coat of Caphtor," like "the remnant of
the Philistines" in [Amo 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#008). Opinions
are divided as to Caphtor. The prevailing view is that of Lakemacher,
that Caphtor is the name of the island of Crete; but for this there are
no tenable grounds: see on [Zep 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005);
and Delitzsch on Genesis, S. 248, Aufl. 4. Dietrich (in Merx' Archiv. i.
S. 313ff.) and Ebers (Aegypten u. die Bcher Moses, i. S. 130ff.) agree
in thinking that Caphtor is the shore of the Delta, but they explain the
name differently. Dietrich derives it from the Egyptian Kah-pet-Hôr
(district of Hor), which he takes to be the environs of the city of
Buto, and the lake called after it (the modern Burlos), not far from the
Sebennytic mouth of the Nile; Ebers, following the tablet of Canopus, in
which the Egyptian name Kfa (Kaf) is given as that of Phoenicia, derives
the name from Kaf-t-ur, i.e., the great Kefa, as the ancient seat of the
Phoenicians on the shore of the Delta must have been called. But both
explanations are still very doubtful, though there is no question about
the migration of the Philistines from Egypt into Canaan.

[Jeremiah 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 47:5</span></span>

The prophet sees, in the spirit, the threatened desolation as already
come upon Philistia, and portrays it in its effects upon the people and
the country. "Baldness (a sign of the deepest and most painful sorrow)
has come upon Gaza;" cf. [Mic 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016).
נדמתה is rendered by the Vulgate conticuit. After this Graf and
Ngelsbach take the meaning of being "speechless through pain and
sorrow;" cf. [Lam 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#010). Others
translate "to be destroyed." Both renderings are lexically permissible,
for דּמה and דּמם have both meanings. In support of the first, the
parallelism of the members has been adduced; but this is not decisive,
for figurative and literal representations are often interchanged. On
the whole, it is impossible to reach any definite conclusion; for both
renderings give suitable ideas, and these not fundamentally different in
reality the one from the other. שׁארית עמקם, "the rest of their valley"
(the suffix referring to Gaza and Ashkelon), is the low country round
about Gaza and Ashkelon, which are specially mentioned from their being
the two chief fortresses of Philistia. עמק is suitably applied to the
low-lying belt of the country, elsewhere called שׁפלה, "the low
country," as distinguished from the hill-country; for עמק does not
always denote a deep valley, but is also sometimes used, as in [Jos
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016), etc., of the plain of Jezreel,
and of other plains which are far from being deeply-sunk valleys. Thus
there is no valid reason for following the arbitrary translation of the
lxx, καὶ τὰ κατάλοιπα ̓Ενακείμ, and changing עמקם into ענקים, as Hitzig
and Graf do; more especially is it utterly improbable that in the
Chaldean period Anakim were still to be found in Philistia. The mention
of them, moreover, is out of place here; and still less can we follow
Graf in his belief that the inhabitants of Gath are the "rest of the
Anakim." In the last clause of [Jer
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005), Philistia is set forth as a
woman, who tears her body (with her nails) in despair, makes incisions
on her body; cf. [Jer 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#006); [Jer
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#005). The question, "How long dost
thou tear thyself?" forms a transition to the plaintive request, "Gather
thyself," i.e., draw thyself back into thy scabbard. But the seer
replies, "How can it rest? for Jahveh hath given it a commission against
Ashkelon and the Philistine sea-coast." For תּשׁקטי, in [Jer
47:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#007), we must read the 3rd pers. fem.
תּשׁקט, as the following להּ shows. The form probably got into the text
from an oversight, through looking at תּשׁקטי in [Jer
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006). חוף, "the sea-coast," a
designation of Philistia, as in [Eze
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016).

The prophecy concludes without a glance at the Messianic future. The
threatened destruction of the Philistines has actually begun with the
conquest of Philistia by Nebuchadnezzar, but has not yet culminated in
the extermination of the people. The extermination and complete
extirpation are thus not merely repeated by Ezek; [Eze
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#015)., but after the exile the
threats are once more repeated against the Philistines by Zechariah
([Zac 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005)): they only reached their
complete fulfilment when, as Zechariah announces, in the addition made
to [Isa 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#030)., their idolatry also
was removed from them, and their incorporation into the Church of God
was accomplished through judgment. Cf. the remarks on [Zep
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#010).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 48](jer048)

</div>
