<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer029)  [Next](jer031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 30:0</span></span>

B. The Announcement of Deliverance for All Israel - Jeremiah 30-33

In view of the impending fall of the kingdom of Judah, Jeremiah seeks to
present the godly with a strong anchor of hope in the realization of
God's gracious promises, which were to be fulfilled after the appointed
season of punishment had passed. For this purpose, after predicting the
ills of exile times, the prophet gives a comprehensive statement
concerning the deliverance which the Lord will vouchsafe to His people
in the future, and gathers together the repeated briefer promises
regarding the restoration and glorious condition of Israel and Judah, so
as to give a full description of the deliverance intended for all the
covenant people under the sceptre of the future David. This detailed
announcement of the deliverance consists of a pretty long prophetic
address (which Hengstenberg very properly designates "the triumphal hymn
of Israel's salvation," Jer 30 and 31), and two pieces confirmatory of
this address, viz.: (1) one recording a symbolical act performed by the
prophet at God's command - the sale of a piece of hereditary property in
land during the last siege of Jerusalem, shortly before the breaking up
of the kingdom, which commenced with the taking of the city - together
with a message from God explaining this act, Jer 32; and (2) another
passage giving, in prophetic language, a renewed promise that Jerusalem
and Judah would be restored with the blissful arrangements connected
with the Davidic monarchy and the Levitical priesthood, Jer 33.
According to the headings given in [Jer
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001) and [Jer
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#001), these two latter pieces belong
to the tenth year of Zedekiah's reign; the address contained in Jer 30
and 31, on the other hand, belongs to a somewhat earlier period, and was
not uttered publicly before the people, but simply composed in writing,
and meant to be preserved for future use. As regards the exact time of
its composition, the views of modern expositors are very dissimilar.
While Hengstenberg, with many others, places it in the same period with
the allied chapters 32 and 33, viz., in the time when Jerusalem was
being besieged, immediately before the capture and destruction of the
city, Ngelsbach reckons this address among the oldest portions of the
whole book, and assigns its composition to the times of King Josiah, to
which [Jer 3:11-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011) belongs. But the
arguments adduced in support of this view are quite insufficient to
establish it. It does not by any means follow from the substantial
agreement of the address with that in Jer 3, so far as it exists, that
they were both composed at the same time; and if (as Ngelsbach thinks)
the fact that there is no mention made of the Chaldeans were taken as a
criterion of composition before the fourth year of Jehoiakim, then, too,
would the address in Jer 33 be put down as having been composed before
that year, but in glaring contradiction to the inscription given [Jer
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#001). And as little reason is there
for inferring, with Hengstenberg, from [Jer
30:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#005), that the final catastrophe of
Jeremiah's time is represented as still imminent; for these verses do
not refer at all to the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans. That
learned writer is, however, quite correct in his remark, that the
prophet takes his stand-point within the period of the catastrophe, as
if it had already begun, but that this time is an ideal present, so that
we must not allow ourselves to be deceived as to the time of composition
by the circumstance that, generally, Judah no less than Israel appears
to be already in a state of exile, far from the land of the Lord. The
time of composition cannot be made out with perfect certainty. Yet there
is nothing against the assumption that it is the tenth year of Zedekiah.

Israel's Deliverance and Glorious Condition in the Future - Jeremiah
30-31

A great day of judgment, before which all the world trembles, will bring
to Israel deliverance from the yoke imposed on them. The Lord will bring
them out of the land of their captivity ([Jer
30:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004)). He will bind up and heal the
wounds which He inflicted on them because of their sins; will render to
those who oppressed and chastised them according to their deeds ([Jer
30:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)); will again build up His
kingdom, and render His people glorious, both in temporal and spiritual
respects ([Jer 30:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)). The wrath of
the Lord will be poured forth upon all evil-doers like a tempest, till
He has performed the thoughts of His heart at the end of the days ([Jer
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023), [Jer
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024)). At that time the Lord will
become the God of all the families of Israel, and show them favour as
His own people ([Jer 31:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)); He will
also gather the remnant of Israel out of the land of the north, lead
them back into their inheritance, and make them glad and prosperous
through His blessing ([Jer 31:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007));
the sorrow of Ephraim will He change to joy, and He will perform a new
thing in the land ([Jer 31:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)). In
like manner will He restore Judah, and make want to cease ([Jer
31:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023)). Israel and Judah shall be
raised to new life ([Jer 31:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027)),
and a new covenant will be made with them, for the Lord will write His
law in their heart and forgive their sins ([Jer
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)). Israel shall for ever
remain the people of God, and Jerusalem be built anew to the honour of
the Lord, and, as a holy city, shall no more be laid waste for ever
([Jer 31:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)).

This address forms a united whole which divides into two halves. In Jer
30:4-22 it is the deliverance of Israel in general that is set forth;
while in the passage from [Jer 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023)
on to the end of Jer 31 it is deliverance, more especially in reference
to Israel and Judah, that is portrayed. As there is no doubt about its
unity, so neither is there any well-founded doubt regarding its
genuineness and integrity. Hence the assertion of Hitzig, that, as a
whole, it exhibits such a want of connection, such constant alternation
of view-point, so many repetitions, and such irregularity in the
structure of the verses, that there seems good ground for suspecting
interpolation - such an assertion only shows the inability of the
expositor to put himself into the course of thought in the prophetic
word, to grasp its contents properly, and to give a fair and
unprejudiced estimate of the whole. Hitzig would reject [Jer
31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038), and Ngelsbach [Jer
30:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020), as later additions, but in
neither case is this admissible; and Kueper (Jeremias, p. 170ff.) and
Graf, in his Commentary, have already so well shown with what little
reason Movers and Hitzig have supposed they had discovered so many
"interpolations," that, in our exposition, we merely intend to take up
in detail some of the chief passages.

[Jeremiah 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 30:1</span></span>

Introduction, and Statement of the Subject - [Jer
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001). "The word which came to Jeremiah
from Jahveh, saying: [Jer 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#002). Thus
hath Jahveh the God of Israel said: Write thee all the words that I have
spoken unto thee in a book; [Jer 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003).
For, behold, days come, saith Jahveh, when I shall turn the captivity of
my people Israel and Judah, saith Jahve, and I shall bring them back to
the land which I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it."

[Jer 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001) contains the heading not
merely of [Jer 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#002) and [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003), as Hitzig erroneously maintains,
but of the whole prophecy, in Jer 30 and 31. [Jer
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#002) and [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003) form the introduction. Jeremiah
is to write the following word of God in a book, because it refers to
times still future, - regards the deliverance of Israel and Judah from
exile, which will not take place till afterwards. In assigning the
reason for the command to write down the word of God that had been
received, there is at the same time given the subject of the prophecy
which follows. From this it is further evident that the expression "all
the words which I have spoken to thee" cannot, like [Jer
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#002), be referred, with J. D.
Michaelis, to the whole of the prophecies which Jeremiah had up till
that time received; it merely refers to the following prophecy of
deliverance. The perfect דּבּרתּי is thus not a preterite, but only
expresses that the address of God to the prophet precedes the writing
down of the words he received. As to the expression שׁוּב שׁבוּת, see on
[Jer 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#014).

[Jeremiah 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 30:4</span></span>

The judgment on the nations for the deliverance of Israel. - [Jer
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004). "And these are the words which
Jahveh spake concerning Israel and Judah: [Jer
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#005). For thus saith Jahveh: We have
heard a cry of terror, fear, and no peace. [Jer
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#006). Ask now, and see whether a male
bears a child? Why do I see every man with his hands on his loins like a
woman in childbirth, and every face turned to paleness? [Jer
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007). Alas! for that day is great,
with none like it, and it is a time of distress for Jacob, but he will
be saved out of it. [Jer 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008). And it
shall come to pass on that day, saith Jahveh of hosts, that I will break
his yoke from upon thy neck, and I will burst thy bonds, and strangers
shall no more put servitude on him; [Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009). But they shall serve Jahveh
their God, and David their king, whom I shall raise up to them. [Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010). But fear thou not, O my servant
Jacob, saith Jahveh, neither be confounded, O Israel; for, behold, I
will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity;
and Jacob shall return, and be at rest, and be secure, and there shall
be none making him afraid. [Jer 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011).
For I am with thee, saith Jahveh, to save thee; for I will make an end
of all the nations whither I have scattered thee, yet of thee will I not
make an end, but I will chastise thee properly and will not let thee go
quite unpunished."

With [Jer 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004) is introduced the
description of Israel's restoration announced in [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003). This introduction is not
absolutely necessary, but neither is it for that reason spurious and to
be expunged, as Hitzig seeks to do; it rather corresponds to the breadth
of Jeremiah's representation. The כּי in [Jer
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#005) is explicative: "Thus, namely,
hath Jahveh spoken." With the lively dramatic power of a poet, the
prophet at once transports the hearers or readers of his prophecy, in
thought, into the great day to come, which is to bring deliverance to
all Israel. As a day of judgment, it brings terror and anguish on all
those who live to see it. קול חרדה, "A voice (sound) of trembling (or
terror) we hear," viz., the people, of whom the prophet is one. פּחד
does not depend on שׁמענוּ, but forms with ואין שׁלום an independent
clause: "There is fear and not peace" (or safety). [Jer
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#006). What is the cause of this great
horror, which makes all men, from convulsive pains, hold their hands on
their loins, so as to support their bowels, in which they feel the
pangs, and which makes every countenance pale? In [Jer
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007) the cause of this horror is
declared. It is the great day of judgment that is coming. "That (not
hits) day" points to the future, and thus, even apart from other
reasons, excludes the supposition that it is the day of the destruction
of Jerusalem that is meant. The words "that day is great" refer to [Joe
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011), and "there is none like it" is
an imitation of [Joe 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002); in the
latter passage the prophet makes use of a judgment which he had seen
passed on Judah - its devastation by locusts - and for the first time
presents, as the main element in his prophecy, the idea of the great day
of judgment to come on all nations, and by which the Lord will perfect
His kingdom on this earth. This day is for Jacob also, i.e., for all
Israel, a time of distress; for the judgment falls not merely on the
heathen nations, but also on the godless members of the covenant people,
that they may be destroyed from among the congregation of the Lord. The
judgment is therefore for Israel as well as for other nations a critical
juncture, from which the Israel of God, the community of the faithful,
will be delivered. This deliverance is described more in detail in [Jer
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008). The Lord will break the yoke
imposed on Israel, free His people from all bondage to strangers, i.e.,
the heathen, so that they may serve only Him, the Lord, and David, His
king, whom He will raise up. The suffix in עלּו is referred by several
expositors (Hitzig, Ngelsbach) to the king of Babylon, "as having been
most clearly before the minds of Jeremiah and his contemporaries;" in
support of this view we are pointed to [Isa
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#027), as a passage which may have
been before the eyes of Jeremiah. But neither this parallel passage nor
צוּארך (with the suffix of the second person), which immediately
follows, sufficiently justifies this view. For, in the second half also
of the verse, the second person is interchanged with the third, and
מוסרותיך, which is parallel with עלּו, requires us to refer the suffix
in the latter word to Jacob, so that "his yoke" means "the yoke laid on
him," as in [Kg1 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004); [Isa
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003). It is also to be borne in mind
that, throughout the whole prophecy, neither Babylon nor the king of
Babylon is once mentioned; and that the judgment described in these
verses cannot possibly be restricted to the downfall of the Babylonian
monarchy, but is the judgment that is to fall upon all nations ([Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)). And although this judgment
begins with the fall of the Babylonian supremacy, it will bring
deliverance to the people of God, not merely from the yoke of Babylon,
but from every yoke which strangers have laid or will lay on them.

[Jer 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009)

Then Israel will no longer serve strangers, i.e., foreign rulers who are
heathens, but their God Jahveh, and David the king who will be raised up
to them, i.e., the Messiah, the righteous sprout that Jahveh will raise
up to David; cf. [Jer 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005). The
designation of this sprout as "David their king," i.e., the king of the
Israelites, points us back to [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005).

[Jer 30:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010)

Israel the servant of Jahveh, i.e., the true Israel, faithful and
devoted to God, need thus fear nothing, since their God will deliver
them from the land of their captivity, and stand by them as their
deliverer, so that they shall be able to dwell in peace and undisturbed
security in their own land. For Jahveh will make a complete end of all
the nations among whom Israel has been scattered; Israel, on the other
hand, He shall certainly chastise, but למּשׁפּט (according to what is
right, in due measure), that they may be made better by their
punishment. As to the expression יסּר למּשׁפּט, see on [Jer
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024); for לא עשׂה כלה, see on [Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027) and [Jer
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018) (אתך for אתּך, [Jer
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018)); and lastly, on נקּה לא אנקּך,
cf. Ex. 34:47, [Num 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018), [Nah
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003).

[Jer 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010) and [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011) are repeated in [Jer
46:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027), though with some slight
changes.

(Note: The general strain of these verses is the same as that of the
second portion of Isaiah; hence Hitzig, following Movers, views them as
an interpolation made by the reviser. But this view is most incorrect,
as Graf has already pointed out. The only expression which, besides the
repetition made in [Jer 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027), occurs
nowhere else in Jeremiah, but frequently in the second Isaiah, is, "my
servant Jacob;" cf. [Isa 44:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001); [Isa
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#004); [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020) and [Isa
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008); [Isa
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021); [Isa
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003). All the rest is not
characteristic of Isaiah. "Thus, 'Fear not, I am with thee,' is
certainly found in [Isa 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005), but also
in [Gen 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#024); 'Fear not, neither be
afraid,' is found in a like connection in [Isa
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007), but also in [Jer
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024); [Deu
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#021); [Deu
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#008); [Jos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001); cf. [Isa
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002); [Jer
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008), [Jer
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017); [Jos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009). יעקוב occurs also in [Jer
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007), [Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010), 25, [Lam
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#003). For מושׁיעך, cf. [Jer
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008); for מרחק, cf. [Jer
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023); [Jer
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003); [Jer
51:50](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#050). In the second part of Isaiah,
שׁאנן occurs as seldom as ואין; on the other hand, cf. [Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011); [Jer
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#033). The expressions found in [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011) are as rare in the second part
of Isaiah as they are frequent in Jeremiah. Thus, 'For I am with thee to
save thee" is found in [Jer 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#020);
[Jer 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#011); 'to make a full end'
occurs also in [Jer 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027); [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010), [Jer
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018); 'I shall certainly not let thee
go unpunished,' which, like [Nah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003),
seems to have been taken from [Exo
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007) or [Num
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018), is not found at all in the
second part of Isaiah; הפיץ, which is found in [Jer
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015); [Jer
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#024); [Jer
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#017); [Jer
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001)., appears only in [Isa
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#016); and while יסּר is used in the
same meaning in [Jer 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024), יסּר
occurs nowhere in the second part of Isaiah, and למּשׁפּט is found in
[Isa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001); [Isa
54:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#017); [Isa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#011), in quite a different connection
and meaning." (Graf.))

[Jeremiah 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 30:12</span></span>

Because Israel has been severely chastised for his sins, the Lord will
now punish his enemies, and heal Israel. - [Jer
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012). "For thus saith Jahveh: It is
ill with thy bruise, thy wound is painful. [Jer
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013). There is none to judge thy
cause; for a sore, healing-plaster there is none for thee. [Jer
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014). All thy lovers have forgotten
thee, thee they seek not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an
enemy, the chastisement of a cruel one, because of the multitude of
thine iniquity, \[because\] thy sins were numerous. [Jer
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015). Why criest thou over thy bruise
- \[because\] thy wound is bad? Because of the multitude of thine
iniquity, \[because\] thy sins were numerous, have I done these things
to thee. [Jer 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#016). Therefore all
those who devour thee shall be devoured; and all thine oppressors, they
shall all go into captivity; and they who spoiled thee shall become a
spoil, and those that plundered thee I will give up for plunder. [Jer
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017). For I will put a plaster on
thee, and will heal thee of thy wounds, saith Jahveh; for they call thee
an outcast, \[and say\], Zion is she \[whom\] none seeketh after."

This strophe is only a fuller expression of the idea set forth in [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011), that the Lord certainly
chastises Israel, but will not make an end of him. The chastisement has
commenced. From the wounds and blows which Israel has received, he lies
motionless and helpless, getting neither sympathy nor aid from his
lovers. The feminine suffix and the mention of lovers show that the
address turns to the daughter of Zion. On the expression אנוּשׁ , "it is
ill with thy bruise," cf. [Jer 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018).
נחלה מכּה, "bad, incurable is the stroke which thou hast received," as
in [Jer 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019); [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017). דּוּן דּין, "to execute
justice;" cf. [Jer 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028); [Jer
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#016). Hitzig well explains the
meaning: "thy claims against thy heathen oppressors." למזור, although
connected by the accents with what precedes, does not agree well with
דּן דּינך; for מזור has not the meaning which has been attributed to it,
of a "bandage," but, as derived from the verb זוּר, "to press a wound,"
signifies the wound that has been pressed together; see on [Hos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013). Neither does the figure of the
wound agree with the expression, "there is none to judge thy cause," so
that we might, with Umbreit, render the passage, "No one gives thee thy
due, in pressing thy wounds;" while, as Graf says, " רפאות dissociated
from למזור forms a useless synonym with תּעלה," and in [Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011), where the thought is repeated,
it is separated from the latter word. Accordingly, with Hitzig and Graf,
we connect למזור into one clause: "for the wound, there is no healing
(or medicine)-no plaster." תּעלה is what is laid upon the wound, a
plaster. "All thy lovers," i.e., the nations which were once allied with
thee (cf. [Jer 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#020), [Jer
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#022)), do not trouble themselves
about thee, because I have smitten thee so heavily on account of the
multitude of thy transgressions; cf. [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006); [Jer
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022). עצמוּ still depends on the
preposition על, which continues its force, but as a conjunction. The
idea that the Israelites have richly deserved their sufferings is still
more plainly presented in [Jer 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015) :
"Why criest thou, because thou hast brought this suffering on thee
through thy sins?" אנוּשׁ also depends on על, which continues to exert
its power in the sentence as a conjunction.

[Jer 30:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#016)

Therefore (i.e., because Israel, although punished for his sins, is
destitute of help) will the Lord take pity on him. He will recompense to
his oppressors and spoilers according to their deeds, and will heal his
wounds. The enemies of Zion will now meet the fate which they have
prepared for Zion. Those who, like rapacious animals, would devour
Israel (see on [Jer 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#003)), shall be
devoured, and all his oppressors shall go into captivity; cf. [Jer
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#022). The Kethib שׁאסיך is the
Aramaic form of the participle from שׁאס for שׁסס; the Qeri substitutes
the Hebrew form שׁסיך, after [Jer
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011), [Isa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#014). עלה ארכה, to put on a bandage,
lay on a plaster. ארכה signifies, primarily, not a bandage, but, like
the Arabic arîkah (according to Fleischer in Delitzsch on [Isa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)), the new skin which forms over a
wound as it heals, and (as is shown by the expression of Isaiah,
ארכתך־תּצמח) proves the healing of the wound. Against the direct
transference of the meaning of the word in Arabic to the Hebrew ארכה,
without taking into consideration the passage in Isaiah just referred
to, there is the objection that the word is always used in connection
with עלה, "to be put on" (cf. [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022); [Ch2
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#013); [Neh
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001)), or העלה, "to put on" (here and
in [Jer 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#006)), which is not the proper
verb to be used in speaking of the formation of a new skin over a wound
after suppuration has ceased. Hence the word in Hebrew seems to have
received the derived sense of "a healing-plaster;" this is confirmed by
the employment of the word תּעלה, "plaster," in [Jer
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013) and [Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011). - The second כּי, [Jer
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017), is subordinate to the clause
which precedes. "Because they called thee one rejected," i.e., because
the enemies of Zion spoke of her contemptuously, as a city that has been
forsaken of God, and the Lord will heal her wounds.

[Jeremiah 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 30:18</span></span>

Further explanation of the deliverance promised to Zion. - [Jer
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018). "Thus saith Jahveh: Behold, I
will turn the captivity of the tents of Jacob, and will take pity on his
dwellings; and the city shall be built again upon its own hill, and the
palace shall be inhabited after its own fashion. [Jer
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019). And there shall come forth from
them praise and the voice of those who laugh; and I will multiply them,
so that they shall not be few, and I will honour them, so that they
shall not be mean. [Jer 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020). And his
sons shall be as in former times, and his congregation shall be
established before me, and I will punish all that oppress him. [Jer
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021). And his leader shall spring
from himself, and his ruler shall proceed from his midst; and I will
bring him near, so that he shall approach to me; for who is he that
became surety for his life in drawing near to me? saith Jahveh. [Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022). And ye shall become my people,
and I will be your God."

The dwellings of Israel that have been laid waste, and the cities that
have been destroyed, shall be restored and inhabited as formerly, so
that songs of praise and tones of joy shall resound from them ([Jer
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018).). "The captivity of the tents
of Jacob" means the miserable condition of the dwellings of Jacob, i.e.,
of all Israel; for "to turn the captivity" has everywhere a figurative
sense, and signifies the turning of adversity and misery into prosperity
and comfort; see on [Jer 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#014). Hitzig
is quite wrong in his rendering: "I bring back the captives of the tents
of Jacob, i.e., those who have been carried away out of the tents." That
"tents" does not stand for those who dwell in tents, but is a poetic
expression for "habitations," is perfectly clear from the parallel "his
dwellings." To "take pity on the dwellings" means to "restore the
dwellings that have been destroyed" (cf. [Jer
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#018)). The anarthrous עיר must not be
restricted to the capital, but means every city that has been destroyed;
here, the capital naturally claims the first consideration. "Upon its
hills" is equivalent to saying on its former site, cf. [Jos
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#013); it does not mean "on the mound
made by its ruins," in support of which Ngelsbach erroneously adduces
[Deu 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#017). ארמון in like manner
stands, in the most general way, for every palace. על־משׁפּטו does not
mean "on the proper place," i.e., on an open, elevated spot on the hill
(Hitzig), neither does it mean "on its right position" (Ewald); both of
these renderings are against the usage of the words: but it signifies
"according to its right" (cf. [Deu
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#011)), i.e., in accordance with what
a palace requires, after its own fashion. ישׁב, to be inhabited, as in
[Jer 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006), etc. "Out of them" refers
to the cities and palaces. Thence proceeds, resounds praise or
thanksgiving for the divine grace shown them (cf. [Jer
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#011)), and the voice, i.e., the tones
or sounds, of those who laugh (cf. [Jer
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#017)), i.e., of the people living in
the cities and palaces, rejoicing over their good fortune. "I will
increase them, so that they shall not become fewer," cf. [Jer
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#006); "I will bring them to honour
(cf. [Isa 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022)), so that they shall
not be lightly esteemed." - In [Jer
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020). the singular suffixes refer to
Jacob as a nation ([Jer 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)). "His
sons" are the members of the nation; they become as they were
previously, in former times - sicut olim sub Davide et Salmonoe,
florentissimo rerum statu. "The congregation will be established before
me," i.e., under my survey (תּכּון as in Ps. 102:29), i.e., they shall
no more be shaken or moved from their position.

[Jer 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021)

The expression "his prince will be out of him" is explained by the
parallel clause, "his ruler will proceed from him." The meaning is, that
the people will no longer be ruled or subdued by foreign masters, but be
ruled by glorious princes, i.e., leaders endowed with princely glory,
and these out of the midst of themselves. Herein is contained the truth,
that the sovereignty of Israel, as restored, culminates in the kingdom
of the Messiah. Yet the words employed are so general that we cannot
restrict אדּירו and משׁלו to the person of the Messiah. The idea is to
be taken in a more general way: As Israel was ruled by princes of the
house of David, whom God had chosen, so will it again in the future have
its own rulers, whom God will raise out of their midst and exalt
gloriously. This is clear from the further statement, "I will cause him
to approach, and he shall come near unto me." To affirm that these words
do not refer to the ruler, but to the people, is a mistake that could be
made only by those expositors who view the "ruler" as being none else
than the Messiah. Yet the lxx and the Chaldee paraphrase understood the
words as referring to the people; and in support of this view, it may be
asserted that, in the Messianic period, Israel is to become a holy
people ([Jer 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017)), and attain its
destiny of being a nation of priests ([Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)), in reference to which it is
called עם קרבו, [Psa 148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014). But the
context evidently requires us to refer the words to the king, with
regard to whom one here looks for a further statement. The verb הקריב is
the regular expression employed in reference to the approach on the part
of the priests to Jahveh, cf. [Num
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005); and נגּשׁ in [Exo
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002) denotes the approach of Moses to
Jahveh on Mount Sinai. The two verbs thus signify a bringing near and a
coming near, which, under the old covenant, was the prerogative of those
persons who were consecrated by the Lord to be servants in His
sanctuary, but was denied the common people. As to the kings of Israel,
in regard to this matter, the ordinance proclaimed concerning Joshua
held good in reference to them also: "he shall stand before Eleazar, who
shall inquire for him in a matter of Urim before Jahveh" ([Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021)). Even a David could not
approach into the immediate presence of the Lord to ask His will. This
prerogative of the priests the Lord will, in the future, vouchsafe also
to the princes of Israel, i.e., He will then put them in such a relation
to Himself as no one may now presume to occupy, except at the risk of
his life. This is shown by the succeeding sentence, which assigns the
reason: "For who is there that stands surety for his heart, i.e., with
his heart answers for the consequences of approaching me?" לב and not
נפשׁ is named, as the seat of physical life, in so far as the heart is
the place where the soul is alone with itself, and becomes conscious of
all it does and suffers as its own (Oehler in Delitzsch's Psychology, p.
296 of Clark's Translation). The meaning is, that nobody will stake his
spiritual-moral life on any attempt to draw near to God, because a
sinful man is destroyed before the holiness of the Divine Being. Whoever
approaches into the presence of Jahveh must die; [Num
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#019); [Exo
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021); [Exo
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#003), etc.

[Jer 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)

Then Israel shall really become the people of the Lord, and the Lord
shall be their God; thus the end of their divine calling shall be
attained, and the salvation of Israel shall be complete; see on [Jer
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023).

[Jeremiah 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 30:23</span></span>

The wicked shall be destroyed by the fire of God's anger. - [Jer
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023). "Behold, a whirlwind of Jahveh
- wrath goeth forth - a sweeping whirlwind; it shall hurl down on the
head of the wicked. [Jer 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024). The
heat of Jahveh's anger shall not return till He hath done and till He
hath established the purpose of His heart; in the end of the days ye
shall consider it."

These two verses have been already met with in [Jer
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019) and [Jer
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#020), with a few variations. Instead
of מיחולל we have here מתגּורר, and אף־יהוה is here strengthened by
prefixing חרון; on the other hand, בּינה, which is added in the
preceding passage to intensify התבּוננוּ, is here omitted. The first of
these changes is more of a formal than a real kind; for by the
substitution of מתגּורר for מיחולל, the play in the latter word on יחוּל
is merely disturbed, not "destroyed," since ר and ל are kindred sounds.
התגּורר has been variously rendered. The meaning of "abiding," which is
founded on [Kg1 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#020), is here
unsuitable. Equally inappropriate is the meaning of "crowding together,"
or assembling in troops, which we find in [Hos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#014). It is more correct to derive it
from גּרר, either in the sense of sweeping away or that of blustering,
which are meanings derived from the fundamental one of producing harsh
sounds in the throat, and transferred to the rushing sound made by the
storm as it carries everything along with it. The second and third
changes affect the sense. For, by the addition of חרון to אף, the idea
of a judgment in wrath is intensified; and by dropping בּינה, less is
made of the acuteness of perception. Both of these variations correspond
to differences in the context of both passages. In Jer 23, where the
words are applied to the false prophets, it was important to place
emphasis on the statement that these men would, by experience, come to a
full knowledge of the reality of that judgment they denied; in this
chapter, on the other hand, the idea of judgment in wrath must be
expressly set aside. There is thus no good ground for considering these
verses a later interpolation into the text, as Movers, Hitzig, and
Ngelsbach think. Hitzig rejects these verses as spurious on the false
ground that the judgment threatened in this chapter refers merely to the
fall of the kingdom of Babylon, which Jeremiah could not have been able
to know beforehand; Ngelsbach rejects them on the ground of other
erroneous assumptions.

(Note: First, he holds the groundless opinion that this prophecy
originated in the time of Josiah, and therefore could not have borrowed
verses from the address given in Jer 23, which belongs to the time of
Jehoiakim; secondly, with as little ground he affirms that these verses
do not correspond with the character of the chapter, and seem like a
jarring discord in the midst of the announcement of deliverance it
contains; finally, he asks whence could come "the wicked" mentioned, in
the times described by the prophet - as if he thought that when the
captivity of the people was turned, all godless ones would suddenly
disappear. - The doubts as to the genuineness of [Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022) are based by Ngelsbach merely on
the fact that the same idea is repeated in [Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001).)

The only doubtful point regarding these verses is, whether they are to
be connected, as Hengstenberg thinks, with what precedes, or with what
follows, as Ewald supposes. In the former case, to the promise for the
true Israel would be added a threat against those who only seemed to be
Israel, - like the declaration in Isaiah, "There is no peace to the
wicked:" this addition would thus be made, lest those for whom the
promise was not intended should unwarrantably apply it to themselves.
But, however well-founded the thought is, that every increasing
manifestation of grace is invariably accompanied by an increased
manifestation of righteousness, and though all the prophets clearly
testify that the godless members of the covenant people have no share in
the promised salvation, but instead are liable to judgment; yet there
has not been such preparation made for the introduction of this thought
as that we might be able at once to join these two verses to what
precedes. The exclamation "Behold!" with which the words are introduced,
rather form a sign that a new addition is to be made to the prophecy. We
therefore view the threat in this verse as a resumption of the threat of
judgment made in [Jer 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#005)., to which
is attached, in [Jer 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001), the further
development of the announcement of deliverance; but we refer the threat
made in the verse not merely to the heathen as such, but to all "wicked
ones," in such a way that it at the same time applies to the godless
members of the covenant people, and signifies their exclusion from
salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 31](jer031)

</div>
