<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer011)  [Next](jer013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 12:1</span></span>

The prophet's displeasure at the prosperity of the wicked. - The enmity
experienced by Jeremiah at the hands of his countrymen at Anathoth
excites his displeasure at the prosperity of the wicked, who thrive and
live with immunity. He therefore beings to expostulate with God, and
demands from God's righteousness that they be cut off out of the land
([Jer 12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)); whereupon the Lord
reproves him for this outburst of ill-nature and impatience by telling
him that he must patiently endure still worse. - This section, the
connection of which with the preceding is unmistakeable, shows by a
concrete instance the utter corruptness of the people; and it has been
included in the prophecies because it sets before us the greatness of
God's long-suffering towards a people ripe for destruction.

[Jer 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

"Righteous art Thou, Jahveh, if I contend with Thee; yet will I plead
with Thee in words. Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper, are
all secure that deal faithlessly? [Jer
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002). Thou hast planted them, yea,
they have taken root; grow, yea, bring forth fruit. Near art Thou in
their mouth, yet far from their reins. [Jer
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003). But Thou, Jahveh, knowest me,
seest me, and triest mine heart toward Thee. Tear them away like sheep
to the slaughter, and devote them for a day of slaughter. [Jer
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004). How long is the earth to mourn
and the herb of the field to wither? For the wickedness of them that
dwell therein, gone are cattle and fowl; for they say: He sees not our
end. [Jer 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005). If with the footmen
thou didst run and they wearied thee, how couldst thou contend with the
horses? and if thou trustest in the land of peace, how wilt thou do in
the glory of Jordan? [Jer 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006). For
even thy brethren and they father's house, even they are faithless
towards thee, yea, they call after thee with full voice. Believe them
not, though they speak friendly to thee."

The prophet's complaint begins by acknowledging: Thou art righteous,
Lord, if I would dispute with Thee, i.e., would accuse Thee of
injustice. I could convict Thee of no wrong; Thou wouldst appear
righteous and prove Thyself in the right. [Psa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006); [Job
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#002). With אך comes in a limitation:
only he will speak pleas of right, maintain a suit with Jahveh, will set
before Him something that seems incompatible with God's justice, namely
the question: Why the way of the wicked prospers, why they that act
faithlessly are in ease and comfort? On this cf. [Job
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007)., where Job sets forth at length
the contradiction between the prosperity of the wicked and the justice
of God's providence. The way of the wicked is the course of their life,
their conduct. God has planted them, i.e., has placed them in their
circumstances of life; like a tree they have struck root into the
ground; they go on, i.e., grow, and bear fruit, i.e., their undertakings
succeed, although they have God in their mouth only, not in their heart.

[Jer 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)

To show that he has cause for his question, Jeremiah appeals to the
omniscience of the Searcher of hearts. God knows him, tries his heart,
and therefore knows how it is disposed towards Himself (אתּך belongs to
לבּי, and את indicating the relation - here, viz., fidelity - in which
the heart stands to God; cf. [Sa2
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#017)). Thus God knows that in his
heart there is no unfaithfulness, and that he maintains to God an
attitude altogether other than that of those hypocrites who have God on
their lips only; and knows too the enmity which, without having provoked
it, he experiences. How then comes it about that with the prophet it
goes ill, while with those faithless ones it goes well? God, as the
righteous God, must remove this contradiction. And so his request
concludes: Tear them out (נתק of the tearing out of roots, [Eze
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#009)); here Hiph. with the same force
(pointing back to the metaphor of their being rooted, [Jer
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002)), implying total destruction.
Hence also the illustration: as sheep, that are dragged away out of the
flock to be slaughtered. Devote them for the day of slaughter, like
animals devoted to sacrifice.

[Jer 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004)

[Jer 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004) gives the motive of his
prayer: How long shall the earth suffer from the wickedness of these
hypocrites? be visited with drought and dearth for their sins? This
question is not to be taken as a complaint that God is punishing without
end; Hitz. so takes it, and then proposes to delete it as being out of
all connection in sense with [Jer 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)
or [Jer 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005). It is a complaint
because of the continuance of God's chastisement, drawn down by the
wickedness of the apostates, which are bringing the land to utter ruin.
The mourning of the land and the withering of the herb is a consequence
of great drought; and the drought is a divine chastisement: cf. [Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003); [Jer
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024)., [Jer
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#002)., etc. But this falls not only on
the unfaithful, but upon the godly too, and even the beasts, cattle, and
birds suffer from it; and so the innocent along with the guilty. There
seems to be injustice in this. To put an end to this injustice, to
rescue the innocent from the curse brought by the wickedness of the
ungodly, the prophet seeks the destruction of the wicked. ספה, to be
swept away. The 3rd pers. fem. sing. with the plural ות-, as in [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020) and often; cf. Ew. 317, a, Gesen.
146, 3. "They that dwell therein" are inhabitants of the land at large,
the ungodly multitude of the people, of whom it is said in the last
clause: they say, He will not see our end. The sense of these words is
determined by the subject. Many follow the lxx (οὐκ ὄψεται ὁ Θεὸς ὁδοὺς
ἡμῶν) and refer the seeing to God. God will not see their end, i.e.,
will not trouble Himself about it (Schnur., Ros., and others), or will
not pay any heed to their future fate, so that they may do all they
choose unpunished (Ew.). But to this Graf has justly objected, that ראה,
in all the passages that can be cited for this sense of the word, is
used only of that which God sees, regards as already present, never of
that which is future. "He sees" is to be referred to the prophet. Of him
the ungodly say, he shall not see their end, because they intend to put
him out of the way (Hitz.); or better, in a less special sense, they
ridicule the idea that his prophecies will be fulfilled, and say: He
shall not see our end, because his threatenings will not come to pass.

[Jer 12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005)

In [Jer 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005) and [Jer
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006) the Lord so answers the prophet's
complaint as to reprove his impatience, by intimating that he will have
to endure still worse. Both parts of [Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005) are of the nature of proverbs. If
even the race with footmen made him weary, how will he be able to
compete with horses? תּחרה here and [Jer
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015), a Tiph., Aramaic form for
Hiph., arising by the hardening of the ה into ת-cf. [Hos
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#003), and Ew. 122, a - rival, vie
with. The proverb exhibits the contrast between tasks of smaller and
greater difficulty, applied to the prophet's relation to his enemies.
What Jeremiah had to suffer from his countrymen at Anathoth was but a
trifle compared with the malign assaults that yet awaited him in the
discharge of his office. The second comparison conveys the same thought,
but with a clearer intimation of the dangers the prophet will undergo.
If thou puttest thy trust in a peaceful land, there alone countest on
living in peace and safety, how wilt thou bear thyself in the glory of
Jordan? The latter phrase does not mean the swelling of Jordan, its high
flood, so as that we should with Umbr. and Ew., have here to think of
the danger arising from a great and sudden inundation. It is the strip
of land along the bank of the Jordan, thickly overgrown with shrubs,
trees, and tall reeds, the lower valley, flooded when the river was
swollen, where lions had their haunt, as in the reedy thickets of the
Euphrates. Cf. v. Schubert, Resie, iii. S. 82; Robins. Bibl. Researches
in Palestine, i. 535, and Phys. Geogr. of the Holy Land, p. 147. The
"pride of the Jordan" is therefore mentioned in [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019); [Jer
50:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#044); [Zac
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003), as the haunt of lions, and comes
before us here as a region where men's lives were in danger. The point
of the comparison is accordingly this: Thy case up till this time is, in
spite of the onsets thou hast borne, to be compared to a sojourn in a
peaceful land; but thou shalt come into much sorer case, where thou
shalt never for a moment be sure of thy life. To illustrate this, he is
told in [Jer 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006) that his nearest of
kin, and those dwelling under the same roof, will behave unfaithfully
towards him. They will cry behind him מלא, plena voce (Jerome; cf. קראוּ
מלאוּ, [Jer 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005)). They will cry after
him, "as one cries when pursuing a thief or murderer" (Gr.). Perfectly
apposite is therefore Luther's translation: They set up a hue and cry
after thee. These words are not meant to be literally taken, but convey
the thought, that even his nearest friends will persecute him as a
malefactor. It is therefore a perverse design that seeks to find the
distinction between the inhabitants of Anathoth and the brethren and
housemates, in a contrast between the priests and the blood-relations.
Although Anathoth was a city of the priests, the men of Anathoth need
not have been all priests, since these cities were not exclusively
occupied by priests. - In this reproof of the prophet there lies not
merely the truth that much sorer suffering yet awaits him, but the truth
besides, that the people's faithlessness and wickedness towards God and
men will yet grow greater, ere the judgment of destruction fall upon
Judah; for the divine long-suffering is not yet exhausted, nor has
ungodliness yet fairly reached its highest point, so that the final
destruction must straightway be carried out. But judgment will not tarry
long. This thought is carried on in what follows.

[Jeremiah 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 12:7</span></span>

The execution of the judgment on Judah and its enemies. - As to this
passage, which falls into two strophes, [Jer
12:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007) and [Jer
12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014), Hitz., Graf, and others
pronounce that it stands in no kind of connection with what immediately
precedes. The connection of the two strophes with one another is,
however, allowed by these commentators; while Eichh. and Dahler hold
[Jer 12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014) to be a distinct oracle,
belonging to the time of Zedekiah, or to the seventh or eighth year of
Jehoiakim. These views are bound up with an incorrect conception of the
contents of the passage-to which in the first place we must accordingly
direct our attention.

[Jer 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)

"I have forsaken mine house, cast out mine heritage, given the beloved
of my soul into the hand of its enemies. [Jer
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008). Mine heritage is become unto me
as a lion in the forest, it hath lifted up its voice against me;
therefore have I hated it. [Jer 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009).
Is mine heritage to me a speckled vulture, that vultures are round about
it? Come, gather all the beasts of the field, bring them to devour! [Jer
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010). Many shepherds have destroyed
my vineyard, have trodden down my ground, have made the plot of my
pleasure a desolate wilderness. [Jer
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011). They have made it a desolation;
it mourneth around me desolate; desolated is the whole land, because
none laid it to heart. [Jer 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012). On
all the bare-peaked heights in the wilderness are spoilers come; for a
sword of Jahveh's devours from one end of the land unto the other: no
peace to all flesh. [Jer 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013). They
have sown wheat and reaped thorns; they have worn themselves weary and
accomplished nothing. So then ye shall be put to shame for your produce,
because of the hot anger of Jahve."

[Jer 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014). "Thus saith Jahveh against
all mine evil neighbours, that touch the heritage which I have given
unto my people Israel: Behold, I pluck them out of their land, and the
house of Judah will I pluck out of their midst. [Jer
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#015). But after I have plucked them
out, I will pity them again, and bring them back, each to his heritage,
and each into his land. [Jer 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016).
And it shall be, if they will learn the ways of my people, to swear by
my name: As Jahveh liveth, as they have taught my people to swear by
Baal, then they shall be built in the midst of my people. [Jer
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#017). But if they hearken not, I will
pluck up such a nation, utterly destroying it, saith Jahve."

Hitz. and Graf, in opposition to other commentators, will have the
strophe, [Jer 12:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007), to be taken not
as prophecy, but as a lament on the devastation which Judah, after
Jehoiakim's defection from Nebuchadnezzar in the eighth year of his
reign, had suffered through the war of spoliation undertaken against
insurgent Judah by those neighbouring nations that had maintained their
allegiance to Chaldean supremacy, [Kg2
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002). In support of this, Gr. appeals
to the use throughout of unconnected perfects, and to the prophecy, [Jer
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)., joined with this description;
which, he says, shows that it is something complete, existing, which is
described, a state of affairs on which the prophecy is based. For
although the prophet, viewing the future with the eyes of a seer as a
thing present, often describes it as if it had already taken place, yet,
he says, the context easily enables us in such a case to recognise the
description as prophetic, which, acc. to Graf, is not the case here.
This argument is void of all force. To show that the use of unconnected
perfects proves nothing, it is sufficient to note that such perfects are
used in [Jer 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006), where Hitz. and Gr.
take בּגדוּ and קראוּ as prophetic. So with the perfects in [Jer
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007). The context demands this. For
though no particle attaches [Jer 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)
to what precedes, yet, as Graf himself alleges against Hitz., it is
shown by the lack of any heading that the fragment ([Jer
12:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)) is "not a special, originally
independent oracle;" and just as clearly, that it can by no means be (as
Gr. supposes) an appendix, stuck on to the preceding in a purely
external and accidental fashion. These assumptions are disproved by the
contents of the fragment, which are simply an expansion of the threat of
expulsion from their inheritance conveyed to the people already in [Jer
11:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014); an expansion which not
merely points back to [Jer 11:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014),
but which most aptly attaches itself to the reproof given to the prophet
for his complaint that judgment on the ungodly was delayed ([Jer
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)); since it discloses to the
prophet God's designs in regard to His people, and teaches that the
judgment, though it may be delayed, will not be withheld.

[Jer 12:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)

contain sayings of God, not of the prophet, who had left his house in
Anathoth, as Zwingli and Bugenhagen thought. The perfects are prophetic,
i.e., intimate the divine decree already determined on, whose
accomplishment is irrevocably fixed, and will certainly by and by take
place. "My house" is neither the temple nor the land inhabited by
Israel, in support whereof appeal is unjustly made to passages like [Hos
8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001); [Hos
1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001); [Hos
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015); [Eze
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#012); [Eze
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009); but, as is clearly shown by the
parallel "mine heritage," taken in connection with what is said of the
heritage in [Jer 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008), and by "the
beloved of my soul," [Jer 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007), means
the people of Israel, or Judah as the existing representative of the
people of God (house = family); see on [Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001). נחלתי = עם נחלה, [Deu
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020), cf. [Isa
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006); [Isa
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025). ידדוּת, object of my soul's
love, cf. [Jer 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#015). This
appellation, too, cannot apply to the land, but to the people of Israel
- [Jer 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008) contains the reason why
Jahveh gives up His people for a prey. It has behaved to God like a
lion, i.e., has opposed Him fiercely like a furious beast. Therefore He
must withdraw His love. To give with the voice = to lift up the voice,
as in [Psa 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007); [Psa
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034). "Hate" is a stronger expression
for the withdrawal of love, shown by delivering Israel into the hand of
its enemies, as in [Mal 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003). There is
no reason for taking שׂנאתי as inchoative (Hitz., I learned to hate it).
The "hating" is explained fully in the following verses. In [Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009) the meaning of העיט צבוּע is
disputed. In all other places where it occurs עיט means a bird of prey,
cf. [Isa 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011), or collective, birds
of prey, [Gen 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#011); [Isa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#006). צבוּע, in the Rabbinical Heb.
the hyaena, like the Arabic s\[abu'un or s\[ab'un. So the lxx have
rendered it; and so, too, many recent comm., e.g., Gesen. in thes. But
with this the asyndeton by way of connection with עיט does not well
consist: is a bird of prey, a hyaena, mine heritage? On this ground
Boch. (Hieroz. ii. p. 176, ed. Ros.) sought to make good the claim of
עיט to mean "beast of prey," but without proving his case. Nor is there
in biblical Heb. any sure case for צבוּע in the meaning of hyaena; and
the Rabbinical usage would appear to be founded on this interpretation
of the word in the passage before us. צבע, Arab. s\[aba'a, means dip,
hence dye; and so צבע, [Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030), is
dyed materials, in plur. parti-coloured clothes. To this meaning Jerome,
Syr., and Targ. have adhered in the present case; Jerome gives avis
discolor, whence Luther's der sprincklight Vogel; Chr. B. Mich., avis
colorata. So, and rightly, Hitz., Ew., Graf, Ng. The prophet alludes to
the well-known fact of natural history, that "whenever a strange-looking
bird is seen amongst the others, whether it be an owl of the night
amidst the birds of day, or a bird of gay, variegated plumage amidst
those of duskier hue, the others pursue the unfamiliar intruder with
loud cries and unite in attacking it." Hitz., with reference to Tacit.
Ann. vi. 28, Sueton. Caes. 81, and Plin. Hist. N. x. 19. The question is
the expression of amazement, and is assertory. לי is dat. ethic.,
intimating sympathetic participation (Ng.), and not to be changed, with
Gr., into כּי. The next clause is also a question: are birds of prey
round about it (mine heritage), sc. to plunder it? This, too, is meant
to convey affirmation. With it is connected the summons to the beasts of
prey to gather round Judah to devour it. The words here come from [Isa
56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009). The beasts are emblem for
enemies. התיוּ is not first mode or perfect (Hitz.), but imperat.,
contracted from האתיוּ, as in [Isa
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014). The same thought is, in [Jer
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010), carried on under a figure that
is more directly expressive of the matter in hand. The perfects in [Jer
12:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010) are once more prophetic. The
shepherds who (along with their flocks, of course) destroy the vineyard
of the Lord are the kings of the heathen, Nebuchadnezzar and the kings
subject to him, with their warriors. The "destroying" is expanded in a
manner consistent with the figure; and here we must not fail to note the
cumulation of the words and the climax thus produced. They tread down
the plot of ground, turn the precious plot into a howling wilderness.
With "plot of my pleasure" cf. 'ארץ חמדּה, [Jer
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019).

In [Jer 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011) the emblematical
shepherds are brought forward in the more direct form of enemy. שׂמהּ,
he (the enemy, "they" impersonal) has changed it (the plot of ground)
into desolation. It mourneth עלי, round about me, desolated. Spoilers
are come on all the bare-topped hills of the desert. מרבּר is the name
for such parts of the country as were suited only for rearing and
pasturing cattle, like the so-called wilderness of Judah to the west of
the Dead Sea. A sword of the Lord's (i.e., the war sent by Jahveh, cf.
[Jer 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029); [Jer
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#025)) devours the whole land from end
to end; cf. [Jer 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#033). "All flesh" is
limited by the context to all flesh in the land of Judah. בּשׂר in the
sense of [Gen 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012), sinful mankind;
here: the whole sinful population of Judah. For them there is no שׁלום,
welfare or peace.

[Jer 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013)

They reap the contrary of what they have sowed. The words: wheat they
have sown, thorns they reap, are manifestly of the nature of a saw or
proverb; certainly not merely with the force of meliora exspectaverant
et venerunt pessima (Jerome); for sowing corresponds not to hoping or
expecting, but to doing and undertaking. Their labour brings them the
reverse of what they aimed at or sought to attain. To understand the
words directly of the failure of the crop, as Ven., Ros., Hitz., Graf,
Ng. prefer to do, is fair neither to text nor context. To reap thorns is
not = to have a bad harvest by reason of drought, blight, or the
ravaging of enemies. The seed: wheat, the noblest grain, produces
thorns, the very opposite of available fruit. And the context, too,
excludes the thought of agriculture and "literal harvesting." The
thought that the crop turned out a failure would be a very lame
termination to a description of how the whole land was ravaged from end
to end by the sword of the Lord. The verse forms a conclusion which sums
up the threatening of [Jer 12:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007), to
the effect that the people's sinful ongoings will bring them sore
suffering, instead of the good fortune they hoped for. נחלוּ, they have
worn themselves out, exhausted their strength, and secured no profit.
Thus shall ye be put to shame for your produce, ignominiously
disappointed in your hopes for the issue of your labour.

[Jer 12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)

The spoilers of the Lord's heritage are also to be carried off out of
their land; but after they, like Judah, have been punished, the Lord
will have pity on them, and will bring them back one and all into their
own land. And if the heathen, who now seduce the people of God to
idolatry, learn the ways of God's people and be converted to the Lord,
they shall receive citizenship amongst God's people and be built up
amongst them; but if they will not do so, they shall be extirpated. Thus
will the Lord manifest Himself before the whole earth as righteous
judge, and through judgment secure the weal not only of Israel, but of
the heathen peoples too. By this discovery of His world-plan the Lord
makes so complete a reply to the prophet's murmuring concerning the
prosperity of the ungodly ([Jer
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)), that from it may clearly be
seen the justice of God's government on earth. Viewed thus, both
strophes of the passage before us ([Jer
12:7-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)) connect themselves singularly
well with [Jer 12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001).

[Jer 12:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)

The evil neighbours that lay hands on Jahve's heritage are the
neighbouring heathen nations, the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites,
Philistines, and Syrians. It does not, however, follow that this
threatening has special reference to the event related in [Kg2
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002), and that it belongs to the time
of Jehoiakim. These nations were always endeavouring to assault Israel,
and made use of every opportunity that seemed favourable for waging war
against them and subjugating them; and not for the first time during the
reign of Nebuchadnezzar, at which time it was indeed that they suffered
the punishment here pronounced, of being carried away into exile. The
neighbours are brought up here simply as representatives of the heathen
nations, and what is said of them is true for all the heathen. The
transition to the first person in שׁכני is like that in [Jer
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#015). Jahveh is possessor of the land
of Israel, and so the adjoining peoples are His neighbours. נגע ב, to
touch as an enemy, to attack, cf. [Zac
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#012). I pluck the house of Judah out
of their midst, i.e., the midst of the evil neighbours. This is
understood by most commentators of the carrying of Judah into captivity,
since נתשׁ cannot be taken in two different senses in the two
corresponding clauses. For this word used of deportation, cf. [Kg1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#015). "Them," [Jer
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#015), refers to the heathen peoples.
After they have been carried forth of their land and have received their
punishment, the Lord will again have compassion upon them, and will
bring back each to its inheritance, its land. Here the restoration of
Judah, the people of God, is assumed as a thing of course (cf. [Jer
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016) and [Jer
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037), [Jer
32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044); [Jer
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#026)).

[Jer 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016)

If then the heathen learn the ways of the people of God. What we are to
understand by this is clear from the following infinitive clause: to
swear in the name of Jahveh, viz., if they adopt the worship of Jahveh
(for swearing is mentioned as one of the principal utterances of a
religious confession). If they do so, then shall they be built in the
midst of God's people, i.e., incorporated with it, and along with it
favoured and blessed.

[Jer 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#017)

But they who hearken not, namely, to the invitation to take Jahveh as
the true God, these shall be utterly destroyed. נתושׁ ואבּד, so to pluck
them out that they may perish. The promise is Messianic, cf. [Jer
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019); [Isa
56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006)., [Mic
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001), etc., inasmuch as it points to
the end of God's way with all nations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 13](jer013)

</div>
