<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer030)  [Next](jer032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 31:1</span></span>

The Salvation for all the Families of Israel. - Ewald has well stated
the connection of this chapter with the conclusion of the preceding, as
follows: "In order that the old form of blessing, found in the books of
Moses, and here given in [Jer 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022),
may be fulfilled, the whirlwind of Jahveh, which must carry away all the
unrighteous, will at last discharge itself, as has been already
threatened, [Jer 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019); this must take
place in order that there may be a fulfilment of that hope to all the
tribes of Israel (both kingdoms)." [Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001). announces deliverance for all
the families of Israel, but afterwards it is promised to both divisions
of the people separately - first, in vv. 2-22, to the ten tribes, who
have been exiles the longest; and then, in a more brief statement, [Jer
31:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023), to the kingdom of Judah: to
this, again, there is appended, [Jer
31:27-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027), a further description of the
nature of the deliverance in store for the two houses of Israel.

[Jer 31:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

The deliverance for all Israel, and the readmission of the ten tribes. -
[Jer 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001). "At that time, saith
Jahveh, will I be a God to all the families of Israel, and they shall be
my people. [Jer 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002). Thus saith
Jahveh: A people escaped from the sword found grace in the wilderness.
Let me go to give him rest, even Israel. [Jer
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003). From afar hath Jahve appeared
unto me, and with everlasting love have I loved thee; therefore have I
continued my favour towards thee. [Jer
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004). Once more will I build thee up,
and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel; once more shalt thou adorn
\[thyself\] with thy tabrets, and go forth in the dance of those that
make merry. [Jer 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005). Once more shalt
thou plant vineyards on the ills of Samaria; planters will plant them,
and apply them to common use. [Jer
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006). For there is a day \[when\]
watchmen will cry on Mount Ephraim: Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion,
to Jahveh our God!"

The expression "At that time" refers to [Jer
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024), "in the end of the days," which
means the Messianic future. The announcement of deliverance itself is
continued by resumption of the promise made in [Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022); the transposition of the two
portions of the promise is to be remarked. Here, "I will be a God to
them" stands first, because the restoration and perfection of Israel
have their only foundation in the love of God and in the faithfulness
with which He keeps His covenant, and it is only through this gracious
act that Israel again becomes the people of God. "All the families of
Israel" are the families of the whole twelve tribes - of the two
kingdoms of Israel and Judah, separated since the death of Solomon.
After this announcement of deliverance for the whole of Israel, the
address turns first to Israel of the ten tribes, and continues to treat
longest of them, "because, judging from appearances, they seem
irrecoverably lost - for ever rejected by the Lord" (Hengstenberg). [Jer
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002) is variously explained. Ewald,
following Raschi and others, refers the words 'מצא חן וגו to the leading
of Israel out of Egypt: once on a time, in the Arabian desert, the
people that had just barely escaped the sword of the Egyptians
nevertheless found grace, when Jahveh, as it were, went to make a quiet
dwelling-place for them. The love which He displayed towards them at
that time He has since continued, and thus He will now once more bring
back His people out of the midst of strangers. This view of the passage
is supported by the use of the perfects in [Jer
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002) and [Jer
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003), in contrast with the imperfect,
"again will I build thee," [Jer 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004),
and the employment of the expression "in the desert;" cf. [Jer
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002); [Hos
13:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#004). But "the people of those who
have escaped the sword" is an expression that cannot be reconciled with
it. Rashi, indeed, understands this as referring to the sword of the
Egyptians and Amalekites; but the thought that Israel, led out of Egypt
through the Arabian desert, was a people that had survived or escaped
the sword, is one met with nowhere else in the Old Testament, and is
quite inapplicable to the condition of the people of Israel when they
were led out of Egypt. Although Pharaoh wished to exterminate the people
of Israel through hard servile labour, and through such measures as the
order to kill all male children when they were born, yet he did not make
an exhibition of his wrath against Israel by the sword, neither did he
show his anger thus at the Red Sea, where he sought to bring Israel back
to Egypt by force. There God shielded His people from the attack of
Pharaoh, as He did in the battle against the Amalekites, so that Israel
was led through the desert as a whole people, not as a remnant. The
designation, "a people escaped from the sword," unconditionally requires
us to refer the words to the deliverance of the Israelites from exile;
these were only a remnant of what they had formerly been, since the
greater portion of them perished, partly at the downfall of the kingdom,
and partly in exile, by the sword of the enemy. Hence the perfects in
[Jer 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002) and [Jer
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003) are prophetic, and used of the
divine counsel, which precedes its execution in time. By using the
expression "in the desert," Jeremiah makes an allusion to Israel's being
led through the Arabian desert. The restoration of Israel to Canaan,
from their exile among the nations, is viewed under the figure of their
exodus from Egypt into the land promised to their fathers, as in [Hos
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#016).; and the exodus from the place
of banishment is, at the same time, represented as having already
occurred, so that Israel is again on the march to his native land, and
is being safely conducted through the desert by his God. There is as
little ground for thinking that there is reference here made to the
desert lying between Assyria or Babylon and Palestine, as there is for
Hitzig's referring שׂרידי חרב to the sword of the Medes and Persians. -
The inf. abs. הלוך is used instead of the first person of the imperative
(cf. [Kg1 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#030)), to express a summons
addressed by God to Himself: "I will go." See Gesenius, 131, 4, b, γ. \]
The suffix in הרגּיעו points out the object (Israel) by anticipation:
"to bring him to rest." רגע in the Hiphil usually means to be at rest,
to rest ([Deu 28:65](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065)); here, to give
rest, bring to rest.

[Jer 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003)

The people already see in spirit how the Lord is accomplishing His
purpose, [Jer 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002). "From afar (the
prophet speaks in the name of the people, of which he views himself as
one) hath Jahveh appeared unto me." So long as Israel languished in
exile, the Lord had withdrawn from him, kept Himself far off. Now the
prophet sees Him appearing again. "From afar," i.e., from Zion, where
the Lord is viewed as enthroned, the God of His people ([Psa
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)), sitting there to lead them back
into their land. But the Lord at once assures the people, who have been
waiting for Him, of His everlasting love. Because He loves His people
with everlasting love, therefore has He kept them by His grace, so that
they were not destroyed. משׁך, to draw, keep, restrain; hence משׁך חסד,
prolongare gratiam, [Psa 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#011); [Psa
109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012), but construed with ל of a
person; here, with a double accusative, to restrain any one, to preserve
him constantly by grace.

[Jer 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004)

Israel is now to be built up again, i.e., to be raised to a permanent
condition of ever-increasing prosperity; cf. [Jer
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016). The additional clause, "and
thou shalt be built," confirms this promise. The "virgin of Israel" is
the congregation of Israel; cf. [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017). A new and joyful phase in the
life of the people is to begin: such is the meaning of the words, "with
tabrets shalt thou adorn thyself, and thou shalt go forth in the dance
of those who make merry." In this manner were the popular feasts
celebrated in Israel; cf. [Jdg 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034),
Ps. 66:26.

[Jer 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005)

"The mountains of Samaria," i.e., of the kingdom of Ephraim ([Kg1
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#022); [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024)), shall again be planted with
vineyards, and the planters, too, shall enjoy the fruits in peace - not
plant for strangers, so that enemies shall destroy the fruits; cf. [Isa
62:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#008)., [Isa
65:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#021). The words "planters plant and
profane" (i.e., those who plant the vineyards are also to enjoy the
fruit of them) are to be explained by the law in [Lev
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023)., according to which the fruits
of newly planted fruit trees, and according to [Jdg
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#027), vines also, were not to be eaten
during the first three years; those of the fourth year were to be
presented as a thank-offering to the Lord; and only those of the fifth
year were to be applied to common use. This application to one's own use
is expressed in [Deu 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#006) by חלּל,
properly, to make common.

[Jer 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006)

[Jer 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006) is attached to the foregoing
by כּי, which introduces the reason of what has been stated. The
connection is as follows: This prosperous condition of Ephraim is to be
a permanent one; for the sin of Jeroboam, the seduction of the ten
tribes from the sanctuary of the Lord, shall not continue, but Ephraim
shall once more, in the future, betake himself to Zion, to the Lord his
God. "There is a day," i.e., there comes a day, a time, when watchmen
call. נצרים here denotes the watchmen who were posted on the mountains,
that they might observe and given notice of the first appearance of the
crescent of the moon after new-moon, so that the festival of the
new-moon and the feasts connected with it might be fixed; cf. Keil's
Bibl. Archol. ii. 74, Anm. 9 see also the articles Mond and Neumond in
Herzog's Real-Encykl. vols. ix. and x.; New-moon in Smith's Bible
Dictionary, vol. ii.\]. עלה, to go up to Jerusalem, which was
pre-eminent among the cities of the land as to spiritual matters.

[Jeremiah 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 31:7</span></span>

The restoration of Israel. - [Jer
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007). "For thus saith Jahveh: Shout
for joy over Jacob, and cry out over the head of the nations! Make
known, praise, and say, I Jahveh, save Thy people, the remnant of
Israel! [Jer 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#008). Behold, I will
bring them out of the land of the north, and will gather them from the
sides of the earth. Among them are the blind and lame, the woman with
child and she that hath born, together; a great company shall they
return hither. [Jer 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009). With weeping
shall they come, and with supplications will I lead them: I will bring
them to streams of water, by a straight way in which they shall not
stumble; for I have become a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my
first-born. [Jer 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010). Hear the word
of Jahveh, ye nations, and declare among the islands far off, and say:
He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd
his flock. [Jer 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#011). For Jahveh hath
redeemed Israel and ransomed him out of the hand of one stronger than
he. [Jer 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012). And they shall come
and sing with joy on the height of Zion, and come like a flood to the
goodness of Jahveh, because of corn, and new wine, and fresh oil, and
the young of the flock and the herd; and their soul shall be like a
well-watered garden, neither shall they pine away any more. [Jer
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#013). Then shall the virgin rejoice
in the dance, and young men and old men together; and I will turn their
mourning to joy, and will comfort them, and will cause them to rejoice
after their sorrow. [Jer 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#014). And I
will satiate the soul of the priests with fat, and my people shall be
satisfied with my goodness, saith Jahveh."

In order to set forth the greatness of the salvation which the Lord will
prepare for Israel, so long outcast, Israel is commanded to make loud
jubilation, and exhorted to approach the Lord with entreaties for the
fulfilment of His purpose of grace. The statement regarding this
salvation is introduced by כּי, "for," since the description, given in
this strophe, of Israel's being led back and re-established, furnishes
the actual proof that the nation shall be built up again. The summons to
rejoice comes from Jahveh (since, by His gracious dealings, He gives the
people material for praise), and is addressed to the members of the
nation. These are to rejoice over Jacob, i.e., over the glorious destiny
before the people. צהלו is translated by Hitzig: "shout at the head of
the nations," i.e., making a beginning among them all; but this is
incorrect and against the context. The thought that many other enslaved
nations besides Israel will rejoice over the fall of their oppressors,
has not the least foundation in this passage. The summons to the
nations, which follows in [Jer 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019),
is simply a command to make known God's purpose regarding the
deliverance of Israel. Of course, בּראשׁ, taken literally and by itself,
may be rendered "at the head" ([Kg1
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#012); [Amo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#007), etc.); but in this place, the
expression of which it forms the first word is the object of צהלו, which
is construed with בּ, "to rejoice over something," [Isa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#004). "The head of the nations"
signifies "the first of the nations" (ראשׁית הגּוים, [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)), i.e., the most exalted among the
nations. Such is the designation given to Israel, because God has chosen
them before all the nations of the earth to be His peculiar people ([Deu
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006); [Sa2
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#023).), made them the highest over
(עליון על, [Deu 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019)) all nations.
This high honour of Israel, which seemed to have been taken from him by
his being delivered over to the power of heathen nations, is now to
appear again. השׁמיעוּ, "make to be heard, sing praise," are to be
combined into one thought, "sing praise loudly" (so that people may hear
it). The words of praise, "Save Thy people, O Jahveh," form rather the
expression of a wish than of a request, just as in many psalms, e.g.,
Ps. 20:10; [Psa 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009), especially [Psa
118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025) in הושׁיאה נא, with which Jesus
was greeted on His entry into Jerusalem, [Mat
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009) (Graf). - To the rejoicing and
praise the Lord replies with the promise that He will lead back His
people out of the most distant countries of the north, - every one, even
the feeble and frail, who ordinarily would not have strength for so long
a journey, "Hither," i.e., to Palestine, where Jeremiah wrote the
promise; cf. [Jer 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018); [Jer
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#015).

"With weeping," i.e., with tears of joy, and with contrition of heart
over favour so undeserved, they come, and God leads them with weeping,
"amidst earnest prayers to the God they have found again, as a lost son
returns to the arms of his father" (Umbreit). Hitzig and Graf would
connect בּתחנוּנים with what precedes, and combine "I will lead them, I
will bring them;" by this arrangement, it is said, the careful guidance
of God, in leaving nothing behind, is properly set forth. But the
symmetry of the verse is thereby destroyed; and the reason assigned for
this construction (which is opposed by the accents), viz., that
תּחנוּנים does not mean miseratio, clementia, will not stand the test.
As in [Isa 55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012) it is the being
brought בּשׂמחה that is the chief point, so here, it is the bringing
בּתחנוּנים, amidst weeping, i.e., fervent prayer. At the same time, the
Lord will care like a father for their refreshment and nurture; He will
lead them to brooks of water, so that they shall not suffer thirst in
the desert ([Isa 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#021)), and guide
them by a straight (i.e., level) road, so that they shall not fall. For
He shows Himself again to Israel as a father, one who cares for them
like a father (cf. [Jer 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019); [Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006); [Isa
63:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#006)), and treats Ephraim as His
first-born. "The first-born of Jahveh," in [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022), means the people of Israel as
compared with the other nations of the earth. This designation is here
transferred to Ephraim as the head and representative of the ten tribes;
but it is not likely that there is in this any allusion to the
preference which Jacob displayed for the sons of Joseph, [Gen
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022). compared with [Jer
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004) (Venema, J. D. Michaelis,
Ngelsbach) - the advantage they obtained consisting in this, that
Ephraim and Manasseh were placed on an equal footing with Jacob's sons
as regards inheritance in the land of Canaan; in other words, they were
elevated to the dignity of being founders of tribes. There is no trace
in this prophecy of any preference given to Ephraim before Judah, or of
the ten tribes before the two tribes of the kingdom of Judah. That the
deliverance of Ephraim (Israel) from exile is mentioned before that of
Judah, and is further more minutely described, is simply due to the
fact, already mentioned, that the ten tribes, who had long languished in
exile, had the least hope, according to man's estimation, of
deliverance. The designation of Ephraim as the first-born of Jahveh
simply shows that, in the deliverance of the people, Ephraim is in no
respect to be behind Judah, - that they are to receive their full share
in the Messianic salvation of the whole people; in other words, that the
love which the Lord once displayed towards Israel, when He delivered
them out of the power of Pharaoh, is also to be, in the future,
displayed towards the ten tribes, who were looked on as lost. The nature
of fatherhood and sonship, as set forth in the Old Testament, does not
contain the element of the Spirit's testimony to our spirit, but only
the idea of paternal care and love, founded on the choosing of Israel
out of all the nations to be the peculiar people of God; see on [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022) and [Isa
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016); [Isa
64:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#007). בּכרי is substantially the same
as יקּיר been בּן and ילד שׁעשׁעים in [Jer
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020).

[Jer 31:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010)

The most remote of the heathen, too, are to be told that Jahveh will
free His people from their hands, gather them again, and highly favour
them, lest they should imagine that the God of Israel has not the power
to save His people, and that they may learn to fear Him as the Almighty
God, who has given His people into their power, not from any inability
to defend them, but merely for the purpose of chastising them for their
sins. איּים are the islands in, and countries lying along the coast of,
the Mediterranean Sea; in the language of prophecy, the word is used as
a designation of the distant countries of the west; cf. [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010); [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001), [Isa
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#005); [Isa
42:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#012), etc. On [Jer
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010), cf. [Jer
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003); [Exo
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#012)., [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011). "Stronger than he," as in [Psa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010); the expression is here used of
the heathen master of the world.

[Jer 31:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012)

Thus led by the Lord through the wilderness ([Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)), the redeemed shall come
rejoicing to the sacred height of Zion (see on [Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)), and thence go in streams,
i.e., scatter themselves over the country like a stream, for the
goodness of the Lord, i.e., for the good things which He deals out to
them in their native land. "To the goodness of Jahveh" is explained by
"because of corn," etc. (על for אל), cf. [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005). As to the good things of the
country, cf. [Deu 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008). Their soul will
be like a well-watered garden, an emblem of the fulness and freshness of
living power; cf. [Isa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011).

[Jer 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#013)

Then shall young men and old live in unclouded joy, and forget all their
former sorrow. "In the dance" refers merely to the virgins: to "young
men and old together," only the notion of joy is to be repeated from the
context.

[Jer 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#014)

The priests and the people will refresh themselves with the fat, i.e.,
the fat pieces of the thank-offerings, because numerous offerings will
be presented to the Lord in consequence of the blessing received from
Him.

[Jeremiah 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 31:15</span></span>

Changing of sorrow into joy, because Ephraim will turn to the Lord, and
the Lord will lead him back. - [Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015). "Thus saith Jahveh: A voice is
heard in Ramah, lamentation, bitter weeping, Rachel is weeping for her
children; she refuses to be comforted for her children, because they are
not. [Jer 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#016). Thus saith Jahveh:
Restrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears; for there is
a reward for thy work, saith Jahveh, and they shall return from the land
of the enemy. [Jer 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017). And there is
hope for thy latter end, saith Jahveh, that children shall return to thy
border. [Jer 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018). I have certainly
heard Ephraim complaining, Thou hast chastised me and I was chastised,
like a calf not tamed. Turn me that I may turn, for Thou, O Jahveh, art
my God. [Jer 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019). For, after I
return I repent, and after I have been taught I smite upon \[my\] thigh;
I am ashamed, yea, and confounded, because I bear the reproach of my
youth. [Jer 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020). Is Ephraim a son
dear to me, or a child of delight, that, as often as I speak against
him, I do yet certainly remember him? Therefore my bowels move for him;
I shall surely pity him, saith Jahveh. [Jer
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021). Set thee up way-marks, put up
posts for thyself; set thine heart to the highway, the road \[by which\]
thou camest: return, O virgin of Israel, return to these cities of
thine. [Jer 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022). How long wilt thou
wander about, O backsliding daughter? For Jahveh hath created a new
\[thing\] in the earth: a woman shall encompass a man."

In this strophe the promise is further confirmed by carrying out the
thought, that Israel's release from his captivity shall certainly take
place, however little prospect there is of it at present. For Israel
will come to an acknowledgment of his sins, and the Lord will then once
more show him His love. The hopeless condition of Israel is dramatically
set forth in [Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015).: Rachel, the
mother of Joseph, and thus the ancestress of Ephraim, the chief tribe of
the Israelites who had revolted from the royal house of David, weeps
bitterly over the loss of her children, the ten tribes who have been
carried away into exile; and the Lord addresses consolation to her, with
the promise that they shall return out of the land of the enemy. "A
voice is heard" (נשׁמע, participle, to show duration). The "voice" is
more fully treated of in the second part of the verse: loud lamentation
and bitter weeping. There is a difficulty connected with בּרמה. The lxx
took it to be the name of the city Ramah, now called er-Râm, in the
tribe of Benjamin, five English miles north from Jerusalem, on the
borders of the kingdoms of Judah and Israel ([Kg1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#017)), although this city is
elsewhere written with the article (הרמה), not only in the historical
notices found in [Jer 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001), [Jos
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025); [Jdg
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#005), etc., but also in prophetical
addresses, as in [Hos 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#008); [Isa
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#029). In this passage it cannot be a
mere appellative ("on a height"), as in [Sa1
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#006); [Eze
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024); nor can we think of Ramah in
Naphtali ([Jos 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#036), also הרמה), for
this latter city never figures in history like the Ramah of Samuel, not
far from Gibeah; see on [Jos 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025) and
[Sa1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001). But why is the lamentation
of Rachel heard at Ramah? Most expositors reply, because the tomb of
Rachel was in the divinity of Ramah; in support of this they cite [Sa1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002). Ngelsbach, who is one of these,
still maintains this view with the utmost confidence. But this
assumption is opposed to [Gen 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016)
and [Gen 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019), where it is stated
that Rachel died and was buried on the way to Bethlehem, and not far
from the town (see on Genesis, l.c.), which is about five miles south
from Jerusalem, and thus far from Ramah. Nor is any support for this
view to be got from [Sa1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002), except
by making the groundless assumption, that Saul, while seeking for the
asses of his father, came to Samuel in his native town; whereas, in the
account given in that chapter, he is merely said to have sought for
Samuel in a certain town, of which nothing more is stated, and to have
inquired at him; see on [Sa1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002). We
must therefore reject, as arbitrary and groundless, all attempts to fix
the locality of Rachel's sepulchre in the neighbourhood of Ramah
(Ngelsbach); in the same way we must treat the assertion of Thenius,
Knobel, Graf, etc., that the Ephratah of [Gen
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016), [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019), is the same as the Ephron of
[Ch2 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019), which was situated near
Bethel; so, too, must we deal with the statements, that Ephratah, i.e.,
Bethlehem, is to be expunged from the text of [Gen
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#009) and 48 as a false gloss, and that
the tradition, attested in [Mat 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018),
as to the situation of Rachel's sepulchre in the vicinity of Bethlehem,
is incorrect. Nor does the passage of Jeremiah now before us imply that
Rachel's sepulchre was near Ramah. Rachel does not weep at Ramah over
her lost children, either because she had been buried there, or because
it was in Ramah of Benjamin that the exiles were assembled, according to
[Jer 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001) (Hitzig, and also Delitzsch
on [Gen 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#020)). For it was the Jews
who were to be carried away captive that were gathered together at
Ramah, whereas it was over Israelites or Ephraimites that had been
carried into exile that Rachel weeps. The lamentation of Rachel is heard
at Ramah, as the most loftily situated border-town of the two kingdoms,
whence the wailing that had arisen sounded far and near, and could be
heard in Judah. Nor does she weep because she has learned something in
her tomb of the carrying away of the people, but as their common mother,
as the beloved spouse of Jacob, who in her married life so earnestly
desired children. Just as the people are often included under the notion
of the "daughter of Zion," as their ideal representative, so the great
ancestress of Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh is here named as the
representative of the maternal love shown by Israel in the pain felt
when the people are lost. The sing. כּי איננּוּ signifies, "for not one
of them is left." - This verse is quoted by Matthew ([Mat
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018)), after relating the story of the
murder of the children at Bethlehem, with the introductory formula, τότε
ἐπληρώθη τὸ ῥηθὲν διὰ ̓Ιερεμίου: from this the older theologians (cf.
Calovii Bibl. illustr. ad Jer. l.c.) conclude that Jeremiah directly
prophesied that massacre of the children committed by Herod. But this
inference cannot be allowed; it will not fit in with the context of the
prophecy. The expression ἐπληρώθη, used by Matthew, only shows that the
prophecy of Jeremiah received a new fulfilment through that act of
Herod. Of course, we must not reduce the typical reference of the
prophecy to that event at Bethlehem simply to this, that the wailing of
the mothers of Bethlehem over their murdered children was as great as
the lamentation made when the people were carried into exile. Typology
rather assumes a causal connection between the two events. The
destruction of the people of Israel by the Assyrians and Chaldeans is a
type of the massacre of the infants at Bethlehem, in so far as the sin
which brought the children of Israel into exile laid a foundation for
the fact that Herod the Idumean became king over the Jews, and wished to
destroy the true King and Saviour of Israel that he might strengthen his
own dominion. Cf. Fr. Kleinschmidt, die typolog. Citate der vier
Evangelien, 1861, S. 10ff.; Fairbairn's Typology, fifth edition, vol. i.
pp. 452-3.\]

The Lord will put an end to this wailing. "Cease thy weeping," He cries
to the sorrowing ones, "for there is a reward for thy labour" (almost
identical with [Ch2 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#007)). פּעלּה is
the maternal labour of birth and rearing of children. The reward
consists in this, that the children shall return out of the land of the
enemy into their own land. [Jer 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017)
states the same thing in parallel clauses, to confirm the promise. On
the expression "hope for thy latter end," cf. [Jer
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#011). בּנים without the article, as
in [Hos 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#010), etc.; cf. Ewald, 277,
b. This hope is grounded on the circumstance that Israel will become
aware, through suffering, that he is punished for his sins, and,
repenting of these sins, will beseech his God for favour. The Lord
already perceives this repentant spirit and acknowledgment of sin.
ואוּסר does not mean "I had myself chastised," or "I learned
chastisement" (Hitzig), but "I was chastised," like an untamed calf,
i.e., one not trained to bear the yoke and to endure labour. On this
figure, cf. [Hos 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011). The
recognition of suffering as chastisement by God excites a desire after
amelioration and amendment. But since man cannot accomplish these
through his own powers, Israel prays, "Lead me back," sc. from my evil
way, i.e., turn me. He finds himself constrained to this request,
because he feels regret for his apostasy from God. אחרי שׁוּבי in this
connection can only mean, "after I turned," sc. from Thee, O Lord my
God; on this meaning of שׁוּב, cf. [Jer
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004). הוּדע, to be brought to
understanding through punishment, i.e., to become wise. To smite the
thighs is a token of terror and horror; cf. [Eze
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#017). On בּשׁתּי וגם נכלמתּי cf. [Isa
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016). "The shame of my youth" is that
which I brought on myself in my youth through the sins I then committed.
On this confession generally, cf. the similar one in [Jer
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021). - Thereafter the Lord replies,
[Jer 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020), with the question, whether
Ephraim is so dear a son to Him that, as often as He has spoken against
him, i.e., uttered hard words of condemnation, He still, or again,
thinks of him. ילד שׁעשׁעים, "a child of delight," whom one fondles; cf.
[Isa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007). The clause explanatory of
the question, "for as often as," etc., is taken in different ways. דּבּר
may signify, "to speak about one," or "to speak against one," or "to pay
addresses to one," i.e., to court him: [Sa1
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039); [Sol
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008). Hitzig applies the last meaning
to the expression, and translates, "as often as I have paid my suit to
him;" according to this view, the basis of the representation of
Jahveh's relation to the people is that of a husband to his wife. But
this meaning of the verb does not by any means suit the present context,
well established though it is by the passages that have been adduced.
Ephraim is here represented as a son, not a virgin to whom Jahveh could
pay suit. Hence we must take the expression in the sense of "speaking
against" some one. But what Jahveh says against Ephraim is no mere
threatening by words, but a reprimand by deeds of judgment. The answer
to the question is to be inferred from the context: If the Lord,
whenever He is constrained to punish Ephraim, still thinks of him, then
Ephraim must be a son dear to Him. But this is not because of his
conduct, as if he caused Him joy by obedience and faithful attachment,
but in consequence of the unchangeable love of God, who cannot leave His
son, however much grief he causes his Father. "Therefore," i.e., because
he is a son to whom Jahveh shows the fulness of His paternal love, all
His kindly feelings towards him are now excited, and He desires to show
compassion on him. On המוּ מעי cf. [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011) and [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015). Under "bowels" are included
especially the heart, liver, reins, the noblest organs of the soul. The
expression is strongly anthropopathic, and denotes the most heartfelt
sympathy. This fellow-feeling manifests itself in the form of pity, and
actually as deliverance from misery.

The Lord desires to execute this purpose of His everlasting love. [Jer
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021). Israel is required to prepare
himself for return, and to go home again into his own cities. "Set thee
up way marks." ציּוּן, in [Kg2 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#017)
and [Eze 39:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#015), "a tombstone,"
probably a stone pillar, which could also serve as a way-mark. תּמרוּרים
is not from מרר as in [Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015), but
from תּמר, and has the same meaning as תּימרה, [Joe
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003), Talm. תּמּוּר, a pillar, Arab.
t̀âmîrun, pl., cippi, signa in desertis. "Set thy heart," i.e., turn thy
mind to the road, the way you have gone (on הלכתּי see [Jer
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020)), not, that you may not miss it,
but because it leads thee home. "Return to these cities of thine."
"These" implies that the summons issues from Palestine. Moreover, the
separate clauses of this verse are merely a poetic individualization of
the thought that Israel is to think seriously of returning; and,
inasmuch as this return to Palestine presupposes return to the Lord,
Israel must first turn with the heart to his God. Then, in [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022), follows the exhortation not to
delay. The meaning of התחמּק is educed from [Sol
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#006), where חמק signifies to turn one's
self round; hence the Hithpael means to wander about here and there,
uncertain what to do. This exhortation is finally enforced by the
statement, "Jahveh creates a new thing on earth" (cf. [Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019)). This novelty is, "a woman will
encompass a man." With regard to the meaning of these words, about which
there is great dispute, this much is evident from the context, that they
indicate a transformation of things, a new arrangement of the relations
of life. This new arrangement of things which Jahveh brings about is
mentioned as a motive which should rouse Ephraim (= Israel) to return
without delay to the Lord and to his cities. If we keep this in mind, we
shall at once set aside as untenable such interpretations as that of
Luther in his first translation of 1532-38, "those who formerly behaved
like women shall be men," which Ewald has revived in his rendering, "a
woman changing into a man," or that of Schnurrer, Rosenmller, Gesenius,
Maurer, "the woman shall protect the man," or that of Ngelsbach, "the
woman shall turn the man to herself." The above-mentioned general
consideration, we repeat, is sufficient to set aside these explanations,
quite apart from the fact that none of them can be lexically
substantiated; for סובב neither means to "turn one's self, vertere," nor
to "protect," nor to "cause to return" (as if סובב were used for שׁובב).
[Deu 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010) is adduced to prove the
meaning of protection; but the word there means to go about fondling and
cherishing. Neither the transmutation of the female into a male, or of a
weak woman into a strong man, nor the protection of the man by a woman,
nor the notion that the strong succumbs to the weak, forms an effectual
motive for the summons to Israel to return; nor can we call any of them
a new creative act effected by Jahveh, or a new arrangement of things.
But we must utterly reject the meaning of the words given by Castle, le
Clerc, and Hitzig, who apply them to the unnatural circumstance, that a
woman makes her suit to a man, even where by the woman is understood the
virgin of Israel, and by the man, Jahveh. Luther gave the correct
rendering in his editions of 1543 and 1545, "the woman shall encompass
the man," - only, "embrace" (Ger. umfangen) might express the sense
better than "encompass" (Ger. umgeben). נקבה is nomen sexus, "femella, a
female;" גּבר, a "man," also "proles mascula," not according to the
sexual relation (=זכר), but with the idea of strength. Both in the
choice of these words and by the omission of the article, the relation
is set forth in its widest generality; the attention is thereby steadily
directed to its fundamental nature. The woman, the weak and tender
being, shall lovingly embrace the man, the strong one. Hengstenberg
reverses the meaning of the words when he renders them, "the strong one
shall again take the weak into his closest intercourse, under his
protection, loving care." Many expositors, including Hengstenberg and
Hitzig of moderns, have rightly perceived that the general idea has been
set forth with special reference to the relation between the woman,
Israel, and the man, Jahveh.

Starting with this view, which is suggested by the context, the older
expositors explained the words of the conception and birth of Christ by
a virgin; cf. Corn. a Lapide, Calovii Bibl. ill., Cocceius, and
Pfeiffer, dubia vex. p. 758ff. Thus, for example, the Berleburger Bibel
gives the following explanation: "A woman or virgin - not a married
woman - will encompass, i.e., carry and contain in her body, the man who
is to be a vanquisher of all and to surpass all in strength." This
explanation cannot be set aside by the simple remark, "that here there
would be set forth the very feature in the birth of Christ by a virgin
which is not peculiar to it as compared with others;" for this
"superficial remark" does not in the least touch the real point to be
explained. But it may very properly be objected, that סובב has not the
special meaning of conceiving in a mother's womb. On this ground we can
also set down as incorrect the other explanation of the words in the
Berleburger Bibel, that the text rather speaks of "the woman who is the
Jewish Church, and who, in the spirit of faith, is to bear Christ as the
mighty God, [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), in the likeness
of a man, [Rev 12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)." However, these
explanations are nearer the truth than any that have been offered since.
The general statement, "a woman shall encompass (the) man," i.e.,
lovingly embrace him - this new relation which Jahveh will bring about
in place of the old, that the man encompasses the wife, loving,
providing for, protecting her - can only be referred, agreeably to the
context, to change of relation between Israel and the Lord. סובב, "to
encompass," is used tropically, not merely of the mode of dealing on the
part of the Lord to His people, the faithful, - of the protection, the
grace, and the aid which He grants to the pious ones, as in [Psa
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#007), [Psa
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010); [Deu
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010), - but also of the dealings of
men with divine things. אסובבה מזבּחך, [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006), does not mean, "I will go round
Thine altar," in a circle or semicircle as it were, but, "I will keep to
Thine altar," instead of keeping company with the wicked; or more
correctly, "I will surround Thine altar," making it the object of my
care, of all my dealings, - I will make mine own the favours shown to
the faithful at Thine altar. In the verse now before us, סובב signifies
to encompass with love and care, to surround lovingly and carefully, -
the natural and fitting dealing on the part of the stronger to the weak
and those who need assistance. And the new thing that God creates
consists in this, that the woman, the weaker nature that needs help,
will lovingly and solicitously surround the man, the stronger. Herein is
expressed a new relation of Israel to the Lord, a reference to a new
covenant which the Lord, [Jer 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031).,
will conclude with His people, and in which He deals so condescendingly
towards them that they can lovingly embrace Him. This is the substance
of the Messianic meaning in the words. The conception of the Son of God
in the womb of the Virgin Mary is not expressed in them either directly
or indirectly, even though we were allowed to take סובב in the meaning
of "embrace." This new creation of the Lord is intended to be, and can
be, for Israel, a powerful motive to their immediate return to their
God.

[Jeremiah 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 31:23</span></span>

The re-establishment and blessing of Judah. - [Jer
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023). "Thus saith Jahveh of hosts,
the God of Israel: Once more shall they say this word in the land of
Judah and in its cities, when I turn their captivity: 'Jahveh bless
thee, O habitation of righteousness, O mountain of holiness!' [Jer
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#024). And there shall dwell in it,
\[in\] Judah and all its cities together, husbandmen and \[those who\]
move about with the flock. [Jer 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025).
For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have filled every languishing
soul. [Jer 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026). Because of this I
awoke and looked, and my sleep was sweet unto me."

The prophecy which treats of Judah alone is condensed, but states much
in few words - not merely the restitutio in statum integritatis, but
also rich blessing thereafter. "May Jahveh bless thee" is a benediction,
equivalent to "may you be blessed;" cf. [Psa
128:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#005); [Psa
134:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#003). נוה צדק does not mean
"habitation of salvation," but "habitation of righteousness;" cf. [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021), where it is said of Jerusalem
that righteousness formerly dwelt in it. This state of matters is again
to exist; Jerusalem is again to become a city in which righteousness
dwells. "The holy mountain" is Zion, including Moriah, where the Lord
had set up His throne. That the designation "the holy mountain" was
applied to the whole of Jerusalem cannot be made out from [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)., [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009); [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013), which have been adduced to
prove the assertion. The prayer for the blessing implies that Zion will
again be the seat of the Divine King of His people. [Jer
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#024). "There dwell in it (in the land
of Judah) Judah and all his towns," i.e., the population of Judah and of
all its towns, as "husbandmen and (those who) pasture flocks," i.e.,
each one pursuing undisturbed his own peaceful employment, agriculture
and cattle-rearing, and ([Jer 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025))
so blessed in these callings that they are kept from every need and
want. דּאבה may either be viewed as the perfect, before which the
relative is to be supplied, or an adjectival form imitated from the
Aramaic participle, masc. דּאב.

[Jeremiah 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 31:26</span></span>

Thereupon the prophet awoke from his ecstatic sleep, and said, "My sleep
was pleasant" (cf. [Pro 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#024)). Very
many expositors, including Rosenmller, Umbreit, and Neumann among the
moderns, understand the words, "therefore (or, because of this) I
awoke," etc., as referring to God, because in what precedes and follows
Jahveh speaks, and because God is sometimes, in the Psalms, called on to
awake, e.g., [Psa 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007); [Psa
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023); [Psa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024), etc. But it has been properly
objected to this, that the words, "my sleep was sweet" (pleasant), are
inappropriate as utterances of God, inasmuch as He does not sleep;
nowhere in Scripture is sleep attributed to God, and the summons to
awake merely implies the non-interference on the part of God in the
affairs of His people. Moreover, we would need to refer the sleeping of
God, mentioned in this verse, to His dealing towards Israel during the
exile, in such a way that His conduct as a powerful judge would be
compared to a sweet sleep - which is inconceivable. As little can the
verse be supposed to contain words of the people languishing in exile,
as Jerome has taken them. For the people could not possibly compare the
time of oppression during the exile to a pleasant sleep. There is thus
nothing left for us but to take this verse, as the Targum, Raschi,
Kimchi, Venema, Dahler, Hitzig, Hengstenberg, and others have done, as a
remark by the prophet regarding his feelings when he received this
revelation; and we must accept something like the paraphrase of Tholuck
(die Propheten, S. 68): "Because of such glorious promises I awoke to
reflect on them, and my ecstatic sleep delighted me." This view is not
rendered less tenable by the objection that Jeremiah nowhere says God
had revealed Himself to him in a dream, and that, in what precedes,
there is not to be found any intimation that what he sets forth appeared
to him as a vision. For neither is there any intimation, throughout the
whole prophecy, that he received it while in a waking state. The command
of God, given [Jer 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#002) at the first,
to write in a book the words which Jahveh spoke to him, implies that the
prophecy was not intended, in the first instance, to be publicly read
before the people; moreover, it agrees with the assumption that he
received the prophecy in a dream. But against the objection that
Jeremiah never states, in any other place, in what bodily condition he
was when he received his revelations from God, and that we cannot see
why he should make such an intimation here - we may reply, with
Ngelsbach, that this prophecy is the only one in the whole book which
contains unmixed comfort, and that it is thus easy to explain why he
could never forget that moment when, awaking after he had received it,
he found he had experienced a sweet sleep. Still less weight is there in
the objection of Graf, that one cannot comprehend why this remark stands
here, because the description is evidently continued in what follows,
while the dream must have ended here, when the prophet awoke. For this
is against the assumption that the hand of the Lord immediately touched
him again, and put him back into the ecstatic state. One might rather
urge the consideration that the use of the word שׁנה, "sleep," does not
certainly prove that the prophet was in the ecstatic state, from the
fact that the lxx render תּר, in [Gen
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021) and [Gen
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002), by ἔκστασις. But wherever divine
revelations were made in dreams, these of course presuppose sleep; so
that the ecstatic state might also be properly called "sleep." Jeremiah
adds, "And I looked," to signify that he had been thoroughly awakened,
and, in complete self-consciousness, perceived that his sleep had been
pleasant.

[Jeremiah 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 31:27</span></span>

The renovation of Israel and Judah. - [Jer
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027). "Behold, days are coming, saith
Jahveh, when I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with
seed of men and seed of beasts. [Jer
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028). And it shall be that, just as I
have watched over them to pluck up and to break down, to pull down and
to destroy and to hurt, so shall I watch over them to build and to
plant, saith Jahveh. [Jer 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029). In
those days they shall no more say, 'Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and
the teeth of the children become blunt;' [Jer
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#030). But each man shall die for his
own iniquity: every man who eats the sour grapes, his own teeth shall
become blunted."

After announcement has been made, in what preceded, that both portions
of the covenant people will be led back into their own land and
re-established there, both are now combined, since they are again, at
the restoration, to be united under one king, the sprout of David (cf.
[Jer 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015), [Jer
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018)), and to both there is promised
great blessing, both temporal and spiritual. The house of Israel and the
house of Judah, as separate nations, are represented as a fruitful
field, which God will sow with men and cattle. בּהמּה, "cattle," the
tame domestic animals, contribute to the prosperity of a nation. That
this seed will mightily increase, is evident from the fact that God sows
it, and (as is further stated in [Jer
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028)) will watch over it as it grows.
Whereas, hitherto, He has watched for the purpose of destroying and
annihilating the people, because of their apostasy, He will in time to
come watch for the purpose of planting and building them up. The prophet
has hitherto been engaged in fulfilling, against the faithless people,
the first part of the commission given him by the Lord when he was
called to his office ([Jer 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010));
hereafter, he will be engaged in building up. As certainly as the first
has taken place - and of this the people have had practical experience -
so certainly shall the other now take place.

[Jeremiah 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 31:29</span></span>

The proverb, which Ezekiel also ([Eze
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#002).) mentions and contends against,
cannot mean, "The fathers have begun to eat sour grapes, but not till
the teeth of their sons have become blunted by them" (Ngelsbach); the
change of tense is against this, for, by the perfect אכלוּ and the
imperfect תּקהינה, the blunting of the children's teeth is set down as a
result of the fathers' eating. The proverb means, "Children atone for
the misdeeds of their fathers," or "The sins of the fathers are visited
on their innocent children." On this point, cf. the explanations given
in [Eze 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#002). "Then shall they no more
say" is rightly explained by Hitzig to mean, "They shall have no more
occasion to say." But the meaning of the words is not yet made plain by
this; in particular, the question how we must understand [Jer
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#030) is not settled. Graf, referring
to [Jer 23:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007), supplies יאמרוּ after
כּי־אם, and thus obtains the meaning, Then will they no more accuse God
of unrighteousness, as in that wicked proverb, but they will perceive
that every one has to suffer for his own guilt. Hitzig and Ngelsbach
have declared against this insertion - the former with the remark that,
in [Jer 23:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007), because both members
of the sentence begin with protestations, the whole is clear, while here
it is not so - the latter resting on the fact that the dropping of the
proverb from current use certainly implies a correct knowledge of the
righteousness of God, but one which is very elementary and merely
negative; while, on the other hand, the whole connection of the passage
now before us shows that it is intended to describe a period when the
theocratic life is in a most flourishing condition. Then expositors take
[Jer 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#030) as the utterance of the
prophet, and as embodying the notion that the average level of morality
shall be so high at this future period, that only some sins will
continue to be committed, and these as isolated exceptions to the rule.
Taken all in all, Israel will be a holy people, in which the general
spirit pervading them will repress the evil in some individuals, that
would otherwise manifest itself. But we cannot imagine how these ideas
can be supposed to be contained in the words, "Every man shall die for
his own sins," etc. [Jer 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#030)
unquestionably contains the opposite of [Jer
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029). The proverb mentioned in [Jer
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029) involves the complaint against
God, that in punishing sin He deals unjustly. According to this view,
[Jer 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#030) must contain the
declaration that, in the future, the righteousness of God is to be
revealed in the punishment of sins. As we have already remarked on [Eze
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#003)., the verse in question rather
means, that after the re-establishment of Israel, the Lord will make
known to His people His grace in so glorious a manner that the favoured
ones will fully perceive the righteousness of His judgments. The
experience of the unmerited love and compassion of the Lord softens the
heart so much, that the favoured one no longer doubts the righteousness
of the divine punishment. Such knowledge of true blessedness cannot be
called elementary; rather, it implies a deep experience of divine grace
and a great advance in the life of faith. Nor does the verse contain a
judgment expressed by the prophet in opposition to that of his
contemporaries, but it simply declares that the opinion contained in
that current proverb shall no longer be accepted then, but the favoured
people will recognise in the death of the sinner the punishment due to
them for their own sin. Viewed in this manner, these verses prepare the
way for the following announcement concerning the nature of the new
covenant.

[Jeremiah 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 31:31</span></span>

The new covenant. - [Jer 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031).
"Behold, days are coming, saith Jahveh, when I will make with the house
of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant; [Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032). Not like the covenant that I
made with their fathers on the day when I laid hold of their hand to
bring them out of the land of Egypt, which covenant of mine they broke,
though I had married them to myself, saith Jahveh; [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033). But this is the covenant which
I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith Jahveh: I
will put my law within them, and on their heart will I write it; and I
will become to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034). And they shall no more teach
every man his neighbour and every man his brother, saying, Know ye
Jahveh, for all of them shall know me, from the least of them to the
greatest of them, saith Jahveh; for I will pardon their iniquity, and
their sins will I remember no more. [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035). Thus saith Jahveh, \[who\]
gives the sun for light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and stars
for light by night, who rouses the sea so that its waves roar, Jahveh of
hosts is His name: [Jer 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036). If
these ordinances move away from before me, saith Jahveh, then also will
the seed of Israel cease to be a people before me for ever. [Jer
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037). Thus saith Jahveh: If the
heavens above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth below
can be searched out, then will I also reject all the seed of Israel
because of all that they have done, saith Jahveh. [Jer
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038). Behold, days come, saith
Jahveh, when the city shall be built for Jahveh, from the tower of
Hananeel unto the gate of the corner, [Jer
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039). And the measuring-line shall
once more go out straight over the hill of Gareb, and turn round towards
Goah. [Jer 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040). And all the valley
of the corpses and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the valley of
Kidron, unto the corner of the gate of the horses towards the east,
\[shall be\] holiness to Jahveh; it shall not be plucked up nor pulled
down again for ever.

The re-establishment of Israel reaches its completion in the making of a
new covenant, according to which the law of God is written in the hearts
of the people; thereby Israel becomes in truth the people of the Lord,
and the knowledge of God founded on the experience of the forgiveness of
sins is such that there is no further need of any external means like
mutual teaching about God ([Jer
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)). This covenant is to endure
for ever, like the unchangeable ordinances of nature ([Jer
31:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)); and in consequence of this,
Jerusalem shall be guilt as the holy city of God, which shall never be
destroyed again ([Jer 31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)).

[Jer 31:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)

כּרת בּרית does not mean "to make an appointment," but "to conclude a
covenant," to establish a relation of mutual duties and obligations.
Every covenant which God concludes with men consists, on the side of
God, in assurance of His favours and actual bestowal of them; these bind
men to the keeping of the commands laid on them. The covenant which the
Lord will make with all Israel in the future is called "a new covenant,"
as compared with that made with the fathers at Sinai, when the people
were led out of Egypt; this latter is thus implicitly called the "old
covenant." The words, "on the day when I took them by the hand," etc.,
must not be restricted, on the one side, to the day of the exodus from
Egypt, nor, on the other, to the day when the covenant was solemnly made
at Sinai; they rather refer to the whole time of the exodus, which did
not reach its termination till the entrance into Canaan, though it
culminated in the solemn admission of Israel, at Sinai, as the people of
Jahveh; see on [Jer 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022). (On the
punctuation of החזיקי, cf. Ewald, 238, d, Olshaus. Gramm. 191,f.) אשׁר
is not a conjunction, "quod, because," but a relative pronoun, and must
be combined with את־בּריתי, "which my covenant," i.e., which covenant of
mine. "They" stands emphatically in contrast with "though I" in the
following circumstantial clause, which literally means, "but I have
married them to myself," or, "I was their husband." As to בּעלתּי, see
on [Jer 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014). Hengstenberg wrongly
takes the words as a promise, "but I will marry them to myself;" this
view, however, is incompatible with the perfect, and the position of the
words as a contrast with "they broke."

(Note: In the citation of this passage in [Heb
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008)., the words are quoted according
to the lxx version, κᾀγὼ ἠμέλησα αὐτῶν, although this translation is
incorrect, because the apostle does not use these words in proving any
point. These same words, moreover, have been rendered by the lxx, in
[Jer 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014), ἐγὼ κατακυριεύσω ὑμῶν.)

The two closely connected expressions indicate why a new covenant was
necessary; there is no formal statement, however, of the reason, which
is merely given in a subordinate and appended clause. For the proper
reason why a new covenant is made is not that the people have broken the
old one, but that, though Jahveh had united Israel to Himself, they have
broken the covenant and thereby rendered it necessary to make a new one.
God the Lord, in virtue of His unchangeable faithfulness, would not
alter the relation He had Himself established in His love, but simply
found it anew in a way which obviated the breaking of the covenant by
Israel. For it was a defect connected with the covenant made with Israel
at Sinai, that it could be broken on their part. This defect is not to
exist in the new covenant which God will make in after times. The
expression "after those (not these) days" is remarkable; ההם is not the
same as האלּה, and yet the days meant can only be the "coming days;"
accordingly, it is "those days" (as in [Jer
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029)) that are to be expected. The
expression "after these days" is inexact, and probably owes its origin
to the idea contained in the phrase "in the end of the days" (בּאחרית,
cf. [Jer 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#020)).

[Jer 31:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)

The character of the new covenant: "I (Jahveh) give (will put) my law
within them, and write it upon their heart." בּקרבּם is the opposite of
נתן לפניהם, which is constantly used of the Sinaitic law, cf. [Jer
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#012); [Deu
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008); [Deu
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#032); [Kg1
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#006); and the "writing on the heart" is
opposed to writing on the tables of stone, [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018), cf. [Jer
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#015)., [Jer
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008), [Deu
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013); [Deu
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#011); [Deu
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#004), etc. The difference, therefore,
between the old and the new covenants consists in this, that in the old
the law was laid before the people that they might accept it and follow
it, receiving it into their hearts, as the copy of what God not merely
required of men, but offered and vouchsafed to them for their happiness;
while in the new it is put within, implanted into the heart and soul by
the Spirit of God, and becomes the animating life-principle, [Co2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003). The law of the Lord thus forms,
in the old as well as in the new covenant, the kernel and essence of the
relation instituted between the Lord and His people; and the difference
between the two consists merely in this, that the will of God as
expressed in the law under the old covenant was presented externally to
the people, while under the new covenant it is to become an internal
principle of life. Now, even in the old covenant, we not only find that
Israel is urged to receive the law of the Lord his God into his heart, -
to make the law presented to him from without the property of his heart,
as it were, - but even Moses, we also find, promises that God will
circumcise the heart of the people, that they may love God the Lord with
all their heart and all their soul ([Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006)). But this circumcision of heart
and this love of God with the whole soul, which are repeatedly required
in the law ([Deu 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005); [Deu
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012), [Deu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016)), are impossibilities, unless
the law be received into the heart. It thus appears that the difference
between the old and the new covenants must be reduced to this, that what
was commanded and applied to the heart in the old is given in the new,
and the new is but the completion of the old covenant. This is, indeed,
the true relation between them, as is clearly shown by the fact, that
the essential element of the new covenant, "I will be their God, and
they shall be my people," was set forth as the object of the old; cf.
[Lev 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012) with [Exo
29:45](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#045). Nevertheless the difference is
not merely one of degree, but one of kind. The demands of the law, "Keep
the commandments of your God," "Be ye holy as the Lord your God is
holy," cannot be fulfilled by sinful man. Even when he strives most
earnestly to keep the commands of the law, he cannot satisfy its
requirements. The law, with its rigid demands, can only humble the
sinner, and make him beseech God to blot out his sin and create in him a
clean heart ([Psa 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011).); it can only
awaken him to the perception of sin, but cannot blot it out. It is God
who must forgive this, and by forgiving it, write His will on the heart.
The forgiveness of sin, accordingly, is mentioned, [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034), at the latter part of the
promise, as the basis of the new covenant. But the forgiveness of sins
is a work of grace which annuls the demand of the law against men. In
the old covenant, the law with its requirements is the impelling force;
in the new covenant, the grace shown in the forgiveness of sins is the
aiding power by which man attains that common life with God which the
law sets before him as the great problem of life. It is in this that the
qualitative difference between the old and the new covenants consists.
The object which both set before men for attainment is the same, but the
means of attaining it are different in each. In the old covenant are
found commandment and requirement; in the new, grace and giving.
Certainly, even under the old covenant, God bestowed on the people of
Israel grace and the forgiveness of sins, and, by the institution of
sacrifice, had opened up a way of access by which men might approach Him
and rejoice in His gracious gifts; His Spirit, moreover, produced in the
heart of the godly ones the feeling that their sins were forgiven, and
that they were favoured of God. But even this institution and this
working of the Holy Spirit on and in the heart, was no more than a
shadow and prefiguration of what is actually offered and vouchsafed
under the new covenant, [Heb 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001). The
sacrifices of the old covenant are but prefigurations of the true
atoning-offering of Christ, by which the sins of the whole world are
atoned for and blotted out.

In [Jer 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034) are unfolded the results
of God's putting His law in the heart. The knowledge of the Lord will
then no longer be communicated by the outward teaching of every man to
his fellow, but all, small and great, will be enlightened and taught by
the Spirit of God ([Isa 54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)) to know
the Lord; cf. [Joe 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)., [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009). These words do not imply that,
under the new covenant, "the office of the teacher of religion must
cease" (Hitzig); and as little is "disparity in the imparting of the
knowledge of God silently excluded" in [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033). The meaning simply is this,
that the knowledge of God will then no longer be dependent on the
communication and instruction of man. The knowledge of Jahveh, of which
the prophet speaks, is not the theoretic knowledge which is imparted and
acquired by means of religious instruction; it is rather knowledge of
divine grace based upon the inward experience of the heart, which
knowledge the Holy Spirit works in the heart by assuring the sinner that
he has indeed been adopted as a son of God through the forgiveness of
his sins. This knowledge, as being an inward experience of grace, does
not exclude religious instruction, but rather tacitly implies that there
is intimation given of God's desire to save and of His purpose of grace.
The correct understanding of the words results from a right perception
of the contrast involved in them, viz., that under the old covenant the
knowledge of the Lord was connected with the mediation of priests and
prophets. Just as, at Sinai, the sinful people could not endure that the
Lord should address them directly, but retreated, terrified by the awful
manifestation of the Lord on the mountain, and said entreatingly to
Moses, "Speak thou with us and we will hear, but let not God speak with
us, lest we die" ([Exo 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#015)); so,
under the old covenant economy generally, access to the Lord was denied
to individuals, and His grace was only obtained by the intervention of
human mediators. This state of matters has been abolished under the new
covenant, inasmuch as the favoured sinner is placed in immediate
relation to God by the Holy Spirit. [Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016); [Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012).

In order to give good security that the promise of a new covenant would
be fulfilled, the Lord, in [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)., points to the everlasting
duration of the arrangements of nature, and declares that, if this order
of nature were to cease, then Israel also would cease to be a people
before Him; i.e., the continuance of Israel as the people of God shall
be like the laws of nature. Thus the eternal duration of the new
covenant is implicitly declared. Hengstenberg contests the common view
of [Jer 31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035) and [Jer
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036), according to which the
reference is to the firm, unchangeable continuance of God's laws in
nature, which everything must obey; and he is of opinion that, in [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035), it is merely the omnipotence of
God that is spoken of, that this proves He is God and not man, and that
there is thus formed a basis for the statement set forth in [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035), so full of comfort for the
doubting covenant people; that God does not life, that He can never
repent of His covenant and His promises. But the arguments adduced for
this, and against the common view, are not decisive. The expression
"stirring the sea, so that its waves roar," certainly serves in the
original passage, [Isa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#015), from
which Jeremiah has taken it, to bring the divine omnipotence into
prominence; but it does not follow from this that here also it is merely
the omnipotence of God that is pointed out. Although, in rousing the
sea, "no definite rule that we can perceive is observed, no
uninterrupted return," yet it is repeated according to the unchangeable
ordinance of God, though not every day, like the rising and setting of
the heavenly bodies. And in [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035), under the expression "these
ordinances" are comprehended the rousing of the sea as well as the
movements of the moon and stars; further, the departure, i.e., the
cessation, of these natural phenomena is mentioned as impossible, to
signify that Israel cannot cease to exist as a people; hence the
emphasis laid on the immutability of these ordinances of nature.
Considered in itself, the putting of the sun for a light by day, and the
appointment of the moon and stars for a light by night, are works of the
almighty power of God, just as the sea is roused so that its waves roar;
but, that these phenomena never cease, but always recur as long as the
present world lasts, is a proof of the immutability of these works of
the omnipotence of God, and it is this point alone which here receives
consideration. "The ordinances of the moon and of the stars" mean the
established arrangements as regards the phases of the moon, and the
rising and setting of the different stars. "From being a nation before
me" declares not merely the continuance of Israel as a nation, so that
they shall not disappear from the earth, just as so many others perish
in the course of ages, but also their continuance before Jahveh, i.e.,
as His chosen people; cf. [Jer 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020).
- This positive promise regarding the continuance of Israel is confirmed
by a second simile, in [Jer 31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037),
which declares the impossibility of rejection. The measurement of the
heavens and the searching of the foundations, i.e., of the inmost
depths, of the earth, is regarded as an impossibility. God will not
reject the whole seed of Israel: here כּל is to be attentively
considered. As Hengstenberg correctly remarks, the hypocrites are
deprived of the comfort which they could draw from these promises. Since
the posterity of Israel are not all rejected, the rejection of the dead
members of the people, i.e., unbelievers, is not thereby excluded, but
included. That the whole cannot perish "is no bolster for the sin of any
single person." The prophet adds: "because of all that they have done,"
i.e., because of their sins, their apostasy from God, in order to keep
believing ones from despair on account of the greatness of their sins.
On this, Calvin makes the appropriate remark: Consulto propheta hic
proponit scelera populi, ut sciamus superiorem fore Dei clementiam, nec
congeriem tot malorum fore obstaculo, quominus Deus ignoscat. If we keep
before our mind these points in the promise contained in this verse, we
shall not, like Graf, find in [Jer
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037) merely a tame repetition of what
has already been said, and be inclined to take the verse as a
superfluous marginal gloss.

(Note: Hitzig even thinks that, "because the style and the use of
language betoken the second Isaiah, and the order of both strophes is
reversed in the lxx (i.e., [Jer 31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037)
stands before [Jer 31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035).), [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035), [Jer
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036) may have stood in the margin at
the beginning of the genuine portion in [Jer
31:27-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027), and [Jer
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037), on the other hand, in the
margin at [Jer 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)." But, that the
verses, although they present reminiscences of the second Isaiah, do not
quite prove that the language is his, has already been made sufficiently
evident by Graf, who points out that, in the second Isaiah, המה is
nowhere used of the roaring of the sea, nor do we meet with חקּות and
חקּים, ישׁבּתוּ מהיות, כּל־היּמים, nor again הקר in the Niphal, or מוסדי
ארץ (but מוסדות in [Isa 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021)); other
expressions are not peculiar to the second Isaiah, since they also occur
in other writings. - But the transposition of the verses in the lxx, in
view of the arbitrary treatment of the text of Jeremiah in that version,
cannot be made to prove anything whatever.)

[Jer 31:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)

Then shall Jerusalem be built up as a holy city of God, and be no more
destroyed. After ימים, the Masoretic text wants בּאים, which is supplied
in the Qeri. Hengstenberg is of opinion that the expression was
abbreviated here, inasmuch as it has already occurred before, several
times, in its full form ([Jer 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027)
and [Jer 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)); but Jeremiah does not
usually abbreviate when he repeats an expression, and באים has perhaps
been dropped merely through an error in transcription. "The city shall
be built for Jahveh," so that it thenceforth belongs to Him, is
consecrated to Him. The extent of the new city is described as being
"from the tower of Hananeel to the gate of the corner." The tower of
Hananeel, according to [Neh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001) and
[Zac 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010), was situated on the
north-east corner of the city wall; the gate of the corner was at the
north-west corner of the city, to the north or north-west of the present
"Jaffa Gate;" see on [Kg2 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013); [Ch2
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#009); cf. [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010). This account thus briefly
describes the whole north side. [Jer
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039). The measuring-line (קוה as
found here, [Kg1 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#023) and [Zac
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016), is the original form, afterwards
shortened into קו, the Qeri) further goes out נגדּו, "before itself,"
i.e., straight out over the hill Gareb. על does not mean "away towards,
or on" (Hitzig); nor is the true reading עד, "as far as, even to," which
is met with in several codices: the correct rendering is "away over," so
that a part, at least, of the hill was included within the city bounds.
"And turns towards Goah." These two places last named are unknown. From
the context of the passage only this much is clear, that both of them
were situated on the west of the city; for the starting-point of the
line spoken of is in the north-west, and the valley of Ben-hinnom joins
in at the end of it, in the south, [Jer
31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040). גּרב means "itching," for גּרב
in [Lev 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#020); [Lev
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#022) means "the itch;" in Arabic also
"the leprosy." From this, many expositors infer that the hill Gareb was
the hill where lepers were obliged to dwell by themselves, outside the
city. This supposition is probable; there is no truth, however, in the
assumption of Schleussner, Krafft (Topogr. von Jerus. S. 158), Hitzig,
and Hengstenberg, that the hill Bezetha, included within the city bounds
by the third wall of Agrippa, is the one meant; for the line described
in [Jer 31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039) is not to be sought for
on the north side of the city. With Graf, we look for the hill Gareb on
the mount which lies westward from the valley of Ben-hinnom and at the
end of the valley of Rephaim, towards the north ([Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008); [Jos
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016)), so that it is likely we must
consider it to be identical with "the top of the mountain" mentioned in
these passages. This mountain is the rocky ridge which bounds the valley
of Ben-hinnom on the west, and stretches northwards, on the west side of
the valley of Gihon and the Lower Pool (Birket es Sultn), to near the
high road to Jaffa, where it turns off towards the west on the under
(i.e., south) side of the Upper Pool (Birket el Mamilla); see on [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008). It is not, as Thenius supposes
(Jerusalem before the Exile, an appendix to his commentary on the Books
of Kings), the bare rocky hill situated on the north, and overhanging
the Upper Pool; on this view, Goah could only be the steep descent from
the plateau into the valley of Kidron, opposite this hill, towards the
east. Regarding Goah, only this much can be said with certainty, that
the supposition, made by Vitringa and Hengstenberg, of a connection
between the name and Golgotha, is untenable; lexical considerations and
facts are all against it. Golgotha was situated in the north-west: Goah
must be sought for south-west from Jerusalem. The translation of the
Chaldee, "cattle-pond," is a mere inference from גּעה, "to bellow." But,
in spite of the uncertainty experienced in determining the positions of
the hill Gareb and Goah, this much is evident from the verse before us,
that the city, which is thus to be built anew, will extend to the west
beyond the space occupied by old Jerusalem, and include within it
districts or spots which lay outside old (i.e., pre-and post-exile)
Jerusalem, and which had been divided off from the city, as unclean
places.

[Jer 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040)

In [Jer 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040), without any change of
construction, the southern border is described. "The whole valley of the
corpses and of the ashes...shall be holy to Jahveh," i.e., be included
within the space occupied by the new city. By "the valley of the corpses
and of the ashes" expositors generally and rightly understand the valley
of Ben-hinnom (פּגרים are the carcases of animals that have been killed,
and of men who have been slain through some judgment of God and been
left unburied). Jeremiah applies this name to the valley, because, in
consequence of the pollution by Josiah of the place where the
abominations had been offered to Moloch ([Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)), it had become a sort of
slaughtering-place or tan-yard for the city. According to [Lev
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003), דּשׁן means the ashes of the
burnt-offerings consumed on the altar. According to [Lev
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#012) and [Lev
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004), these were to be carried from the
ash-heap near the altar, out of the city, to a clean place; but they
might also be considered as the gross deposit of the sacrifices, and
thus as unclean. Hence also it came to pass that all the sweepings of
the temple were probably brought to this place where the ashes were,
which thus became still more unclean. Instead of השּׁרמות, the Qeri
requires השּׁדמות , and, in fact, the former word may not be very
different from שׁדמות קדרון, [Kg2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004), whither Josiah caused all the
instruments used in idolatrous worship to be brought and burned. But it
is improbable that שׁרמות is a mere error in transcription for שׁדמות.
The former word is found nowhere else; not even does the verb שׁרם
occur. The latter noun, which is quite well known, could not readily be
written by mistake for the former; and even if such an error had been
committed, it would not have gained admission into all the MSS, so that
even the lxx should have that reading, and give the word as ̓Ασαρημώθ,
in Greek characters. We must, then, consider שׁרמות as the correct
reading, and derive the word from Arab. srm, or s\]rm, or s\[rm, "to cut
off, cut to pieces," in the sense of "ravines, hollows" (Arab. s\]arm),
or loca abscissa, places cut off or shut out from the holy city. "Unto
the brook of Kidron," into which the valley of Ben-hinnom opens towards
the east, "unto the corner of the horse-gate towards the east." The
horse-gate stood on the site of the modern "Dung-gate" (Ba=b el
Mogha=riebh), in the wall which ran along from the south-east end of
Zion to the western border of Ophel (see on [Neh
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#028)), so that, in this verse before
us, it is the south and south-eastern boundaries of the city that are
given; and only the length of the eastern side, which enclosed the
temple area, on to the north-eastern corner, has been left without
mention, because the valley of the Kidron here formed a strong boundary.

The extent of the new city, as here given, does not much surpass that of
old Jerusalem. Only in the west and south are tracts to be included
within the city, and such tracts, too, as had formerly been excluded
from the old city, as unclean places. Jeremiah accordingly announces,
not merely that there will be a considerable increase in the size of
Jerusalem, but that the whole city shall be holy to the Lord, the
unclean places in its vicinity shall disappear, and be transformed into
hallowed places of the new city. As being sacred to the Lord, the city
shall no more be destroyed.

From this description of Jerusalem which is to be built anew, so that
the whole city, including the unclean places now outside of it, shall be
holy, or a sanctuary of the Lord, it is very evident that this prophecy
does not refer to the rebuilding of Jerusalem after the exile, but,
under the figure of Jerusalem, as the centre of the kingdom of God under
the Old Testament, announces the erection of a more spiritual kingdom of
God in the Messianic age. The earthly Jerusalem was a holy city only in
so far as the sanctuary of the Lord, the temple, had been built in it.
Jeremiah makes no mention of the rebuilding of the temple, although he
had prophesied the destruction, not only of the city, but also of the
temple. But he represents the new city as being, in its whole extent,
the sanctuary of the Lord, which the temple only had been, in ancient
Jerusalem. Cf. as a substantial parallel, [Zac
14:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010). - The erection of Jerusalem
into a city, within whose walls there shall be nothing unholy, implies
the vanquishment of sin, from which all impurity proceeds; it is also
the ripe fruit of the forgiveness of sins, in which the new covenant,
which the Lord will make with His people in the days to come, consists
and culminates. This prophecy, then, reaches on to the time when the
kingdom of God shall have been perfected: it contains, under an old
Testament dress, the outlines of the image of the heavenly Jerusalem,
which the seer perceives at Patmos in its full glory. This image of the
new Jerusalem thus forms a very suitable conclusion to this prophecy
regarding the restoration of Israel, which, although it begins with the
deliverance of the covenant people from their exile, is yet thoroughly
Messianic. Though clothed in an Old Testament dress, it does not
implicitly declare that Israel shall be brought back to their native
land during the period extending from the time of Cyrus to that of
Christ; but, taking this interval as its stand-point, it combines in one
view both the deliverance from the exile and the redemption by the
Messiah, and not merely announces the formation of the new covenant in
its beginnings, when the Christian Church was founded, but at the same
time points to the completion of the kingdom of God under the new
covenant, in order to show the whole extent of the salvation which the
Lord will prepare for His people who return to Him. If these last verses
have not made the impression on Graf's mind, that they could well have
formed the original conclusion to the prophecy which precedes, the
reason lies simply in the theological inability of their expositor to
get to the bottom of the sacred writings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 32](jer032)

</div>
