<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer031)  [Next](jer033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 32:0</span></span>

The Purchase of a Field as a Symbol of the Restoration of Judah after
the Exile

This chapter, after an introduction ([Jer
32:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)) which accurately sets forth
the time and circumstances of the following event, contains, first of
all ([Jer 32:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006)), the account of the
purchase of a hereditary field at Anathoth, which Jeremiah, at the
divine command, executes in full legal form, together with a statement
of the meaning of this purchase; then ([Jer
32:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016)) a prayer of the prophet for
an explanation as to how the purchase of the field could be reconciled
with the delivering up of the people and the city of Jerusalem to the
Chaldeans; together with ([Jer
32:26-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026)) the Lord's reply, that He
shall certainly give up Jerusalem to the Chaldeans, because Israel and
Judah, by their sins and their idolatries, have roused His wrath; but
([Jer 32:36-44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036)) that He shall also
gather again His people out of all the lands whither they have been
scattered, and make an everlasting covenant with them, so that they
shall dwell safely and happily in the land in true fear of God.

[Jeremiah 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 32:1</span></span>

The time and the circumstances of the following message from God. - The
message came to Jeremiah in the tenth year of Zedekiah, i.e., in the
eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar (cf. [Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001) and [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012)), when the army of the king of
Babylon was besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah was kept in confinement in
the fore-court of the royal palace. These historical data are inserted
([Jer 32:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002)) in the form of
circumstantial clauses: 'ואז חיל וגו, "for at that time the army of the
king of Babylon was besieging Jerusalem." The siege had begun in the
ninth year of Zedekiah ([Jer 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#001);
[Jer 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004)), and was afterwards raised
for a short time, in consequence of the approach of an auxiliary corps
of Egyptians; but, as soon as these had been defeated, it was resumed
([Jer 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#005), [Jer
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#011)). Jeremiah was then kept
confined in the court of the prison of the royal palace (cf. [Neh
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025)), "where Zedekiah, king of Judah,
had imprisoned him, saying: Why dost thou prophesy, 'Thus saith the
Lord, Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of
Babylon, so that he shall take it; [Jer
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#004). And Zedekiah, the king of Judah,
shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall assuredly
be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and his mouth shall
speak with his mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes; [Jer
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#005). And he shall lead Zedekiah to
Babylon, and there shall he be until I visit him, saith the Lord. Though
ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not succeed?'" - We have already
found an utterance of like import in [Jer
21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001), but that is not here referred
to; for it was fulfilled at the beginning of the siege of Jerusalem, and
did not bring on Jeremiah the consequences mentioned here. From Jer 37
we learn that Jeremiah, during the siege of Jerusalem, on till the time
when it was raised through the approach of the Egyptian army, had not
been imprisoned, but went freely in and out among the people ([Jer
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#004).). Not till during the temporary
raising of the siege, when he wanted to go out of the city into the land
of Benjamin, was he seized and thrown into a dungeon, on the pretence
that he intended to go over to the Chaldeans. There he remained many
days, till King Zedekiah ordered him to be brought, and questioned him
privately as to the issue of the conflict; when Jeremiah replied, "Thou
shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon." On this
occasion Jeremiah complained to the king of his imprisonment, and
requested that he might not be sent back into the dungeon, where he must
soon perish; the king then ordered him ([Jer
37:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#011)) to be taken into the court
of the prison-house (חצר , [Jer
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#021)), where he remained in
confinement till the city was taken ([Jer
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#013), [Jer
38:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#028); [Jer
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#014)). The statement in our verses as
to the cause of this imprisonment does not contradict, but agrees with
the notice in Jer 37, as soon as we perceive that this account contains
merely a brief passing notice of the matter. The same holds true of the
utterance of the prophet in [Jer
32:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003). Jeremiah, even at the
beginning of the siege ([Jer 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003).),
had sent a message of similar import to the king, and repeated the same
afterwards: [Jer 34:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003); [Jer
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#017); [Jer
38:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017). The words of our verses are
taken from these repeated utterances; [Jer
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#004) agrees almost verbatim with [Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003); and the words, "there shall he
remain עד־פּקדי אתו, till I regard him with favour," are based upon the
clearer utterance as to the end of Zedekiah, [Jer
34:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#004). - The circumstances under
which Jeremiah received the following commission from the Lord are thus
exactly stated, in order to show how little prospect the present of the
kingdom of Judah offered for the future, which was portrayed by the
purchase of the field. Not only must the kingdom of Judah inevitably
succumb to the power of the Chaldeans, and its population go into exile,
but even Jeremiah is imprisoned, in so hopeless a condition, that he is
no longer sure of his life for a single day.

[Jeremiah 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 32:6</span></span>

The purchase of the field. - In [Jer
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006), the introduction, which has been
interrupted by long parentheses, is resumed with the words, "And
Jeremiah said," etc. The word of the Lord follows, [Jer
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#007). The Lord said to him: "Behold,
Hanamel, the son of Shallum, thine uncle, cometh to thee, saying, 'Buy
thee my field at Anathoth, for thou hast the redemption-right to
purchase it.' " According to a mode of construction common elsewhere,
דּדך might be taken as in apposition to חנמאל: "Hanamel, son of Shallum,
thine uncle." But [Jer 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#008), [Jer
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#009), in which Jeremiah calls Hanamel
בּן־דּדי, son of my uncle, show that דּדך is in apposition to שׁלּם:
"son of Shallum, \[who is\] thine uncle." The right of redemption
consisted in this, that if any one was forced through circumstances to
sell his landed property, the nearest blood-relation had the right, or
rather was obliged, to preserve the possession for the family, either
through pre-emption, or redemption from the stranger who had bought it
([Lev 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025)). For the land which God
had given to the tribes and families of Israel for a hereditary
possession could not be sold, so as to pass into the hands of strangers;
and for this reason, in the year of jubilee, what had bee sold since the
previous jubilee reverted, without payment of any kind, to the original
possessor or his heirs. (Cf. [Lev
25:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023), and Keil's Bibl. Archol. ii.
141, p. 208ff.)

[Jeremiah 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 32:8</span></span>

What had been announced to the prophet by God took place. Hanamel came
to him, and offered him his field for sale. From this Jeremiah perceived
that the proposed sale was the word of the Lord, i.e., that the matter
was appointed by the Lord. [Jer 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#009).
Jeremiah accordingly bought the field, and weighed out to Hanamel "seven
shekels and ten the silver" (הכּסף is definite, as being the amount of
money asked as price of purchase). But the form of expression is
remarkable: "seven shekels and ten" instead of "seventeen" (שׁבעה ועשׂרת
שׁקלי הכּסף). The Chaldee consequently has "seven manehs and ten shekels
of silver;" and J. D. Michaelis supposes that the seven shekels which
are first named, and are separated from the ten, were shekels of gold:
"seven shekels of gold, and seven shekels of silver." But both
assumptions are gratuitous, and perhaps only inferences, not merely from
the unusual separation of the numerals, but likewise from the fact that
seventeen silver shekels (less than two pounds sterling) was too small a
price for an arable field. The supposition of Hitzig has more in its
favour, that the mode of expression "seven shekels and ten (shekels) of
silver" was a law form. Some have sought to explain the smallness of the
price on the ground that the seller was compelled to part with his
property through poverty, and that the land had become depreciated in
consequence of the war. Both may be true; but, as Ngelsbach has already
remarked, neither explains the smallness of the price. For instances
have very properly been adduced from Roman history (Livy, xxvi. 11, and
Florus, ii. 6) which show that occupation of a country by an enemy did
not lessen the value of ground-property. It is rather to be taken into
consideration, that in the first place we do not know the real value of
arable land among the Hebrews; and secondly, the sale of portions of
land was, correctly speaking, only the sale of the harvests up till the
year of jubilee, for then the property returned to the former possessor
of his heirs. In the case of a sale, then, the nearer the jubilee-year,
the smaller must be the price of purchase in the alienation of the land.

[Jeremiah 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 32:10</span></span>

The purchase was concluded in full legal form. "I wrote it (the
necessary terms) in the letter (the usual letter of purchase), and
sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed out the money on the balance"
(it was then and still is the custom in the East to weigh money). חתם
means here, not to append a seal instead of subscribing the name, or for
attestation (cf. [Kg1 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#008); [Neh
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#001); 2), but to seal up, make sure by
sealing ([Isa 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011), etc.). For, from
[Jer 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#011), [Jer
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#012), we perceive that two copies of
the bill of purchase were prepared, one sealed up, and the other open;
so that, in case the open one were lost, or were accidentally or
designedly injured or defaced, a perfect original might still exist in
the sealed-up copy. Then "Jeremiah took the bill of purchase, the sealed
one," - the specification and the conditions - "and the open one." The
words המּצוה והחקּים are in apposition with 'את־ספר וגו. The Vulgate
renders stipulationes et rata; Jerome, stipulatione rata, which he
explains by stipulationibus et sponsionibus corroborata. מצוה, usually
"a command, order," is probably employed here in the general sense of
"specification," namely, the object and the price of purchase; חקּים,
"statutes," the conditions and stipulations of sale. The apposition has
the meaning, "containing the agreement and the conditions." Both copies
of this bill, the prophet-before the eyes of Hanamel, his cousin (דּדי,
either in the general sense of a near relation, since the relationship
has been stated exactly enough already, or בּן־ has been inadvertently
omitted), and before the eyes of, i.e., in the presence of "the
witnesses, who wrote in the letter of purchase," i.e., had subscribed it
as witnesses in attestation of the matter, and in the eyes of all the
Jews who were sitting in the court of the prison, and in whose presence
the transaction had been concluded - delivered up to his attendant
Baruch, son of Nerijah, the son of Mahsejah, with the words, [Jer
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#014) : "Thus saith Jahveh of hosts,
the God of Israel: Take these letters, this sealed-up letter of purchase
and this open letter, and put them into an earthen vessel, that they may
remain a long time there. [Jer 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#015).
For thus saith Jahveh of hosts, the God of Israel: Houses, and fields,
and vineyards shall still be bought in this land." - The second
utterance of the Lord ([Jer 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#015))
declares the reason why the letters were to be preserved in an earthen
vessel, in order to protect them from damp, decay, and destruction,
namely, because one could make use of them afterwards, when sale of
property would still be taking place. There is also implied the
intimation, that the present desolation of the land and the
transportation of its inhabitants will only last during their time; and
then the population of Judah will return, and enter again on the
possession of their land. The purchase of the field on the part of
Jeremiah had this meaning; and for the sake of this meaning it was
announced to him by God, and completed before witnesses, in the presence
of the Jews who happened to be in the court of the prison.

[Jeremiah 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 32:16</span></span>

The prayer of Jeremiah. - Although Jeremiah has declared, in the words
of the Lord, [Jer 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#014)., the meaning
of the purchase of the field to the witnesses who were present at the
transaction, yet the intimation that houses, fields, and vineyards would
once more be bought, seemed so improbable, in view of the impending
capture and destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, that he betakes
himself to the Lord in prayer, asking for further disclosures regarding
the future of the people and the land, less for his own sake than for
that of the people, who could with difficulty rise to such confidence of
faith. The prayer runs thus, [Jer
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#017) : "Ah, Lord Jahveh! behold, Thou
hast made the heaven and the earth by Thy great power and Thine
outstretched arm; to Thee nothing is impossible. [Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018). Thou showest mercy unto
thousands, and repayest the iniquity of fathers into the bosom of their
children after them, Thou great and mighty God, whose name is Jahveh of
hosts. [Jer 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019). Great in counsel
and mighty in deed, whose eyes are open to all the ways of the children
of men, to give unto every one according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his works: [Jer 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020).
Thou who didst signs and wonders in the land of Egypt until this day,
both in Israel and among \[other\] men, and madest for Thyself a name,
as it is this day; [Jer 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#021). And
didst lead Thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs and
wonders, and with strong hand and outstretched arm, and with great
terror, [Jer 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#022). And didst give
them this land, which Thou hast sworn to their fathers to give them, a
land flowing with milk and honey; [Jer
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#023). And they came and took
possession of it, but they hearkened not to Thy voice and walked not in
Thy law: all that Thou commandedst them to do they did not, therefore
didst Thou cause all this evil to come against them. [Jer
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024). Behold, the besiegers' mounds
are come to the city, to take it, and the city will be given into the
hands of the Chaldeans, who fight against it, because of the sword,
hunger, and pestilence; and what Thou didst speak is come to pass, and,
behold, Thou seest it. [Jer 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#025). Yet
Thou hast said to me, O Lord Jahveh, 'Buy thee the field for money, and
take witnesses,' while the city is being delivered into the hands of the
Chaldeans."

This prayer contains a laudation of the omnipotence of the Lord and the
justice of His dealing among all men ([Jer
32:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#017)), and especially in the
guidance of the people Israel ([Jer
32:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020)), with the view of connecting
with it the question, how the divine command to buy the field is to be
reconciled with the decreed deliverance of the city into the power of
the Chaldeans ([Jer 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024), [Jer
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#025)). [Jer
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#017). God proclaims His omnipotence
in the creation of the heaven and the earth, cf. [Jer
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#005). From this it is plain that
nothing is too wonderful for God, i.e., is impossible for Him, [Gen
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014). As Creator and Ruler of the
world, God exercises grace and justice. The words of [Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018) are a reminiscence and free
imitation of the passages [Exo 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005).
and [Jer 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#007), where the Lord so
depicts His dealings in the guidance of men. To "recompense iniquity
into the bosom" (see [Isa 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006), cf.
[Psa 79:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012)), i.e., to pour into the
bosom of the garment the reward for iniquity, so that it may be carried
away and borne; cf. [Rut 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#015); [Pro
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#023). "The great and mighty God," as
in [Deu 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017). On "Jahveh of hosts is
His name," cf. [Jer 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016); [Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035). שׁמו is to be explained thus:
"O Thou great God, whose name is Jahveh of hosts."

[Jeremiah 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 32:19</span></span>

God shows His greatness and might in the wisdom with which He regards
the doings of men, and in the power with which He executes His decrees,
so as to recompense to every one according to his deeds. On 19a cf. [Isa
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029); [Psa
66:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005). "To give to every one," etc., is
repeated, word for word, from [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010).

[Jeremiah 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 32:20</span></span>

The Lord has further shown this omnipotence and righteousness in His
guidance of Israel, in His leading them out of Egypt with wonders and
signs; cf. [Deu 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#022); [Deu
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#011). "Until this day" cannot mean
that the wonders continue in Egypt until this day - still less, that
their glorious remembrance continues till this day (Calvin, Rosenmller,
etc.). Just as little can we connect the words with what follows, "until
this day, in Egypt and among men," as Jerome supposed; although the idea
et in Israel et in cunctis mortalibus quotidie tua signa complentur is
in itself quite right. Logically considered, "until this day" belongs to
the verb. 'ושׂמתּ וגו, and the construction is pregnant, as in [Jer
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#007) : "Thou hast done wonders in
Egypt, and hast still been doing them until this day in Israel and among
other men." "Men," in contrast to "Israel," are mankind outside of
Israel - other men, the heathen; on the expression, cf. [Jdg
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007); [Isa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004); [Psa
73:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#005). "As at this day:" cf. [Jer
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#005); [Jer
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#018). Through signs and wonders the
Lord wrought, leading Israel out of Egypt, and into the land of Canaan,
which had been promised to their fathers. [Jer
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#021) is almost exactly the same as
[Deu 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008), cf. [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034). מורא refers to the terror spread
among the neighbouring nations, [Exo
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014)., by the wonders, especially the
slaying of the first-born among the Egyptians, [Exo
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030)., and the miracle at the Red
Sea. On "a land flowing with milk and honey," cf. [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008).

[Jeremiah 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 32:23</span></span>

These wonders of grace which the Lord wrought for His people, Israel
requited with base unthankfulness. When they had got into possession of
the land, they did not listen to the voice of their God, and did the
reverse of what He had commanded. (The Kethib בתרותך might be read as a
plural. But since תּורה in the plural is always written elsewhere תּורת
(cf. [Gen 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005); [Exo
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#028); [Exo
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#020); [Lev
26:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#046), etc.), and the omission of the
י in plural suffixes is unusual (cf. [Jer
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#022)), the word rather seems to have
been incorrectly written for בּתורתך (cf. [Jer
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#004); [Jer
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#010), [Jer
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023)), i.e., the w seems to have been
misplaced. Therefore the Lord brought on them this great calamity, the
Chaldean invasion (תּקרא for תּקרה); cf. [Jer
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022), [Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029). With this thought, the prophet
makes transition to the questions addressed to the Lord, into which the
prayer glides. In [Jer 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024), the
great calamity is more fully described. The ramparts of the besieging
enemy have come to the city (בּוא with acc.), to take it, and the city
is given (נתּנה, prophetic perfect) into the hands of the Chaldeans.
"Because of the sword;" i.e., the sword, famine, and pestilence (cf.
[Jer 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#016); [Jer
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#016), etc.) bring them into the power
of the enemy. "What Thou spakest," i.e., didst threaten through the
prophets, "is come to pass; and, behold, Thou seest it (viz., what has
happened), and yet (ואתּה adversative) Thou sayest to me, 'Buy the
field,' " etc. The last clause, 'והעיר נ, is a "circumstantial" one, and
is not a part of God's address, but is added by Jeremiah in order to
give greater prominence to the contrast between the actual state of
matters and the divine command regarding the purchase. The prayer
concludes with this, which is for men an inexplicable riddle, not (as
Ngelsbach thinks) for the purpose of leaving to the reader the solution
of the problem, after all aids have been offered him - for Jeremiah
would not need to direct his question to God for that purpose - but in
order to ask from God an explanation regarding the future. This
explanation immediately follows in the word of the Lord, which, from
[Jer 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026) onwards, is addressed to
the prophet.

[Jeremiah 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 32:26</span></span>

The answer of the Lord. - Behold, I am Jahveh, the God of all flesh; is
there anything impossible to me? [Jer
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#028). Therefore, thus saith Jahveh:
Behold, I give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the
hand of Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon, that he may take it. [Jer
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029). The Chaldeans that fight
against this city shall come, and shall set fire to this city, and burn
it and the houses on whose roofs you have burned incense to Baal and
poured out libations to other gods, to provoke me. [Jer
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030). For the children of Israel and
the children of Judah have done only what is evil in mine eyes from
their youth; for the children of Israel have only provoked me with the
work of their hands, saith Jahveh. [Jer
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031). For this city has been to me a
burden upon mine anger and upon my wrath from the day that it was built
till this day, that I might remove it from before my face;\] [Jer
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#032). Because of all the wickedness
of the children of Israel and the children of Judah, which they have
done, to provoke me-they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and
their prophets, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. [Jer
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#033). They turned to me the back and
not the face; and though they were constantly being taught, they would
not hear so as to receive instruction. [Jer
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034). And they placed their
abominations in the house which is called by my name, in order to defile
it; [Jer 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035). And built high places
to Baal in the valley of Ben-hinnom, to devote their sons and their
daughters of Moloch-which I did not command them, nor did it come into
my mind that they would do such abomination-that they might lead Judah
to sin. [Jer 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036). And now,
therefore, thus saith Jahveh, the God of Israel, concerning this city,
of which ye say, 'It shall be delivered into the hand of the king of
Babylon, through the sword, famine, and pestilence:' [Jer
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037). Behold, I shall gather them out
of all lands whither I have driven them in my wrath, and in mine anger,
and in great rage, and shall bring them back to this place, and make
them dwell safely. [Jer 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038). And
they shall be my people, and I will be their God. [Jer
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039). And I will give them one heart
and one way, to fear me always, for good to them and to their children
after them. [Jer 32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040). And I will
make with them an everlasting covenant, that I shall not turn aside form
doing them good; and I will put my fear in their heart, that they may
not depart from me. [Jer 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041). And I
shall rejoice over them, to do them good, and shall plant them in this
land, in truth, with my whole heart and my whole soul. [Jer
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#042). For thus saith Jahveh: 'Just as
I have brought all this great evil on this people, so shall I bring on
them all the good of which I speak regarding them.' [Jer
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#043). And fields shall be bought in
this land, of which ye say, It is a desolation, without man or beast,
and it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans. [Jer
32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044). They shall buy fields for
money, and write it in the letter, and seal it up, and take witnesses,
in the land of Benjamin, and in the places round Jerusalem, and in the
cities of Judah, and in the cities of the hill-country, and in the
cities of the plain, and in the cities of the south; for I shall turn
again their captivity, saith Jahveh."

The Lord replies to the three points touched on in the prayer of the
prophet. First, in [Jer 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#027), He
emphatically confirms the acknowledgment that to Him, as Creator of
heaven and earth, nothing is impossible ([Jer
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#017)), and at the same time points
out Himself as the God of all flesh, i.e., the God on whom depend the
life and death of all men. This description of God is copied from [Num
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022); [Num
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#016), where Jahveh is called "the God
of the spirits of all flesh." "All flesh" is the name given to humanity,
as being frail and perishing. - Then God reaffirms that Jerusalem will
be given into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar, and be burned by the Chaldeans
([Jer 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#028).), because Israel and
Judah have always roused His wrath by their idolatry and rebellion
against His commands ([Jer 32:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030)).
The substance of these verses has been often given before. On והצּיתוּ
cf. [Jer 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010); [Jer
37:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#008); on אשׁר cf. [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013) with [Jer
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009), [Jer
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018). The mention of the children of
Israel in connection with the children of Judah is not to be understood
as if the destruction of Jerusalem was partly owing to the former; but
it is here made, to signify that Judah can expect no better fate than
the Israelites, whose kingdom has been destroyed long before, and who
have for a long time now been driven into exile. היוּ, "they were only
doing," i.e., doing nothing else than what is displeasing to the Lord.
In [Jer 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030) "the children of Israel"
is a designation of the whole covenant people. The whole sentence has
reference to [Deu 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029). "The work of
their hands" is not the idols, but signifies the whole conduct and
actions of the people. [Jer 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031). The
difficult construction היתה־לּי...על־אפּי is most easily explained from
the employment of היה על with reference to the superincumbency of a duty
or burden lying on one. "This city became to me a burden on my wrath,"
an object which lay upon my wrath, called it forth. No other explanation
can be vindicated. The passages [Jer
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#003) and [Kg2
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003), [Kg2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#020), are of a different character,
and the meaning juxta, secundum for על, after [Kg2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#014) (Hitzig), is quite unsuitable.
The words, "from the day when it was built," are not to be referred to
the earliest founding of Jerusalem, but to that time when the Israelites
first built it; and even in reference to this, they are not to be
pressed, but to be viewed as a rhetorically strong expression for, "from
its earliest times." Even so early as David's time, opposition against
Jahveh showed itself in the conspiracy of Absalom; and towards the end
of Solomon's reign, idolatry had been introduced into Jerusalem, [Kg1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005). After the words "to remove it
from before my face," there follows once more, in [Jer
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#032), the reason of the rejection;
cf. [Jer 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012); [Jer
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#017), and for enumeration of the
several classes of the population, [Jer
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026); [Jer
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#025). The sins are once more
specified, [Jer 32:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#033); in [Jer
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#033), as a stiff-necked departure
from God, and in [Jer 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034). the
mention of the greatest abomination of idolatry, the setting up of idols
in the temple, and of the worship of Moloch. With 33a cf. [Jer
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027). The inf. abs. ולמּד stands with
special emphasis instead of the finite tense: though they were taught
from early morn, yet they were inattentive still. On this point cf. [Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013), [Jer
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025); [Jer
25:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#003). On לקחת מוּסר cf. [Jer
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#023); [Jer
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028). [Jer
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034), [Jer
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035) are almost identical with [Jer
7:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030). לעשׂות וגו does not belong to
the relative clause אשׁר לא וגו' (Nהgelsbach), but is parallel to להעביר
וגו', continuing the main clause: "that they should commit these
abominations, and thereby cause Judah to sin," i.e., bring them into sin
and guilt. החטי with א dropped; see [Jer
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#015). - After setting forth the sin
for which Judah had drawn on herself the judgment through the Chaldeans,
the Lord proclaims, [Jer 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036)., the
deliverance of the people from exile, and their restoration; thus He
answers the question which had been put to Him, [Jer
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#025). ועתּה, "but now," marks what
follows as the antithesis to what precedes. "Therefore, thus saith
Jahveh," in [Jer 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036), corresponds to
the same words in [Jer 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#028). Because
nothing is impossible to the Lord, He shall, as God of Israel, gather
again those who have been scattered through every land, and bring them
back into their own country. "To this city," - namely, of which ye
speak. The suffix of מקבּצם refers to העיר, whose inhabitants are meant.
Jerusalem, as the capital, represents the whole kingdom. "The dispersed"
are thus, in general, the inhabitants of Judah. Hence, too, from the
nature of the case, "this place" is the kingdom of Judah. On this point
cf. [Eze 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#011), [Eze
36:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#033); [Hos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011).

[Jeremiah 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jer 32:38</span></span>

[Jer 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038), [Jer
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039) are to be understood like [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033). They must in very deed become
the people of the Lord, for God gives them one heart and one way of
life, to fear Him always, i.e., through His Spirit He renews and
sanctifies them ([Jer 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033); [Jer
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007); [Jer
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)). "One heart and one way" that
they may all with one mind and in one way fear me, no longer wander
through many wicked ways ([Jer 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003);
[Isa 53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)). יראה is an infinitive, as
often in Deut., e.g., [Jer 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010), from
which the whole sentence has been derived, and [Jer
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024), to which the expression לטוב להם
points. The everlasting covenant which the Lord wishes to conclude with
them, i.e., the covenant-relationship which He desires to grant them,
is, in fact, the new covenant, [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033). Here, however, only the eternal
duration of it is made prominent, in order to comfort the pious in the
midst of their present sufferings. Consequently, only the idea of the
עולם is mainly set forth: "that I shall not turn away from them, to do
them good - no more withdraw from them my gracious benefits;" but the
uninterrupted bestowal of these implies also faithfulness to the Lord on
the part of the people. The Lord desires to establish His redeemed
people in this condition by putting His fear in their heart, namely,
through His Spirit; see [Jer 31:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033).
ושׂשׂתּי, "And I shall rejoice over them, by doing them good," as was
formerly the case ([Deu 28:63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#063)), and is
again to be, in time to come. בּאמת, in truth, properly, "in
faithfulness." This expression is strengthened by the addition, "with my
whole heart and my whole soul." - So much for the promise of restoration
and renewal of the covenant people. This promise is confirmed, [Jer
32:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#042), by the assurance that the
accomplishment of deliverance shall follow as certainly as the decree of
the calamity has done; the change is similar to that in [Jer
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038). Finally, [Jer
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#043), [Jer
32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044), there is the application made
of this to the purchase of the field which the prophet had been
commanded to fulfil; and the signification of this purchase is thus far
determined, that after the restoration of Judah to their own land,
fields shall once more be bought in full legal form: with this, the
discourse returns to its starting-point, and finishes. The article is
used generically in השׂדה; hence, on the repetition of the thought, [Jer
32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044), the plural שׂדות is employed
instead. The enumeration of the several regions of the kingdom, as in
[Jer 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026), is a rhetorical
individualization for strengthening the thought. The land of Benjamin is
here made prominent in relation to the field purchased by Jeremiah at
Anathoth in the land of Benjamin. The final sentence 'כּי אשׁיב also
serves for further proof. The Hiphil in this expression does not mean
the same as the usual אשׁוּב: "I turn the captivity," i.e., I change the
adversity into prosperity. השׁיב expresses restitutio in statum
incolumitatis seu integritatis more plainly than שׁוּב - not merely the
change of misfortune or misery; but it properly means, to lead back or
restore the captivity, i.e., to remove the condition of adversity by
restoration of previous prosperity. The expression is analogous to קומם
or בּנה חרבות, to build or raise ruins, [Isa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026); [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012); [Isa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004), and קומם שׁממות, to raise up
desolate places, [Isa 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004), which does
not mean to restore ruins or desolate places, but to build them up into
inhabitable places (cf. [Isa 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004)), to
remove ruins or desolations by the building and restoration of cities.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 33](jer033)

</div>
