<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer039)  [Next](jer041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 40:1</span></span>

The liberation of Jeremiah by Nebuzaradan, the chief of the body-guards.
- The superscription, "The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord,
after that Nebuzaradan, the captain of the body-guard, had let him go
from Ramah," does not seem to be appropriate; for in what follows there
is no word of God declared by Jeremiah, but first, [Jer
1:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002), we are told that Jeremiah was
liberated and given in charge to Gedaliah; then is told, Jer 40:7-41:18,
the story of the murder of Gedaliah the governor by Ishmael, together
with its consequences; and not till [Jer
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#007). is there communicated a word of
God, which Jeremiah uttered regarding the Jews who wished to flee to
Egypt, and had besought him for some revelation from God ([Jer
42:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001)). The heading of our verse
cannot refer to this prophecy, not merely for the reason that it is too
far removed, but still more because it has a historical notice
introducing it, [Jer 42:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001). Our
superscription rather refers to [Jer
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001); and דּבר here, as well as
there, means, not a single prophecy, but a number of prophecies. Just as
דבר in [Jer 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002) forms the heading for
all the prophecies uttered by Jeremiah from the thirteenth year of
Josiah till the destruction of Jerusalem and the carrying away of the
people in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, so the words 'הדּבר אשׁר וגו of
this verse form the superscription for the prophecies which Jeremiah
uttered after the destruction of Jerusalem, i.e., to the section formed
by Jer 40-45, although Jer 44; [Jer
45:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001) have headings of their own;
these, however, are subordinate to the heading of this chapter, in the
same way as the titles in [Jer 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001);
[Jer 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#011); [Jer
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001), etc. fall under the general
title given in [Jer 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002). - Regarding
Nebuzaradan and the discharge of Jeremiah at Ramah (i.e., er Rm, see on
[Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)), cf. the explanations
given on [Jer 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#013) (p. 335 of this
volume). In what follows, from בּקחתּו onwards, further details are
given regarding Jeremiah's liberation. "When he (Nebuzaradan) sent for
him, he (Jeremiah), bound with fetters, was among all the captives of
Jerusalem and Judah who were being carried away to Babylon." Those who
were to be carried away had been gathered together to Ramah, which lies
about five miles north from Jerusalem; thence they were to set out for
Babylon. אזקּים (= זקּים, [Job 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008);
[Isa 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014)), "fetters," - here,
according to [Jer 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#004), "manacles," by
which, perhaps, two or more prisoners were fastened to one another.

[Jer 40:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#002)

When Jeremiah had been brought, the commander of the guards said to him,
"The Lord thy God hath declared this evil against this place, and the
Lord hath brought it on (brought it to pass), and hath done as He spake;
for ye have sinned against the Lord, and have not hearkened to His
voice: thus hath this thing happened to you." The mode of expression is
that of Jeremiah; but Nebuzaradan may have expressed the thought, that
now there had been fulfilled what Jeremiah had predicted in the name of
God, because the people, by their rebellion, had broken the oath they
had sworn before their God (cf. [Eze
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#013).), and had thereby sinned
against Him. The article before דּבר, required by the Qeri, is
unnecessary; cf. Ewald, 293, a; Gesenius, 112, 2, a.

[Jer 40:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#004)

Nebuzaradan then declared him free: "And now, behold, I free thee this
day from the shackles on thine hands. If it please thee to come with me
to Babylon, then come, and I will set mine eye upon thee (i.e., take
thee under my protection, cf. [Jer
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#012)). But if it please thee not to
come with me to Babylon, then let it be so. See, the whole country is
before thee (cf. [Gen 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#009); [Gen
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#005), etc.); whithersoever it pleases
thee, and seems right to thee to go, go." [Jer
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#005). And because Jeremiah had not yet
returned, he said, "Go back to Gedaliah,...whom the king of Babylon hath
set over the cities of Judah, and remain with him among the people; or
go wherever it seemeth right to thee to go." And the commander of the
guard gave him what provisions he required and a present, and sent him
away; thereafter Jeremiah went to Gedaliah to Mizpah, and remained there
among the people who had been left behind in the land ([Jer
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#006)). The words ועדנּוּ were
certainly misunderstood by the old translators, who made various
conjectures as to their meaning; even yet, Dahler, Movers, Graf, and
Nהgelsbach are of opinion that "it is impossible to understand" this
sentence, and that the text is plainly corrupt. Luther renders: "for no
one will any longer return thither." Hitzig considers this translation
substantially correct, and only requiring to be a little more exactly
rendered: "but there, no one returns home again." Apart, however, from
the consideration that on this view עדנּוּ, which stands at the head of
the sentence, does not get full justice paid to it, the thought does not
accord with what precedes, and the reference of the suffix to the
indefinite "person" or "one" is extremely forced. According to what goes
before, in which Nebuzaradan gives the prophet full liberty of choosing
whether he would go with him to Babylon or remain in the country, in
whatever part he likes, and from the following advice which he gives
him, "Go, or return, to Gedaliah," the words עדנּוּ לא ישׁוּב, on
account of the third person (ישׁוּב), cannot certainly be an address of
the chief captain to Jeremiah, and as little can they contain a remark
about going to Babylon. The words are evidently, both as to their form
and their contents, a circumstantial clause, containing a statement
regarding the relation of Jeremiah to the proposal of the chief captain
(and this is the view taken long ago by Kimchi), i.e., a parenthetical
remark of the narrator, according to which Nebuzaradan demands that he
shall remain with Gedaliah, in the sense, "and yet he was not going
back," or, still better, on account of the imperfect ישׁוּב, "because he
was still unwilling to go back," namely, to this or that place
indefinitely; then Nebuzaradan further said, "Return, then, to
Gedaliah." If we supply ויּאמר before 'ושׁוּבה וגו, with which
Nebuzaradan brings the matter to a close, the meaning is quite clear. It
is evident from [Jer 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#004) that
Nebuzaradan stopped a little in order to let Jeremiah decide; but since
the prophet did not return, i.e., neither decided in the one way nor the
other, he adds 'ושׁוּבה וגו, and thereby puts an end to the indecision.
ארחה means a portion of food, or victuals; cf. [Jer
52:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#034) and [Pro
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#017). Mizpah, where Gedaliah had
taken up his position, is the Mizpah of the tribe of Benjamin, where
Samuel judged the people and chose Saul to be king ([Sa1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015)., [Jer
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#017)); doubtless the modern Neby
Samwil, five miles north-west from Jerusalem, a short distance
south-west from Ramah; see on [Jos
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026).

[Jeremiah 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 40:7</span></span>

Return of those who had been dispersed: they gather round Gedaliah. -
Whilst the country and its capital were being conquered, many of the men
of war had dispersed here and there through the land, and fled for
refuge to regions difficult of access, where they could not be reached
by the Chaldeans; others had even escaped into the territory of the
Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites. When these heard that now, after the
destruction of Jerusalem and the carrying away of the captives, the king
of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah as governor over the few people who
had been left behind in the country, they returned from their several
places of refuge, and came to Mizpah to Gedaliah, who promised them
protection and safety, on condition that they would recognise the
authority of the king of Babylon and peaceably cultivate the soil. שׂרי
חילים, "leaders of the forces, captains." בּשׂדה, "in the country," as
opposed to the city; שׂדה, "fields," as in [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003). אנשׁיהם, "their men," the troops
under the captains. כּי הפקיד אתּו, "that he had committed to his
oversight and care." "Men," viz., old, weak, infirm men; "women and
children," whose husbands and fathers had perished; "and some of the
poor of the country, of those who had not been carried captive to
Babylon" (מן partitive), i.e., the poor and mean people whom the
Chaldeans had left behind in the country ([Jer
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#010)).

[Jer 40:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#008)

These captains came to Mizpah, namely (ו explicative), Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah (according to [Jer 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001),
the grandson of Elishama, and of royal blood), Johanan and Jonathan the
sons of Kareah (cf. [Jer 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#013) and
[Jer 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#011), [Jer
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#016); [Jer
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001).; the name Jonathan is omitted in
[Kg2 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#023); see on this passage),
Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite
(from Netophah in the vicinity of Bethlehem, [Ch1
2:54](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#054); [Ezr
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#022)), Jezaniah (יזניהוּ; but in [Kg2
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#023) יאזניהוּ), the Maachathite, from
Maachah, a district in Syria near Hermon, [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014); [Jos
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#005). These men, who had borne arms
against the Chaldeans, were concerned for their safety when they
returned into the country. Gedaliah sware to them, i.e., promised them
on oath, "Be not afraid to serve the Chaldeans; remain in the country
and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you. And as for
me, behold, I shall remain at Mizpah to stand before the Chaldeans who
will come to us," i.e., as lieutenant of the king of Babylon, to
represent you before the Chaldean officers and armies, to maintain your
rights and interests, so that you may be able to settle down where you
choose, without anxiety, and cultivate the land. "And as for yourselves,
father ye wine and fruit (קיץ, see on [Sa2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)) and oil, and put them in your
vessels." אסף is used of the ingathering of the fruits of the ground. It
was during the fifth or sixth month ([Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008)), the end of July or beginning of
August, that grapes, figs, and olives became ripe; and these had grown
so plentifully in comparison with the small number of those who had
returned, that they could gather sufficient for their wants. "And dwell
in your cities, cities which ye seize," i.e., which you shall take
possession of. [Jer 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#011). Those Jews
also who had fled, during the war, into the neighbouring countries of
Moab, Ammon, Edom, etc., returned to Judah when they learned that the
king of Babylon had left a remnant, and placed Gedaliah over them; they
came to Mizpah and Gedaliah, who appointed them places to dwell in, and
they gathered much wine and fruit, i.e., made a rich vintage and fruit
harvest. נתן שׁארית, "to give a remainder," as it were to leave a
remainder ('הותיר שׁ'( redniamer, [Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007), or 'שׂוּם שׁ, [Gen
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#007)).

[Jeremiah 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 40:13</span></span>

Gedaliah is forewarned of Ishmael's intention to murder him. - After the
return of those who had taken refuge in Moab, etc., Johanan the son of
Kareah, together with the rest of the captains who were scattered here
and there through the country, came to Gedaliah at Mizpah, to say to
him: "Dost thou know indeed that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath
sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to take thy life?" The words "that
were in the country" are neither a gloss, nor a thoughtless repetition
by some scribe from [Jer 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#007) (as
Hitzig and Graf suppose), but they are repeated for the purpose of
distinguishing plainly between the captains with their men from the Jews
who had returned out of Moab, Ammon, and Edom. הכּות, "to strike the
soul, life" = to kill; cf. [Gen 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#021);
[Deu 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#006). What induced the king of
Ammon to think of assassination - whether it was personal hostility
towards Gedaliah, or the hope of destroying the only remaining support
of the Jews, and thereby perhaps putting himself in possession of the
country, - cannot be determined. That he employed Ishmael for the
accomplishment of his purpose, may have been owing to the fact that this
man had a personal envy of Gedaliah; for Ishmael, being sprung from the
royal family ([Jer 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001)), probably
could not endure being subordinate to Gedaliah. - The plot had become
known, and Gedaliah was secretly informed of it by Johanan; but the
former did not believe the rumour. Johanan then secretly offered to slay
Ishmael, taking care that no one should know who did it, and urged
compliance in the following terms: "Why should he slay thee, and all the
Jews who have gathered themselves round thee be scattered, and the
remnant of Judah perish?" Johanan thus called his attention to the evil
consequences which would result to the remnant left in the land were he
killed; but Gedaliah replied, "Do not this thing, for thou speakest a
lie against Ishmael." The Qeri needlessly changes אל־תּעשׂ into
אל־תּעשׂה; cf. [Jer 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#012).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 41](jer041)

</div>
