<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job002)  [Next](job004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

[Job 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 3:1</span></span>

Job's first longer utterance now commences, by which he involved himself
in the conflict, which is his seventh temptation or trial.

1, 2 After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed his day. And Job spake,
and said.

[Job 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#002)

[Job 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#002) consists only of three words,
which are separated by Rebia; and ויאמר, although Milel, is vocalized
ויּאמר, because the usual form ויּאמר, which always immediately precedes
direct narration, is not well suited to close the verse. ענה, signifies
to begin to speak from some previous incitement, as the New Testament
ἀποκρίνεσθαι (not always = השׁיב) is also sometimes used.

(Note: Vid., on this use of ἀποκρίνεσθαι, Quaestio xxi. of the
Amphilochia of Photius in Ang. Maji Collectio, i. 229f.)

The following utterance of Job, with which the poetic accentuation
begins, is analysed by modern critics as follows: [Job
3:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003), [Job
3:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#011), [Job
3:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020). Schlottmann calls it three
strophes, Hahn three parts, in the first of which delirious cursing of
life is expressed; in the second, eager longing for death; in the third,
reproachful inquiry after the end of such a life of suffering. In
reality they are not strophes. Nevertheless Ebrard is wrong when he
maintains that, in general, strophe-structure is as little to be found
in the book of Job as in Wallenstein's Monologue. The poetical part of
the book of Job is throughout strophic, so far as the nature of the
drama admits it. So also even this first speech. Stickel has correctly
traced out its divisions; but accidentally, for he has reckoned
according to the Masoretic verses. That this is false, he is now fully
aware; also Ewald, in his Essay on Strophes in the Book of Job, is
almost misled into this groundless reckoning of the strophes according
to the Masoretic verses (Jahrb. iii. X. 118, Anm. 3). The strophe-schema
of the following speech is as follows: 8. 10. 6. 8. 6. 8. 6. The
translation will show how unmistakeably it may be known. In the
translation we have followed the complete lines of the original, and
their rhythm: the iambic pentameter into which Ebrard, and still earlier
Hosse (1849), have translated, disguises the oriental Hebrew poetry of
the book with its variegated richness of form in a western uniform, the
monotonous impression of which is not, as elsewhere, counter-balanced in
the book of Job by the change of external action. After the translation
we give the grammatical explanation of each strophe; and at the
conclusion of the speech thus translated and explained, its higher
exposition, i.e., its artistic importance in the connection of the
drama, and its theological importance in relation to the Old and New
Testament religion and religious life.

[Job 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 3:3</span></span>

3 Perish the day wherein I was born.

And the night which said, A man-child is conceived!

4 Let that day become darkness;

Let not Eloah ask after it from above,

And let not the light shine on it.

5 May darkness and the shadow of death purchase it back;

Let a cloud lie upon it;

May that which obscures the day terrify it.

The curse is against the day of his birth and the night of his
conception as recurring yearly, not against the actual first day
(Schlottm.), to which the imprecations which follow are not pertinent.
Job wishes his birth-day may become dies ater, swallowed up by darkness
as into nothing. The elliptical relative clauses, [Job
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003) (Ges. 123, 3; cf. 127, 4, c),
become clear from the translation. Transl. the night (לילה with parag.
He is masc.) which said, not: in which they said; the night alone was
witness of this beginning of the development of a man-child, and made
report of it to the High One, to whom it is subordinate. Day emerges
from the darkness as Eloah from above (as [Job
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#002), [Job
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#028)), i.e., He who reigns over the
changes here below, asks after it; interests Himself in His own (דּרשׁ).
Job wishes his birth-day may not rejoice in this. The relations of this
his birth-day are darkness and the shadow of death. These are to redeem
it, as, according to the right of kinsmen, family property is redeemed
when it has got into a stranger's hands. This is the meaning of גּאל
(lxx ἐκλάβοι), not = גּעל, inquinent (Targ.). עננה is collective, as
נהרה, mass of cloud. Instead of כּמרירי (the Caph of which seems pointed
as praepos), we must read with Ewald (157, a), Olshausen, (187, b), and
others, כּמרירי, after the form חכליל, darkness, dark flashing (vid., on
[Psa 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008)), שׁפריר, tapestry, unless
we are willing to accept a form of noun without example elsewhere. The
word signifies an obscuring, from כּמר, to glow with heat, because the
greater the glow the deeper the blackness it leaves behind. All that
ever obscures a day is to overtake and render terrible that day.

(Note: We may compare here, and further, on, Constance's outburst of
despair in King John (3:1 and 3:4). Shakespeare, like Goethe, enriches
himself from the book of Job.)

[Job 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 3:6</span></span>

6 That night! let darkness seize upon it;

Let it not rejoice among the days of the year;

Let it not come into the number of the month.

7 Lo! let that night become barren;

Let no sound of gladness come to it.

8 Let those who curse the day curse it,

Who are skilled in stirring up leviathan.

9 Let the stars of its early twilight be darkened;

Let it long for light and there be none;

And let it not refresh itself with eyelids of the dawn.

Darkness is so to seize it, and so completely swallow it up, that it
shall not be possible for it to pass into the light of day. It is not to
become a day, to be reckoned as belonging to the days of the year and
rejoice in the light thereof. יחדּ, for יחדּ, fut. Kal from חדה ([Exo
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#009)), with Dagesh lene retained, and
a helping Pathach (vid., Ges. 75, rem. 3, d); the reverse of the passage
[Gen 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006), where יחד, from יחד, uniat
se, is found. It is to become barren, גּלמוּד, so that no human being
shall ever be conceived and born, and greeted joyfully in it.

(Note: Fries understands רננה, song of the spheres (concentum coeli,
[Job 38:37](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#037), Vulg.); but this Hellenic
conception is without support in holy Scripture.)

"Those who curse days" are magicians who know how to change days into
dies infausti by their incantations. According to vulgar superstition,
from which the imagery of [Job 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#008) is
borrowed, there was a special art of exciting the dragon, which is the
enemy of sun and moon, against them both, so that, by its devouring
them, total darkness prevails. The dragon is called in Hindu râhu; the
Chinese, and also the natives of Algeria, even at the present day make a
wild tumult with drums and copper vessels when an eclipse of the sun or
moon occurs, until the dragon will release his prey.

(Note: On the dragon rhu, that swallows up sun and moon, vid., Pott, in
the Hallische Lit. Zeitschr. 1849, No. 199; on the custom of the
Chinese, Kuffer, Das chinesische Volk, S. 123. A similar custom among
the natives of Algeria I have read of in a newspaper (1856). Moreover,
the clouds which conceal the sky the Indians represent as a serpent. It
is ahi, the cloud-serpent, which Indra chases away when he divides the
clouds with his lightning. Vid., Westergaard in Weber's Indischer
Zeitschr. 1855, S. 417.)

Job wishes that this monster may swallow up the sun of his birth-day. If
the night in which he was conceived or born is to become day, then let
the stars of its twilight (i.e., the stars which, as messengers of the
morning, twinkle through the twilight of dawn) become dark. It is to
remain for ever dark, never behold with delight the eyelids of the dawn.
בּ ראה, to regale one's self with the sight of anything, refresh one's
self. When the first rays of morning shoot up in the eastern sky, then
the dawn raises its eyelids; they are in Sophocles's Antigone, 103,
χρυσέης ἡμέρας βλέφαρον, the eyelid of the golden day, and therefore of
the sun, the great eye.

[Job 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 3:10</span></span>

10 Because it did not close the doors of my mother's womb,

Nor hid sorrow from my eyes.

11 Why did I not die from the womb,

Come forth from the womb and expire?

12 Why have the knees welcomed me?

And why the breasts, that I should suck?

The whole strophe contains strong reason for his cursing the night of
his conception or birth. It should rather have closed (i.e., make the
womb barren, to be explained according to [Sa1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#005); [Gen
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002)) the doors of his womb (i.e., the
womb that conceived concepit him), and so have withdrawn the sorrow he
now experiences from his unborn eyes (on the extended force of the
negative, vid., Ges. 152, 3). Then why, i.e., to what purpose worth the
labour, is he then conceived and born? The four questions, [Job
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#011)., form a climax: he follows the
course of his life from its commencement in embryo (מרהם, to be
explained according to [Jer 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#017), and
[Job 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#018), where, however, it is מן
local, not as here, temporal) to the birth, and from the joy of his
father who took the new-born child upon his knees (comp. [Gen
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#023)) to the first development of the
infant, and he curses this growing life in its four phases (Arnh.,
Schlottm.). Observe the consecutio temp. The fut. אמוּת has the
signification moriebar, because taken from the thought of the first
period of his conception and birth; so also ואגוע, governed by the
preceding perf., the signification et exspirabam (Ges. 127, 4, c). Just
so אינק, but modal, ut sugerem ea.

[Job 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 3:13</span></span>

13 So should I now have lain and had quiet,

I should have slept, then it would have been well with me,

14 With kings and councillors of the earth,

Who built ruins for themselves,

15 Or with princes possessing gold,

Who filled their houses with silver:

16 Or like a hidden untimely birth I had not been,

And as children that have never seen the light.

The perf. and interchanging fut. have the signification of oriental
imperfecta conjunctivi, according to Ges. 126, 5; עתּה כּי is the usual
expression after hypothetical clauses, and takes the perf. if the
preceding clause specifies a condition which has not occurred in the
past ([Gen 31:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042); [Gen
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#010); [Num
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#029), [Num
22:33](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#033); [Sa1
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#030)), the fut. if a condition is not
existing in the present ([Job 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#003);
[Job 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006); [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019)). It is not to be translated:
for then; כי rather commences the clause following: so I should now,
indeed then I should. Ruins, הרבות, are uninhabited desolate buildings,
elsewhere such as have become, here such as are from the first intended
to remain, uninhabited and desolate, consequently sepulchres,
mausoleums; probably, since the book has Egyptian allusions, in other
passages also, a play upon the pyramids, in whose name (III-XPAM,
according to Coptic glossaries) III is the Egyptian article (vid.,
Bunsen, Aeg. ii. 361); Arab. without the art. hirâm or ahrâm (vid.,
Abdollatf, ed. de Sacy, p. 293, s.).

(Note: We think that חרבות sounds rather like חרמות, the name of the
pyramids, as the Arabic haram (instead of hharam), derived from XPAM,
recalls harmân (e.g., beith harmân, a house in ruins), the synonym of
hhardân (חרבאן).)

Also Renan: Qui se btissent des mausoles. Bttch. de inferis, 298 (who,
however, prefers to read רחבות, wide streets), rightly directs attention
to the difference between החרבות בנה (to rebuild the ruins) and לו בנה ח
(to build ruins for one's self). With או like things are then ranged
after one another. Builders of the pyramids, millionaires, abortions
(vid., [Ecc 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003)), and the still-born:
all these are removed from the sufferings of this life in their quiet of
the grave, be their grave a "ruin" gazed upon by their descendants, or a
hole dug out in the earth, and again filled in as it was before.

[Job 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 3:17</span></span>

17 There the wicked cease from troubling,

And the weary are at rest.

18 The captives dwell together in tranquillity;

They hear not the voice of the taskmaster.

19 The small and great, - they are alike there;

And the servant is free from his lord.

There, i.e., in the grave, all enjoy the rest they could not find here:
the troublers and the troubled ones alike. רגן corresponds to the
radical idea of looseness, broken in pieces, want of restraint,
therefore of Turba (comp. [Isa 57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020);
[Jer 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#007)), contained etymologically in
רשׁע. The Pilel שׁאנן vid., Ges. 55, 2) signifies perfect freedom from
care. In הוּא שׁם, הוּא is more than the sign of the copula (Hirz.,
Hahn, Schlottm.); the rendering of the lxx, Vulg., and Luther., ibi
sunt, is too feeble. As it is said of God, [Isa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004); [Isa
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013); [Psa
102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028), that He is הוּא, i.e., He who
is always the same, ὁ αὐτός; so here, הוּא, used purposely instead of
המּה, signifies that great and small are like one another in the grave:
all distinction has ceased, it has sunk to the equality of their present
lot. Correctly Ewald: Great and small are there the same. יחד, [Job
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#018), refers to this destiny which
brings them together.

[Job 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 3:20</span></span>

20 Why is light given to the wretched,

And life to the sorrowful in soul?

21 Who wait for death, and he comes not,

Who dig after him more than for treasure,

22 Who rejoice with exceeding joy,

Who are enraptured, when they can find the grave?

23 To the man whose way is hidden,

And whom Eloah hath hedged round?

The descriptive partt. [Job 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#021), [Job
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#022), are continued in predicative
clauses, which are virtually relative clauses; [Job
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#021) has the fut. consec., since the
sufferers are regarded as now at least dead; [Job
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#022) the simple fut., since their
longing for the grave is placed before the eye (on this transition from
the part. to the verb. fin., vid., Ges. 134, rem. (2). Schlottm. and
Hahn wrongly translate: who would dig (instead of do dig) for him more
than for treasure. אלי־גיל (with poetical אלי instead of אל) might
signify, accompanied by rejoicing, i.e., the cry and gesture of joy. The
translation usque ad exultationem, is however, more appropriate here as
well as in [Hos 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001). With [Job
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#023) Job refers to himself: he is the
man whose way of suffering is mysterious and prospectless, and whom God
has penned in on all sides (a fig. like [Job
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008); comp. [Lam
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005)). סכך, sepire, above, [Job
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010), to hedge round for protection,
here: forcibly straiten.

[Job 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 3:24</span></span>

24 For instead of my food my sighing cometh,

And my roarings pour themselves forth as water.

25 For I fear something terrible, and it cometh upon me,

And that before which I shudder cometh to me.

26 I dwelt not in security, nor rested, nor refreshed myself:

Then trouble cometh.

That לפני may pass over from the local signification to the
substitutionary, like the Lat. pro (e.g., pro praemio est), is seen from
[Job 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019) (comp. [Sa1
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#016)): the parallelism, which is less
favourable to the interpretation, before my bread (Hahn, Schlottm., and
others), favours the signification pro here. The fut. consec. ויּתּכוּ
(Kal of נתך) is to be translated, according to Ges. 129, 3, a, se
effundunt (not effuderunt): it denotes, by close connection with the
preceding, that which has hitherto happened. Just so v. 25a: I fear
something terrible; forthwith it comes over me (this terrible, most
dreadful thing). אתה is conjugated by the ה passing into the original א
of the root (vid., Ges. 74, rem. 4). And just so the conclusion: then
also forthwith רגן (i.e., suffering which disorders, rages and ransacks
furiously) comes again. Schlottm. translates tamely and wrongly: then
comes - oppression. Hahn, better: Nevertheless fresh trouble always
comes; but the "nevertheless" is incorrect, for the fut. consec.
indicates a close connection, not contrast. The praett., [Job
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#026), give the details of the
principal fact, which follows in the fut. consec.: only a short
cessation, which is no real cessation; then the suffering rages afresh.

Why - one is inclined to ask respecting this first speech of Job, which
gives rise to the following controversy - why does the writer allow Job,
who but a short time before, in opposition to his wife, has manifested
such wise submission to God's dealings, all at once to break forth in
such despair? Does it not seem as though the assertion of Satan were
about to be confirmed? Much depends upon one's forming a correct and
just judgment respecting the state of mind from which this first speech
proceeds. To this purpose, consider (1) That the speech contains no
trace of what the writer means by את־האלהים ברך: Job nowhere says that
he will have nothing more to do with God; he does not renounce his
former faithfulness: (2) That, however, in the mind of the writer, as
may be gathered from [Job 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010), this
speech is to be regarded as the beginning of Job's sinning. If a man, on
account of his sufferings, wishes to die early, or not to have been born
at all, he has lost his confidence that God, even in the severest
suffering, designs his highest good; and this want of confidence is sin.

There is, however, a great difference between a man who has in general
no trust in God, and in whom suffering only makes this manifest in a
terrible manner, and the man with whom trust in God is a habit of his
soul, and is only momentarily repressed, and, as it were, paralysed.
Such interruption of the habitual state may result from the first
pressure of unaccustomed suffering; it may then seem as though trust in
God were overwhelmed, whereas it has only given way to rally itself
again. It is, however, not the greatness of the affliction in itself
which shakes his sincere trust in God, but a change of disposition on
the part of God which seems to be at work in the affliction. The
sufferer considers himself as forgotten, forsaken, and rejected of God,
as many passages in the Psalms and Lamentations show: therefore he sinks
into despair: and in this despair expression is given to the profound
truth (although with regard to the individual it is a sinful weakness),
that it is better never to have been born, or to be annihilated, than to
be rejected of God (comp. [Mat 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024),
καλὸν ἦ αὐτῷ ει ̓ οὐκ ἐγεννήθη ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἐκεῖνος). In such a condition
of spiritual, and, as we know from the prologue, of Satanic temptation
([Luk 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031); [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)), is Job. He does not despair
when he contemplates his affliction, but when he looks at God through
it, who, as though He were become his enemy, has surrounded him with
this affliction as with a rampart. He calls himself a man whose way is
hidden, as Zion laments, [Isa 40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027),
"My way is hidden from Jehovah;" a man whom Eloah has hedged round, as
Jeremiah laments over the ruins of Jerusalem, [Lam
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001) (in some measure a comment on
[Job 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#023)), "I am the man who has seen
affliction by the rod of His wrath ... . He has hedged me round that I
cannot get out, and made my chain heavy."

In this condition of entire deprivation of every taste of divine
goodness, Job breaks forth in curses. He has lost wealth and children,
and has praised God; he has even begun to bear an incurable disease with
submission to the providence of God. Now, however, when not only the
affliction, but God himself, seems to him to be hostile (nunc autem
occultato patre, as Brentius expresses it),

(Note: Fries, in his discussion of this portion of the book of Job,
Jahrbb. fr Deutsche Theologie, 1859, S. 790ff., is quite right that the
real affliction of Job consists in this, that the inward feeling of
being forsaken of God, which was hitherto strange to him, is come upon
him. But the remark directed against me, that the feeling of being
forsaken of God does not always stand in connection with other
affliction, but may come on the favoured of God even in the midst of
uninterrupted outward prosperity, does not concern me, since it is
manifestly by the dispensations which deprive him of all his
possessions, and at last affect him corporeally and individually, that
Job is led to regard himself as one forsaken of God, and still more than
that, one hated by God; and since, on the other hand also, this view of
the tempted does not appear to be absolutely subjective, God has really
withdrawn from Job the external proof, and at the same time the feeling,
of His abiding love, in order to try the fidelity of His servant's love,
and prove its absoluteness.)

we hear from his mouth neither words of praise (the highest excellence
in affliction) nor words of resignation (duty in affliction), but words
of despair: his trust in God is not destroyed, but overcast by thick
clouds of melancholy and doubt.

It is indeed inconceivable that a New Testament believer, even under the
strongest temptation, should utter such imprecations, or especially such
a question of doubt as in [Job 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020) :
Wherefore is light given to the miserable? But that an Old Testament
believer might very easily become involved in such conflicts of belief,
may be accounted for by the absence of any express divine revelation to
carry his mind beyond the bounds of the present. Concerning the future
at the period when the book of Job was composed, and the hero of the
book lived, there were longings, inferences, and forebodings of the
soul; but there was no clear, consoling word of God on which to rely, -
no θεῖος λόγος which, to speak as Plato (Phaedo, p. 85, D), could serve
as a rescuing plank in the shipwreck of this life. Therefore the
πανταχοῦ θρυλλούμενον extends through all the glory and joy of the Greek
life from the very beginning throughout. The best thing is never to have
been born; the second best, as soon as possible thereafter, to die. The
truth, that the suffering of this present time is not worthy of the
glory which shall be revealed in us, was still silent. The proper
disposition of mind, under such veiling of the future, was then indeed
more absolute, as faith committed itself blindfold to the guidance of
God. But how near at hand was the temptation to regard a troublous life
as an indication of the divine anger, and doubtingly to ask, Why God
should send the light of life to such! They knew not that the present
lot of man forms but the one half of his history: they saw only in the
one scale misery and wrath, and not in the other the heaven of love and
blessedness to be revealed hereafter, by which these are outweighed;
they longed for a present solution of the mystery of life, because they
knew nothing of the possibility of a future solution. Thus it is to be
explained, that not only Job in this poem, but also Jeremiah in the book
of his prophecy, [Job 20:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014), curses
the day of his birth. He curses the man who brought his father the
joyous tidings of the birth of a son, and wishes him the fate of Sodom
and Gomorrha. He wishes for himself that his mother might have been his
grave, and asks, like Job, "Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to
see labour and sorrow, and that my days should be consumed in shame?"
Hitzig remarks on this, that it may be inferred from the contents and
form of this passage, there was a certain brief disturbance of spirit, a
result of the general indescribable distress of the troublous last days
of Zedekiah, to which the spirit of the prophet also succumbed. And it
is certainly a kind of delirium in which Jeremiah so speaks, but there
is no physical disorder of mind with it: the understanding of the
prophet is so slightly and only momentarily disturbed, that he has the
rather gained power over his faith, and is himself become one of its
disturbing forces.

Without applying to this lyric piece either the standard of pedantic
moralizing, or of minute criticism as poetry, the intense melancholy of
this extremely plaintive prophet may have proceeded from the following
reasoning: After I have lived ten long years of fidelity and sacrifice
to my prophetic calling, I see that it has totally failed in its aim:
all my hopes are blighted; all my exhortations to repentance, and my
prayers, have not availed to draw Judah back from the abyss into which
he is now cast, nor to avert the wrath of Jehovah which is now poured
forth: therefore it had been better for me never to have been born. This
thought affects the prophet so much the more, since in every fibre of
his being he is an Israelite, and identifies the weal and woe of his
people with his own; just as Moses would rather himself be blotted out
form the book of life than that Israel should perish, and Paul was
willing to be separated from Christ as anathema if he could thereby save
Israel. What wonder that this thought should disburden itself in such
imprecations! Had Jeremiah not been born, he would not have had occasion
to sit on the ruins of Jerusalem. But his outburst of feeling is
notwithstanding a paroxysm of excitement, for, though reason might drive
him to despair, faith would teach him to hope even in the midst of
downfall; and in reality, this small lyric piece in the collective
prophecy of Jeremiah is only as a detached rock, over which, as a stream
of clear living water, the prophecy flows on more joyous in faith, more
certain of the future. In the book of Job it is otherwise; for what in
Jeremiah and several of the psalms is compressed into a small compass, -
the darkness of temptation and its clearing up, - is here the substance
of a long entanglement dramatically presented, which first of all
becomes progressively more and more involved, and to which this outburst
of feeling gives the impulse. As Jeremiah, had he not been born, would
not have sat on the ruins of Jerusalem; so Job, had he not been born,
would not have found himself in this abyss of wrath. Neither of them
knows anything of the future solution of every present mystery of life;
they know nothing of the future life and the heavenly crown. This it is
which, while it justifies their despair, casts greater glory round their
struggling faith.

The first speaker among the friends, who now comes forward, is Eliphaz,
probably the eldest of them. In the main, they all represent one view,
but each with his individual peculiarity: Eliphaz with the
self-confident pathos of age, and the mien of a prophet;

(Note: A. B. Davidson thinks Eliphaz is characterized as "the oldest,
the most dignified, the calmest, and most considerate of Job's
friends.")

Bildad with the moderation and caution befitting one poorer in thought;
Zophar with an excitable vehemence, neither skilled nor disposed for a
lasting contest. The skill of the writer, as we may here at the outset
remark, is manifested in this, that what the friends say, considered in
itself, is true: the error lies only in the inadequacy and
inapplicability of what is said to the case before them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 4](job004)

</div>
