<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job038)  [Next](job040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001)

[Job 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 39:1</span></span>

1 Dost thou know the bearing time of the wild goats of the rock?

Observest thou the circles of the hinds?

2 Dost thou number the months which they fulfil,

And knowest thou the time of their bringing forth?

3 They bow down, they let their young break through,

They cast off their pains.

4 Their young ones gain strength, grow up in the desert,

They run away and do not return.

The strophe treats of the female chamois or steinbocks, ibices (perhaps
including the certainly different kinds of chamois), and stags. The
former are called יעלים, from יעל, Arab. w‛l (a secondary formation from
עלה, Arab. ‛lâ), to mount, therefore: rock-climbers. חולל is inf. Pil.:
τὸ ὠδίνειν, comp. the Pul. [Job 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007).
שׁמר, to observe, exactly as [Ecc
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#004); [Sa1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#012); [Zac
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011). In [Job
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#002) the question as to the expiration
of the time of bearing is connected with that as to the time of bringing
forth. תּספּור, plene, as [Job 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016);
לדתּנה (littâna, like עת = עדתּ) with an euphonic termination for לדתּן,
as [Gen 42:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036); [Gen
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#029), and also out of pause, [Rut
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019), Ges. 91, 1, rem. 2. Instead of
תּפלּחנה Olsh. wishes to read תּפלּטנה, but this (synon. תמלטנה) would
be: they let slip away; the former (synon. תבקענה): they cause to
divide, i.e., to break through (comp. Arab. felâh, the act of breaking
through, freedom, prosperity). On כּרע, to kneel down as the posture of
one in travail, vid., [Sa1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019). "They
cast off their pains" is not meant of an easy working off of the
after-pains (Hirz., Schlottm.), but חבל signifies in this phrase, as
Schultens has first shown, meton. directly the foetus, as Arab. ḥabal,
plur. ahbâl, and ὠδίν, even of a child already grown up, as being the
fruit of earlier travail, e.g., in Aeschylus, Agam. 1417f.; even the
like phrase, ῥίψαι ὠδῖνα = edere foetum, is found in Euripides, Ion 45.
Thus born with ease, the young animals grow rapidly to maturity (חלם,
pinguescere, pubescere, whence חלום, a dream as the result of puberty,
vid., Psychol. S. 282), grow in the desert (בּבּר, Targ. = בּחוּץ, vid.,
i. 329, note), seek the plain, and return not again למו, sibi h. e. sui
juris esse volentes (Schult.), although it might also signify ad eas,
for the Hebr. is rather confused on the question of the distinction of
gender, and even in חבליהם and בניהם the masc. is used ἐπικοίνως. We,
however, prefer to interpret according to [Job
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019); [Job
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016). Moreover, Bochart is right: Non
hic agitur de otiosa et mere speculativa cognitione, sed de ea
cognitione, quae Deo propria est, qua res omnes non solum novit, sed et
dirigit atque gubernat.

[Job 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 39:5</span></span>

5 Who hath sent forth the wild ass free,

And who loosed the bands of the wild ass,

6 Whose house I made the steppe,

And his dwelling the salt country?

7 He scorneth the tumult of the city,

He heareth not the noise of the driver.

8 That which is seen upon the mountains is his pasture,

And he sniffeth after every green thing.

On the wild ass (not: ass of the forest).

(Note: It is a dirty yellow with a white belly, single-hoofed and
long-eared; its hornless head somewhat resembles that of the gazelle,
but is much later; its hair has the dryness of the hair of the deer, and
the animal forms the transition from the stag and deer genus to the ass.
It is entirely distinct from the mah or baqar el-wahsh, wild ox, whose
large soft eyes are so much celebrated by the poets of the steppe. This
latter is horned and double-hoofed, and forms the transition from the
stag to the ox distinct from the ri'm, ראם, therefore perhaps an
antelope of the kind of the Indian nlgau, blue ox, Portax tragocamelus.
I have not seen both kinds of animals alive, but I have often seen their
skins in the tents of the Ruwal. Both kinds are remarkable for their
very swift running, and it is especially affirmed of the fer that no
rider can overtake it. The poets compare a troop of horsemen that come
rushing up and vanish in the next moment to a herd of fer. In spite of
its difficulty and hazardousness, the nomads are passionately given to
hunting the wild ass, and the proverb cited by the Kms: kull es-sêd
bigôf el-ferâ (every hunt sticks in the belly of the fer, i.e., compared
with that, every other hunt is nothing), is perfectly correct. When the
approach of a herd, which always consists of several hundred, is
betrayed by a cloud of dust which can be seen many miles off, so many
horsemen rise up from all sides in pursuit that the animals are usually
scattered, and single ones are obtained by the dogs and by shots. The
herd is called gemı̂le, and its leader is called ‛anûd (ענוּד),as with
gazelles. - Wetzst.)

In Hebr. and Arab. it is פּרא (ferâ or himâr el-wahsh, i.e., asinus
ferus), and Aram. ערוד; the former describes it as a swift-footed
animal, the latter as an animal shy and difficult to be tamed by the
hand of man; "Kulan" is its Eastern Asiatic name. lxx correctly
translates: τίς δὲ ἐστιν ὁ ἀφεὶς ὄνον ἄγριον ἐλεύθερον. חפשׁי is the
acc. of the predicate (comp. [Gen
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#002); [Jer
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#030)). Parallel with ערבה (according
to its etymon perhaps, land of darkness, terra incognita) is מלחה, salt
adj. or (sc. ארץ) a salt land, i.e., therefore unfruitful and incapable
of culture, as the country round the Salt Sea of Palestine: that the
wild ass even gladly licks the salt or natron of the desert, is a matter
of fact, and may be assumed, since all wild animals that feed on plants
have a partiality, which is based on chemical laws of life, for licking
slat. On [Job 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#008) Ew. observes, to
render יתוּר as "what is espied" is insecure, "on account of the
structure of the verse" (Gramm. S. 419, Anm.). This reason is
unintelligible; and in general there is no reason for rendering יתוּר,
after lxx, Targ., Jer., and others, as an Aramaic 3 fut. with a mere
half vowel instead of Kametz before the tone = יתוּר, which is without
example in Old Testament Hebrew (for יהוּא, [Ecc
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#003), follows the analogy of יהי), but
יתוּר signifies either abundantia (after the form יבוּל, לחוּם [Job
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023), from יתר, Arab. wtr, p. 571) or
investigabile, what can be searched out (after the form יקוּם, that
which exists, from תּוּר, Arab. târ, to go about, look about), which,
with Olsh. 212, and most expositors, we prefer.

[Job 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 39:9</span></span>

9 Will the oryx be willing to serve thee,

Or will he lodge in thy crib?

10 Canst thou bind the oryx in the furrow with a leading rein,

Or will he harrow the valleys, following thee?

11 Wilt thou trust him because his strength is great,

And leave thy labour to him?

12 Wilt thou confide in him to bring in thy sowing,

And to garner thy threshing-floor?

In correct texts רים has a Dagesh in the Resh, and היאבה the accent on
the penult., as [Pro 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#021) ינּקה רע,
and [Jer 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#012) רּע מאוּמה. The tone
retreats according to the rule, Ges. 29, 3, b; and the Dagesh is, as
also when the second word begins with an aspirate,

(Note: The National Grammarians call this exception to the rule, that
the muta is aspirated when the preceding word ends with a vowel, אתי
מרחיק (veniens e longinquo), i.e., the case, where the word ending with
a vowel is Milel, whether from the very first, or, when the second word
is a monosyllable or has the tone on the penult., on account of the
accent that has retreated (in order to avoid two syllables with the
chief tone coming together); in this case the aspirate, and in general
the initial letter (if capable of being doubled) of the second
monosyllabic or penultima-accented word, takes a Dagesh; but this is not
without exceptions that are quite as regular. Regularly, the second word
is not dageshed if it begins with ו, כ, ל, ב, or if the first word is
only a bare verb, e.g., עשׂה לו, or one that has only ו before it, e.g.,
ועשׂה פסח; the tone of the first word in both these examples retreats,
but without the initial of the second being doubled. This is
supplementary, and as far as necessary a correction, to what is said in
Psalter, i 392, Anm.)

Dag. forte conj., which the Resh also takes, [Pro
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001) מענה־רּך, exceptionally,
according to the rule, Ges. 20, 2, a. In all, it occurs thirteen times
with Dagesh in the Old Testament - a relic of a mode of pointing which
treated the ר (as in Arabic) as a letter capable of being doubled (Ges.
22, 5), that has been supplanted in the system of pointing that gained
the ascendency. רים ([Psa 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022), רם)
is contracted from ראם ([Psa 92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011),
plene, ראים), which (= ראם) is of like form with Arab. ri'm (Olsh. 154,
a).

(Note: Since ra'ima, inf. ri'mân, has the signification assuescere, ראם,
רים, רימנא (Targ.) might describe the oryx as a gregarious animal,
although all ruminants have this characteristic in common. On ראם, Arab.
r'm, vid., Seetzen's Reise, iii. S. 393, Z 9ff., and also iv. 496.)

Such, in the present day in Syria, is the name of the gazelle that is
for the most part white with a yellow back and yellow stripes in the
face (Antilope leucoryx, in distinction from Arab. ‛ifrı̂, the
earth-coloured, dirty-yellow Antilope oryx, and Arab. ḥmrı̂, himrı̂, the
deer-coloured Antilope dorcas); the Talmud also (b. Zebachim, 113b;
Bathra, 74b) combines ראימא and אורזילא or ארזילא, a gazelle (Arab.
gazâl), and therefore reckons the reêm to the antelope genus, of which
the gazelle is a species; and the question, [Job
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#010), shows that an animal whose home
is on the mountains is intended, viz., as Bochart, and recently
Schlottm. (making use of an academic treatise of Lichtenstein on the
antelopes, 1824), has proved, the oryx, which the lxx also probably
understands when it translates μονοκέρως; for the Talmud. קרש, mutilated
from it, is, according to Chullin, 59b, a one-horned animal, and is more
closely defined as טביא דבי עילאי, "gazelle (antelope) of Be
(Beth)-Illi" (comp. Lewysohn, Zoologie des Talmuds, 1858, 146).

The oryx also appears on Egyptian monuments sometimes with two horns,
but mostly with one variously curled; and both Aristotle

(Note: Vid., Sundevall, Die Thierarten des Aristoteles (Stockholm,
1863), S. 64f.)

and Pliny describe it as a one-horned cloven-hoof; so that one must
assent to the supposition of a one-horned variety of the oryx (although
as a fact of natural history it is not yet fully established), as then
there is really tolerably certain information of a one-horned antelope
both in Upper Asia and in Central Africa;

(Note: J. W. von Mller (Das Einhorn von gesch. u. naturwiss. Standpunkte
betrachtet, 1852) believed that in a horn in the Ambras Collection at
Vienna he recognised a horn of the Monocers (comp. Fechner's
Centralblatt, 1854, Nr. 2), but he is hardly right. J. W. von Mller,
Francis Galton (Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa,
1853), and other travellers have heard the natives speak ingenuously of
the unicorn, but without seeing it themselves. On the other hand, Huc
and Gabet (Journeyings through Mongolia and Thibet, Germ. edition) tell
us "a horn of this animal was sent to Calcutta: it was 50 centimetres
long and 11 in circumference; from the root it ran up to a gradually
diminishing point. It was almost straight, black, etc ... . Hodgson,
when English consul at Nepal, had the good fortune to obtain an unicorn
... . It is a kind of antelope, which in southern Thibet, that borders
on Nepal, is called Tschiru. Hodgson sent a skin and horn to Calcutta;
they came from an unicorn that died in the menagerie of the Raja of
Nepal." The detailed description follows, and the suggestion is advanced
that this Antilope Hodgsonii, as it has been proposed to call the
Tschiru, is the one-horned oryx of the ancients. The existence of
one-horned wild sheep (not antelopes), attested by R. von Schlagintweit
(Zoologischer Garten, 1st year, S. 72), the horn of which consists of
two parts gradually growing together, covered by one horn-sheath, does
not depreciate the credibility of the account given by Huc-Gabet (to
which Prof. Will has called my attention as being the most weighty
testimony of the time). Another less minute account is to be found in
the Arabic description of a journey (communicated to me by Prof.
Fleischer) by Selm Bisteris (Beirt, 1856): In the menagerie of the
Viceroy of Egypt he saw an animal of the colour of a gazelle, but the
size and form of an ass, with a long straight horn between the ears, and
what, as he says, seldom go together) with hoofs, viz. - and as the
expression Arab. ḥâfr, horse's hoof (not Arab. chuff, a camel's hoof),
also implies - proper, uncloven hoofs, - therefore an one-horned and at
the same time one-hoofed antelope.)

and therefore there is sufficient ground for seeking the origin of the
tradition of the unicorn in an antelope, - perhaps rather like a horse,
- with one horn rising out of the two points of ossification over the
frontal suture. The proper buffalo, Bos bubalus, cannot therefore be
intended, because it only came from India to Western Asia and Europe at
a more recent date, but also not any other species whatever of this
animal (Carey and others), which is recognisable by its flat horns,
which are also near together, and its forbidding, staring, bloodshot
eyes; for it is tameable, and is (even in modern Syria) used as a
domestic animal. On the other hand there are antelopes which somewhat
resemble the horse, others the ox (whence βούβαλος, βούβαλις, is a name
for the antelope), others the deer and the ass. Schultens erroneously
considers ראם to be the buffalo, being misled by a passage in the Divan
of the Hudheilites, which gives the ri'm the by-name of dhu chadam,
i.e., oxen-like white-footed, which exactly applies to the A. oryx or
even the A. leucoryx; for the former has white feet and legs striped
lengthwise with black stripes, the latter white feet and legs. Just as
little reason is there for imagining the rhinoceros after Aquila (and in
part Jerome); ῥινοκέρως is nothing but an unhappy rendering of the
μονοκέρως of the lxx. The question in [Job
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#010), as already observed, requires
an animal that inhabits the mountains.

On אבה, to be willing = to take up, receive. The "furrow (תּלם, sulcus,
not porca, the ridge between the furrows) of his cord" is that which it
is said to break up by means of the ploughshare, being led by a rein.
אחריך refers to the leader, who goes just before or at the side;
according to Hahn, to one who has finished the sowing which precedes the
harrowing; but it is more natural to imagine the leader of the animal
that is harrowing, which is certainly not left to itself. On כּי, [Job
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#012), as an exponent of the obj.
vid., Ew. 336, b. The Chethib here uses the Kal שׁוּב transitively: to
bring back (viz., that which was sown as harvested), which is possible
(vid., [Job 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010)). גרנך, [Job
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#012), is either a locative (into thy
threshing-floor) or acc. of the obj. per synecd. continentis pro
contento, as [Rut 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#002); [Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012). The position of the question
from beginning to end assumes an animal outwardly resembling the
yoke-ox, as the ראם is also elsewhere put with the ox, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Psa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006); [Isa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#007). But the conclusion at length
arrived at by Hahn and in Gesenius' Handwrterbuch, that on this very
account the buffalo is to be understood, is a mistake: A. oryx and
leucoryx are both (for this very reason not distinguished by the
ancients) entirely similar to the ox; they are not only ruminants, like
the ox, with a like form of the hoof, but also of a plump form, which
makes them appear to be of the ox tribe.

[Job 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 39:13</span></span>

13 The wing of the ostrich vibrates joyously,

Is she pious, wing and feather?

14 No, she leaveth her eggs in the earth

And broodeth over the dust,

15 Forgetting that a foot may crush them,

And the beast of the field trample them.

16 She treateth her young ones harshly as if they were not hers;

In vain is her labour, without her being distressed.

17 For Eloah hath caused her to forget wisdom,

And gave her no share of understanding.

18 At the time when she lasheth herself aloft,

She derideth the horse and horseman.

As the wild ass and the ox-like oryx cannot be tamed by man, and
employed in his service like the domestic ass and ox, so the ostrich,
although resembling the stork in its stilt-like structure, the colour of
its feathers, and its gregarious life, still has characteristics totally
different from those one ought to look for according to this similarity.
רננים, a wail, prop. a tremulous shrill sound (vid., [Job
39:23](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#023)), is a name of the female
ostrich, whose peculiar cry is called in Arabic zimâr (זמר). נעלס (from
עלס, which in comparison with עלץ, עלז, rarely occurs) signifies to make
gestures of joy. אם, [Job 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013), is an
interrogative an; חסידה, pia, is a play upon the name of the stork,
which is so called: pia instar ciconiae (on this figure of speech, comp.
Mehren's Rehtorik der Araber, S. 178). כּי, [Job
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#014), establishes the negation
implied in the question, as e.g., [Isa
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#028). The idea is not that the
hen-ostrich abandons the hatching of her eggs to the earth (עזב ל as
[Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)), and makes them "glow over
the dust" (Schlottm.), for the maturing energy compensating for the
sitting of the parent bird proceeds from the sun's heat, which ought to
have been mentioned; one would also expect a Hiph. instead of the Piel
תּחמּם, which can be understood only of hatching by her own warmth. The
hen-ostrich also really broods herself, although from time to time she
abandons the חמּם to the sun.

(Note: It does, however, as it appears, actually occur, that the female
leaves the work of hatching to the sun by day, and to the male at night,
and does not sit at all herself; vid., Funke's Naturgeschichte, revised
by Taschenberg (1864), S. 243f.)

That which contrasts with the φιλοστοργία of the stork, which is here
made prominent, is that she lays here eggs in a hole in the ground, and
partly, when the nest is full, above round about it, while חסידה ברושׁים
ביתה, [Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017). רננים is construed
in accordance with its meaning as fem. sing., Ew. 318, a. Since she acts
thus, what next happens consistently therewith is told by the not
aoristic but only consecutive ותּשׁכּח: and so she forgets that the foot
may crush (זוּר, to press together, break by pressure, as הזּוּרה, [Isa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005) = הזּוּרה, that which is crushed,
comp. לנה = לנה, [Zac 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004)) them (i.e.,
the eggs, Ges. 146, 3), and the beast of the field may trample them
down, crush them (דּוּשׁ as Arab. dâs, to crush by treading upon
anything, to tread out).

[Job 39:16](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#016)

The difficulty of הקשׁיח (from קשׁח, Arab. qsḥ, hardened from קשׁה,
Arab. qsâ) being used of the hen-ostrich in the masc., may be removed by
the pointing הקשׁיח (Ew.); but this alteration is unnecessary, since the
Hebr. also uses the masc. for the fem. where it might be regarded as
impossible (vid., [Job 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#003), and comp.
e.g., [Isa 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#011).). Jer. translates
correctly according to the sense: quasi non sint sui, but ל is not
directly equivalent to כּ; what is meant is, that by the harshness of
her conduct she treats her young as not belonging to her, so that they
become strange to her, Ew. 217, d. In [Job
39:16](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#016) the accentuation varies: in vain
(לריק with Rebia mugrasch) is her labour that is devoid of anxiety; or:
in vain is her labour (לריק( ruobal r with Tarcha, יגיעהּ with Munach
vicarium) without anxiety (on her part); or: in vain is her labour (לריק
with Mercha, יגיעה with Rebia mugrasch), yet she is without anxiety. The
middle of these renderings (לריק in all of them, like [Isa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#004) = לריק, [Isa
65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023) and freq.) seems to us the most
pleasing: the labour of birth and of the brooding undertaken in places
where the eggs are put beyond the danger of being crushed, is without
result, without the want of success distressing her, since she does not
anticipate it, and therefore also takes no measures to prevent it. The
eggs that are only just covered with earth, or that lie round about the
nest, actually become a prey to the jackals, wild-cats, and other
animals; and men can get them for themselves one by one, if they only
take care to prevent their footprints being recognised; for if the
ostrich observes that its nest is discovered, it tramples upon its own
eggs, and makes its nest elsewhere (Schlottm., according to
Lichtenstein's Sdafrik. Reise). That it thus abandons its eggs to the
danger of being crushed and to plunder, arises, according to [Job
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#017), from the fact that God has
caused it to forget wisdom, i.e., as [Job
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#017) explains, has extinguished in
it, deprived it of, the share thereof (ב as [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012), lxx ἐν, as [Act
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#021)) which it might have had. It is
only one of the stupidities of the ostrich that is made prominent here;
the proverbial ahmaq min en-na‛âme, "more foolish than the ostrich," has
its origin in more such characteristics. But if the care with which
other animals guard their young ones is denied to it, it has in its
stead another remarkable characteristic: at the time when (כּעת here
followed by an elliptical relative clause, which is clearly possible,
just as with בּעת, [Job 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#017)) it
stretches (itself) on high, i.e., it starts up with alacrity from its
ease (on the radical signification of המריא = המרה), and hurries forth
with a powerful flapping of its wings, half running half flying, it
derides the horse and its rider - they do not overtake it, it is the
swiftest of all animals; wherefore Arab. '‛dâ mn 'l-dlı̂m ‛zalı̂m,
equivalent to delı̂m according to a less exact pronunciation, supra, p.
582, note) and Arab. 'nfr mn 'l-n‛âmt, fleeter than the ostrich, is just
as proverbial as the above Arab. 'ḥmq mn 'l-wa‛nat; and "on ostrich's
wings" is equivalent to driving along with incomparable swiftness.
Moreover, on תּמריא and תּשׂחק, which refer to the female, it is to be
observed that she is very anxious, and deserts everything in her fright,
while the male ostrich does not forsake his young, and flees no danger.

(Note: We take this remark from Doumas, Horse of the Sahara. The
following contribution from Wetzstein only came to hand after the
exposition was completed: "The female ostriches are called רננים not
from the whirring of their wings when flapped about, but from their
piercing screeching cry when defending their eggs against beasts of prey
(chiefly hyaenas), or when searching for the male bird. Now they are
called rubd, from sing. rubda (instead of rabdâ), from the black colour
of their long wing-feathers; for only the male, which is called חיק
(pronounce hêtsh), has white. The ostrich-tribe has the name of בּת יענה
bat (Arab. bdt 'l-wa‛nat), 'inhabitant of the desert,' because it is
only at home in the most lonely parts of the steppe, in perfectly barren
deserts. Neshwn the Himjarite, in his 'Shems el-'olm' (MSS in the Royal
Library at Berlin, sectio Wetzst. I No. 149, Bd. i.f. 110b), defines the
word el-wa‛na by: ארץ ביצא לא תנבת שׁיא, a white (chalky or sandy)
district, which brings forth nothing; and the Kms explains it by ארץ
צלבּה, a hard (unfruitful) district. In perfect analogy with the Hebr.
the Arabic calls the ostrich abu (and umm) es-sahârâ, 'possessor of the
sterile deserts.' The name יענים, [Lam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003), is perfectly correct, and
corresponds to the form יעלים (steinbocks); the form פעל (Arab. f‛l) is
frequently the Nisbe of פעל and פעלה, according to which יען = בּת היענה
and יעל = בּת היּעלה, 'inhabitant of the inaccessible rocks.' Hence,
says Neshwn (against the non-Semite Firzbdi), wa‛l (יעל and wa‛la) is
exclusively the high place of the rocks, and wa‛il (יעל exclusively the
steinbock. The most common Arabic name of the ostrich is na‛âme, נעמה,
collective na‛âm, from the softness (nu‛ûma, נעוּמה) of its feathers,
with which the Arab women (in Damascus frequently) stuff cushions and
pillows. Umm thelâthin, 'mother of thirty,' is the name of the female
ostrich, because as a rule she lays thirty eggs. The ostrich egg is
called in the steppe dahwa, דּחוה (coll. dahû), a word that is certainly
very ancient. Nevertheless the Hauranites prefer the word medha, מדחה. A
place hollowed out in the ground serves as a nest, which the ostrich
likes best to dig in the hot sand, on which account they are very common
in the sandy tracts of Ard ed-Dehan (דהנא), between the Shemmar
mountains and the Sawd (Chaldaea). Thence at the end of April come the
ostrich hunters with their spoil, the hides of the birds together with
the feathers, to Syria. Such an unplucked hide is called gizze (גזּה).
The hunters inform us that the female sits alone on the nest from early
in the day until evening, and from evening until early in the morning
with the male, which wanders about throughout the day. The statement
that the ostrich does not sit on its eggs, is perhaps based on the fact
that the female frequently, and always before the hunters, forsakes the
eggs during the first period of brooding. Even. [Job
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#014) and [Job
39:15](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#015) do not say more than this. But
when the time of hatching (called el-faqs, פקץ) is near, the hen no
longer leaves the eggs. The same observation is also made with regard to
the partridge of Palestine (el-hagel, חגל), which has many other
characteristics in common with the ostrich.

That the ostrich is accounted stupid ([Job
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#017)) may arise from the fact, that
when the female has been frightened from the eggs she always seeks out
the male with a loud cry; she then, as the hunters unanimously assert,
brings him forcibly back to the nest (hence its Arabic name zalı̂m, 'the
violent one'). During the interval the hunter has buried himself in the
sand, and on their arrival, by a good shot often kills both together in
the nest. It may also be accounted as stupidity, that, when the wind is
calm, instead of flying before the riding hunters, the bird tries to
hide itself behind a mound or in the hollows of the ground. But that,
when escape is impossible, it is said to try to hide its head in the
sand, the hunters regard as an absurdity. If the wind aids it, the
fleeing ostrich spreads out the feathers of its tail like a sail, and by
constantly steering itself with its extended wings, it escapes its
pursuers with ease. The word המריא, [Job
39:18](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#018), appears to be a hunting
expression, and (without an accus. objecti) to describe this spreading
out of the feathers, therefore to be perfectly synonymous with the
תערישׁ (Arab. t'rı̂š) of the ostrich hunters of the present day. Thus
sings the poet Rshid of the hunting race of the Sulubt: 'And the head
(of the bride with its loosened locks) resembles the (soft and black)
feathers of the ostrich-hen, when she spreads them out (‛arrashannâ).
They saw the hunter coming upon them where there was no hiding-place,
And stretched their legs as they fled.' The prohibition to eat the
ostrich in the Thora ([Lev 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#016); [Deu
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#015)) is perhaps based upon the
cruelty of the hunt; for it is with the rarest exceptions always killed
only on its eggs. The female, which, as has been said already, does not
flee towards the end of the time of brooding, stoops on the approach of
the hunter, inclines the head on one side and looks motionless at her
enemy. Several Beduins have said to me, that a man must have a hard
heart to fire under such circumstances. If the bird is killed, the
hunter covers the blood with sand, puts the female again upon the eggs,
buries himself at some distance in the sand, and waits till evening,
when the male comes, which is now shot likewise, beside the female. The
Mosaic law might accordingly have forbidden the hunting of the ostrich
from the same feeling of humanity which unmistakeably regulated it in
other decisions (as [Exo 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019); [Deu
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#006)., [Lev
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#028), and freq.).)

[Job 39:19](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 39:19</span></span>

19 Dost thou give to the horse strength?

Dost thou clothe his neck with flowing hair?

20 Dost thou cause him to leap about like the grasshopper?

The noise of his snorting is a terror!

21 He paweth the ground in the plain, and boundeth about with strength.

He advanceth to meet an armed host.

22 He laugheth at fear, and is not affrighted,

And turneth not back from the sword.

23 The quiver rattleth over him,

The glittering lance and spear.

24 With fierceness and rage he swalloweth the ground,

And standeth not still, when the trumpet soundeth.

25 He saith at every blast of the trumpet: Ha, ha!

And from afar he scenteth the battle,

The thundering of the captains and the shout of war.

After the ostrich, which, as the Arabs say, is composed of the nature of
a bird and a camel, comes the horse in its heroic beauty, and impetuous
lust for the battle, which is likewise an evidence of the wisdom of the
Ruler of the world - a wisdom which demands the admiration of men. This
passage of the book of Job, says K. Lffler, in his Gesch. des Pferdes
(1863), is the oldest and most beautiful description of the horse. It
may be compared to the praise of the horse in Hammer-Purgstall's
Duftkrner; it deserves more than this latter the praise of majestic
simplicity, which is the first feature of classic superiority. Jer.
falsely renders [Job 39:19](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019): aut
circumdabis collo ejus hinnitum; as Schlottm., who also wishes to be so
understood: Dost thou adorn his neck with the voice of thunder? The neck
(צוּאר, prop. the twister, as Persic gerdân, gerdan, from צוּר, Arab.
ṣâr, to twist by pressure, to turn, bend, as Pers. from gerdı̂den, to
turn one's self, twist) has nothing to do with the voice of neighing.
But רעמה also does not signify dignity (Ew. 113, d), but the mane, and
is not from רעם = ראם = רם, the hair of the mane, as being above, like
λοφιά, but from רעם, tremere, the mane as quivering, trembling (Eliz.
Smith: the shaking mane); like φόβη, according to Kuhn, cogn. with σόβη,
the tail, from φοβεῖν (σοβεῖν), to wag, shake, scare, comp. άΐ́σσεσθαι of
the mane, Il. vi. 510.

[Job 39:20](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#020)

The motion of the horse, which is intended by תרעישׁנּוּ (רעשׁ, Arab.
r‛s, r‛š, tremere, trepidare), is determined according to the comparison
with the grasshopper: what is intended is a curved motion forwards in
leaps, now to the right, now to the left, which is called the caracol, a
word used in horsemanship, borrowed from the Arab. hargala-l-farasu
(comp. חרגּל), by means of the Moorish Spanish; moreover, Arab. r‛s is
used of the run of the ostrich and the flight of the dove in such
"successive lateral and oblique motions" (Carey). nachar, [Job
39:20](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#020), is not the neighing of the
horse, but its snorting through the nostrils (comp. Arab. nachı̂r,
snoring, a rattling in the throat), Greek φρύαγμα, Lat. fremitus (comp.
Aeschylus, Septem c. Th. 374, according to the text of Hermann: ἵππος
χαλινῶν δ ̓ ὡς κατασθμαίνων βρέμει); הוד, however, might signify pomp
(his pompous snorting), but perhaps has its radical signification,
according to which it corresponds to the Arab. hawı̂d, and signifies a
loud strong sound, as the peal of thunder (hawı̂d er-ra‛d),' the howling
of the stormy wind (hawı̂d er-rijâh), and the like.

(Note: A verse of a poem of Ibn-Dchi in honour of Dkn ibn-Gendel runs:
Before the crowding (lekdata) of Taijr the horses fled repulsed, And
thou mightest hear the sound of the bell-carriers (hawı̂da mubershemât)
of the warriors (el-menâir, prop. one who thrusts with the lance). Here
hawı̂d signifies the sound of the bells which those who wish to announce
themselves as warriors hang about their horses, to draw the attention of
the enemy to them. Mubershemât are the mares that carry the burêshimân,
i.e., the bells. The meaning therefore is: thou couldst hear this sound,
which ought only to be heard in the fray, in flight, when the warriors
consecrated to death fled as cowards. Taijr (Têjâr) is Slih the son of
Cana'an (died about 1815), mentioned in p. 456, note 1, a great warrior
of the wandering tribe of the 'Aneze. - Wetzst.)

The substantival clause is intended to affirm that its dull-toned snort
causes or spreads terror. In [Job
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#021) the plur. alternates with the
sing., since, as it appears, the representation of the many pawing hoofs
is blended with that of the pawing horse, according to the well-known
line,

Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum

(Virgil, Aen. viii. 596);

or, since this is said of the galloping horse, according to the likewise
Virgilian line,

Cavatque

Tellurem, et solido graviter sonat ungula cornu

(Georg. iii. 87 f).

חפר is, as the Arab. hâfir, hoof, shows, the proper word for the horse's
impatient pawing of the ground (whence it then, as in [Job
39:29](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#029), signifies rimari, scrutari).
עמק is the plain as the place of contest; for the description, as now
becomes still more evident, refers to the war-horse. The verb שׂישׂ
(שׂוּשׂ) has its radical signification exsultare (comp. Arab. s\]ts,
skirta'n, of the foetus) here; and since בּכח, not בּכּח, is added to
it, it is not to be translated: it rejoices in its strength, but: it
prances or is joyous with strength, lxx γαυριᾷ ἐν Ἰσχύΐ. The difference
between the two renderings is, however, scarcely perceptible. נשׁק,
armament, [Job 39:21](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#021), is meton. the
armed host of the enemy; אשׁפּה, "the quiver," is, however, not used
metonymically for the arrows of the enemy whizzing about the horse
(Schult.), but [Job 39:23](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#023) is the
concluding description of the horse that rushes on fearlessly, proudly,
and impetuously in pursuit, under the rattle and glare of the equipment
of its rider (Schlottm. and others). רנה (cogn. of רנן), of the rattling
of the quiver, as Arab. ranna, ranima, of the whirring of the bow when
the arrow is despatched; to point it תּרנּה ([Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); [Pro
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#003)), instead of תּרנה, would be to
deprive the language of a word supported by the dialects (vid., Ges.
Thes.). On [Job 39:24](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#024) we may compare
the Arab. iltahama-l-farasu-l-arda, the horse swallows up the ground,
whence lahimm, lahı̂m, a swallower = swift-runner; so here: with
boisterous fierceness and angry impatience (בּרעשׁ ורגז) it swallows up
the ground, i.e., passes so swiftly over it that long pieces vanish so
rapidly before it, as though it greedily sucked them up (גּמּא intensive
of גּמא, whence גּמא, the water-sucking papyrus); a somewhat differently
applied figure is nahab-el-arda, i.e., according to Silius' expression,
rapuit campum. The meaning of [Job
39:24](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#024) is, as in Virgil, Georg. iii.
83f.:

Tum si qua sonum procul arma dedere,

Stare loco nescit;

and in Aeschylus, Septem, 375: ὅστις βοὴν σάλπιγγος ὁρμαίνει (Hermann,
ὀργαίνεἰ μένων (impatiently awaiting the call of the trumpet). האמין
signifies here to show stability (vid., Genesis, S. 367f.) in the first
physical sense (Bochart, Rosenm., and others): it does not stand still,
i.e., will not be held, when (כּי, quum) the sound of the war-trumpet,
i.e., when it sounds. שׁופר is the signal-trumpet when the army was
called together, e.g., [Jdg 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#027); to
gather the army that is in pursuit of the enemy, [Sa2
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#028); when the people rebelled, [Sa2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001); when the army was dismissed at
the end of the war, [Sa2 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#022); when
forming for defence and for assault, e.g., [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006); and in general the signal of war,
[Jer 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019). As often as this is heard
(בּדי, in sufficiency, i.e., happening at any time = quotiescunque), it
makes known its lust of war by a joyous neigh, even from afar, before
the collision has taken place; it scents (praesagit according to Pliny's
expression) the approaching conflict, (scents even in anticipation) the
thundering command of the chiefs that may soon be heard, and the cry of
battle giving loose to the assault. "Although," says Layard (New
Discoveries, p. 330), "docile as a lamb, and requiring no other guide
than the halter, when the Arab mare hears the war-cry of the tribe, and
sees the quivering spear of her rider, her eyes glitter with fire, her
blood-red nostrils open wide, her neck is nobly arched, and her tail and
mane are raised and spread out to the wind. The Bedouin proverb says,
that a high-bred mare when at full speed should hide her rider between
her neck and her tail."

[Job 39:26](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 39:26</span></span>

26 Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom,

Doth it spread its wings towards the south?

27 Or is it at thy command that the eagle soareth aloft,

And buildeth its nest on high?

28 It inhabiteth the rock, and buildeth its nest

Upon the crag of the rock and fastness.

29 From thence it seeketh food,

Its eyes see afar off.

30 And its young ones suck up blood;

And where the slain are, there is it.

The ancient versions are unanimous in testifying that, according to the
signification of the root, נץ signifies the hawk (which is significant
in the Hieroglyphics): the soaring one, the high-flyer (comp. Arab. nṣṣ,
to rise, struggle forwards, and Arab. nḍḍ, to raise the wings for
flight). The Hiph. יאבר- (jussive form in the question, as [Job
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027)) might signify: to get feathers,
plumescere (Targ., Jer.), but that gives a tame question; wherefore
Gregory understands the plumescit of the Vulgate of moulting, for which
purpose the hawk seeks the sunny side. But האביר alone, by itself,
cannot signify "to get new feathers;" moreover, an annual moulting is
common to all birds, and prominence is alone given to the new feathering
of the eagle in the Old Testament, [Psa
103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005); [Mic
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016), comp. [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031) (lxx πτεροφυήσουσιν ὡς ἀετοί).

(Note: Less unfavourable to this rendering is the following, that אברה
signifies the long feathers, and אבר the wing that is composed of them
(perhaps, since the Talm. אברים signifies wings and limbs, artus, from
אבר = הבר, Arab. hbr, to divide, furnish with joints), although נוצה
(from נצה, to fly) is the more general designation of the feathers of
birds.)

Thus, then, the point of the question will lie in לתימן: the hawk is a
bird of passage, God has endowed it with instinct to migrate to the
south as the winter season is approaching.

In [Job 39:27](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#027) the circle of the native
figures taken from animal life, which began with the lion, the king of
quadrupeds, is now closed with the eagle, the king of birds. It is
called נשׁר, from נשׁר, Arab. nsr, vellere; as also vultur (by virtue of
a strong power of assimilation = vultor) is derived from vellere, - a
common name of the golden eagle, the lamb's vulture, the carrion-kite
(Cathartes percnopterus), and indeed also of other kinds of kites and
falcons. There is nothing to prevent our understanding the eagle κατ ̓
εξοχήν, viz., the golden eagle (Aquila chrysatos), in the present
passage; for even to this, corpses, though not already putrified, are a
welcome prey. In [Job 39:27](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#027) we must
translate either: and is it at thy command that ... ? or: is it so that
(as in הכי) at thy command ... ? The former is more natural here.
מצוּדה, [Job 39:28](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#028), signifies prop.
specula (from צוּד, to spy); then, however, as Arab. masâd (referred by
the original lexicons to masada), the high hill, and the mountain-top.
The rare form יעלעוּ, for which Ges., Olsh., and others wish to read
לעלעוּ or ילעלעוּ (from לוּע, deglutire), is to be derived from עלע, a
likewise secondary form out of עלעל (from עוּל, to suck, to give suck),

(Note: The Arab. ‛alla does not belong here: it gains the signification
iterum bibere from the primary signification of "coming over or upon
anything," which branches out in various ways: to take a second, third,
etc., drink after the first. More on this point on [Isa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#004).

Supplementary note: The quadriliteral עלעל to be supposed, is not to be
derived from עלל, and is not, as it recently has been, to be compared
with Arab. ‛ll, "to drink." This Arab. verb does not signify "to drink"
at all, but, among many other branchings out of its general primary
signification, related to עלה, Arab. ‛lâ, also signifies: "to take a
second, third, etc., drink after the first," concerning which more
details will be given elsewhere. עלעל goes back to עוּל, lactare, with
the middle vowel, whence also עויל, [Job
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#011); [Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018); [Job
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#011) (which see). The Hauran dialect
has ‛âlûl (plur. ‛awâlı̂l), like the Hebr. עולל (עולל = מעולל), in the
signification juvenis, and especially juvencus (comp. infra, p. 689,
note 3, "but they are heifers," Arab. illâ ‛awâlı̂l).)

like שׁרשׁ out of שׁרשׁר (from שׁרר, Arab. srr, to make firm), Ew. 118,
a, comp. Frst, Handwrterbuch, sub עוּל, since instances are wanting in
favour of עלע being formed out of לעלע (Jesurun, p. 164). Schult. not
inappropriately compares even גלג = גלגל in גּלגּתא, Γολγοθᾶ =
גּלגּלתּא. The concluding words, [Job
39:30](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#030), are perhaps echoed in [Mat
24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028). High up on a mountain-peak the
eagle builds its eyrie, and God has given it a remarkably sharp vision,
to see far into the depth below the food that is there for it and its
young ones. Not merely from the valley in the neighbourhood of its
eyrie, but often from distant plains, which lie deep below on the other
side of the mountain range, it seizes its prey, and rises with it even
to the clouds, and bears it home to its nest.

(Note: Vid., the beautiful description in Charles Boner's Forest
Creatures, 1861.)

Thus does God work exceeding strangely, but wonderously, apparently by
contradictions, but in truth most harmoniously and wisely, in the
natural world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 40](job040)

</div>
