<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job039)  [Next](job041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001)

[Job 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 40:1</span></span>

1 Then Jehovah answered Job, and said:

2 Will now the censurer contend with the Almighty?

Let the instructor of Eloah answer it!

3 Then Job answered Jehovah, and said:

With [Job 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001); [Job
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001) is again taken up, because the
speech of Jehovah has now in some measure attained the end which was
assigned to it as an answer to Job's outburst of censure. רב is inf.
abs., as [Jdg 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#025); it is left to the
hearer to give to the simple verbal notion its syntactic relation in
accordance with the connection; here it stands in the sense of the fut.
(comp. [Kg2 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#043)): num litigabit, Ges.
131, 4, b. The inf. abs. is followed by יסּור as subj., which (after the
form שׁכּור) signifies a censurer and fault-finder, moomeetee's. The
question means, will Job persist in this contending with God? He who
sets God right, as though he knew everything better than He, shall
answer the questions put before him.

[Job 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 40:4</span></span>

4 Behold, I am too mean: what shall I answer Thee?

I lay my hand upon my mouth.

5 Once have I spoken, and will not begin again;

And twice - I will do it no more.

He is small, i.e., not equal to the task imposed, therefore he keeps his
mouth firmly closed (comp. [Job 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#005);
[Job 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009)), for whatever he might say
would still not be to the point. Once he has dared to criticise God's
doings; a second time (שׁתּים = שׁנית, Ges. 120, 5) he ventures it no
more, for God's wondrous wisdom and all-careful love dazzle him, and he
gladly bows.

But how? Is not the divine speech altogether different from what one
ought to expect? One expects to hear from the mouth of Jehovah something
unheard of in the previous course of the drama, and in this expectation
we find ourselves disappointed at the outset. For one need only look
back and read [Job 9:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004), where Job
acknowledges and describes God as a wise and mighty Lord over the
natural world, especially as an irresistible Ruler over everything great
in it; [Job 12:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#007), where he refers
to the creatures of the sky and deep as proofs of God's creative power;
[Job 12:11-25](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#011), where he sketches the
grandest picture of God's terrible doings in nature and among men; [Job
26:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#005), where he praises God as the
Creator and Lord of all things, and describes what he says concerning
Him as only a faint echo of the thunder of His might; [Job
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#023), where he ascribes absolute
wisdom to Him as the Creator of and Ruler of the world. If one ponders
these passages of Job's speeches, he will not be able to say that the
speech of Jehovah, in the exhibition of the creative power and wisdom of
God, which is its theme, would make Job conscious of anything which was
previously unknown to him; and it is accordingly asked, What, then, is
there that is new in the speech of Jehovah by which the great effect is
brought about, that Job humbles himself in penitence, and becomes ready
for the act of redemption which follows?

It has indeed never occurred to Job to desire to enter into a
controversy with God concerning the works of creation; he is far from
the delusion of being able to stand such a test; he knows in general,
that if God were willing to contend with him, he would not be able to
answer God one in a thousand, [Job
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003). And yet God closely questioned
him, and thereby Job comes to the perception of his sin - how comes it
to pass? Has the plot of the drama perhaps failed in this point? Has the
poet made use of means unsuited to the connection of the whole, to bring
about the needful effect, viz., the repentance of Job, - because,
perhaps, the store of his thoughts was exhausted? But this poet is not
so poor, and we shall therefore be obliged to try and understand the
disposition of the speech of Jehovah before we censure it.

When one of Job's last words before the appearing of Jehovah was the
word שׁדי יענני, Job thereby desired God's decision concerning the
testimony of his innocence. This wish is in itself not sinful; yea, it
is even a fruit of his hidden faith, when he casts the look of hope away
from his affliction and the accusation of the friends, into the future
to God as his Vindicator and Redeemer. But that wish becomes sinful when
he looks upon his affliction as a de facto accusation on the part of
God, because he cannot think of suffering and sin as separable, and
because he is conscious of his innocence, looks upon it as a decree of
God, his opponent and his enemy, which is irreconcilable with the divine
justice. This Job's condition of conflict and temptation is the
prevailing one; his faith is beclouded, and breaks through the night
which hangs over him only in single rays. The result of this condition
of conflict is the sinful character which that wish assumes: it becomes
a challenge to God, since Job directs against God Himself the accusation
which the friends have directed against him, and asserts his ability to
carry through his good cause even if God would enter with him into a
judicial contention; he becomes a יסור and מוכיח אלוה, and raises
himself above God, because he thinks he has Him for an enemy who is his
best friend. This defiance is, however, not common godlessness; on the
contrary, Job is really the innocent servant of God, and his defiant
tone is only the result of a false conception which the tempted one
indulges respecting the Author of his affliction. So, then, this
defiance has not taken full possession of Job's mind; on the contrary,
the faith which lays firm hold on confidence in the God whom he does not
comprehend, is in conflict against it; and this conflict tends in the
course of the drama, the nearer it comes to the catastrophe, still
nearer to the victory, which only awaits a decisive stroke in order to
be complete. Therefore Jehovah yields to Job's longing שׁדי יענני, in as
far as He really answers Job; and even that this takes place, and that,
although out of the storm, it nevertheless takes place, not in a way to
crush and destroy, but to instruct and convince, and displaying a loving
condescension, is an indirect manifestation that Job is not regarded by
God as an evil-doer mature for judgment. But that folly and temerity by
which the servant of God is become unlike himself must notwithstanding
be destroyed; and before Job can realize God as his Witness and
Redeemer, in which character his faith in the brighter moments has
foreseen Him, his sinful censuring and blaming of God must be blotted
out by penitence; and with it at the same time his foolish imagination,
by which his faith has been almost overwhelmed, must be destroyed, viz.,
the imagination that his affliction is a hostile dispensation of God.

And by what means is Job brought to the penitent recognition of his
gloomy judgment concerning the divine decree, and of his contending with
God? Is it, perhaps, by God's admitting to him what really is the case:
that he does not suffer as a sinner the punishment of his sin, but
showing at the same time that the decree of suffering is not an unjust
one, because its design is not hostile? No, indeed, for Job is not
worthy that his cause should be acknowledged on the part of God before
he has come to a penitent recognition of the wrong by which he has
sinned against God. God would be encouraging self-righteousness if He
should give Job the testimony of his innocence, before the sin of
vainglory, into which Job has fallen in the consciousness of his
innocence, is changed to humility, by which all uprightness that is
acceptable with God is tested. Therefore, contrary to expectation, God
begins to speak with Job about totally different matters from His
justice or injustice in reference to his affliction. Therein already
lies a deep humiliation for Job. But a still deeper one in God's
turning, as it were, to the abecedarium naturae, and putting the
censurer of His doings to the blush. That God is the almighty and
all-wise Creator and Ruler of the world, that the natural world is
exalted above human knowledge and power, and is full of marvellous
divine creations and arrangements, full of things mysterious and
incomprehensible to ignorant and feeble man, Job knows even before God
speaks, and yet he must now hear it, because he does not know it
rightly; for the nature with which he is acquainted as the herald of the
creative and governing power of God, is also the preacher of humility;
and exalted as God the Creator and Ruler of the natural world is above
Job's censure, so is He also as the Author of his affliction. That which
is new, therefore, in the speech of Jehovah, is not the proof of God's
exaltation in itself, but the relation to the mystery of his affliction,
and to his conduct towards God in this his affliction, in which Job is
necessitated to place perceptions not in themselves strange to him. He
who cannot answer a single one of those questions taken from the natural
kingdom, but, on the contrary, must everywhere admire and adore the
power and wisdom of God-he must appear as an insignificant fool, if he
applies them to his limited judgment concerning the Author of his
affliction.

The fundamental tone of the divine speech is the thought, that the
divine working in nature is infinitely exalted above human knowledge and
power, and that consequently man must renounce all claim to better
knowledge and right of contention in the presence of the divine
dispensations. But at the same time, within the range of this general
thought, it is also in particular shown how nature reflects the goodness
of God as well as His wisdom (He has restrained the destructive power of
the waters, He also sendeth rain upon the steppe, though untenanted by
man); how that which accomplishes the purposes for which it was in
itself designed, serves higher purposes in the moral order of the world
(the dawn of day puts an end to the works of darkness, snow and hail
serve as instruments of divine judgments); how divine providence extends
to all creatures, and always according to their need (He provides the
lion its prey, He satisfies the ravens that cry to Him); and how He has
distributed His manifold gifts in a way often paradoxical to man, but in
truth worthy of admiration (to the steinbock ease in bringing forth and
growth without toil, to the wild ass freedom, to the antelope untameable
fleetness, to the ostrich freedom from anxiety about its young and
swiftness, to the horse heroic and proud lust for the battle, to the
hawk the instinct of migration, to the eagle a lofty nest and a piercing
sight). Everywhere the wonders of God's power and wisdom, and in fact of
His goodness abounding in power, and His providence abounding in wisdom,
infinitely transcend Job's knowledge and capacity. Job cannot answer one
of all these questions, but yet he feels to what end they are put to
him. The God who sets bounds to the sea, who refreshes the desert, who
feeds the ravens, who cares for the gazelle in the wilderness and the
eagle in its eyrie, is the same God who now causes him seemingly thus
unjustly to suffer. But if the former is worthy of adoration, the latter
will also be so. Therefore Job confesses that he will henceforth keep
silence, and solemnly promises that he will now no longer contend with
Him. From the marvellous in nature he divines that which is marvellous
in his affliction. His humiliation under the mysteries of nature is at
the same time humiliation under the mystery of his affliction; and only
now, when he penitently reveres the mystery he has hitherto censured, is
it time that its inner glory should be unveiled to him. The bud is
mature, and can now burst forth, in order to disclose the blended
colours of its matured beauty.

[Job 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 40:6</span></span>

6 Then Jehovah answered Job out of the storm, and said:

This second time also Jehovah speaks to Job out of the storm; not,
however, in wrath, but in the profound condescension of His majesty, in
order to deliver His servant from dark imaginings, and to bring him to
free and joyous knowledge. He does not demand blind subjection, but free
submission; He does not extort an acknowledgement of His greatness, but
it is effected by persuasion. It becomes manifest that God is much more
forbearing and compassionate than men. Observe the friends, the
defenders of the divine honour, these sticklers for their own orthodoxy,
how they rave against Job! How much better is it to fall into the hands
of the living God, than into the hands of man! For God is truth and
love; but men have at one time love without truth, at another truth
without love, since they either connive at one or anathematize him. When
a man who, moreover, like Job, is a servant of God, fails in one point,
or sins, men at once condemn him altogether, and admit nothing good in
him; God, however, discerns between good and evil, and makes the good a
means of freeing the man from the evil. He also does not go rashly to
work, but waits, like an instructor, until the time of action arrives.
How long He listens to Job's bold challenging, and keeps silence! And
then, when He does begin to speak, He does not cast Job to the ground by
His authoritative utterances, but deals with him as a child; He examines
him from the catechism of nature, and allows him to say for himself that
he fails in this examination. In this second speech He acts with him as
in the well-known poem of Hans Sachs with St. Peter: He offers him to
take the government of the world for once instead of Himself. Here also
He produces conviction; here also His mode of action is a deep lowering
of Himself. It is Jehovah, the God, who at length begets Himself in
humanity, in order to convince men of His love.

[Job 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 40:7</span></span>

7 Gird up thy loins manfully:

I will question thee, and do thou answer me!

8 Wilt thou altogether annul my right,

Condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous?

9 And hast thou then an arm like God,

And canst thou with the voice thunder like Him?

The question with האף stands to [Job
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#002) in the relation of a climax: Job
contended not alone with God, which is in itself wrong, let it be
whatsoever it may; he went so far as to lose sight of the divine justice
in the government of the world, and in order not to be obliged to give
up his own righteousness, so far as to doubt the divine. ואם, [Job
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#009), is also interrogative, as [Job
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003); [Job
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#004); [Job
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#017), comp. [Job
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013), not expressive of a wish, as
[Job 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#016). In the government of the
world, God shows His arm, He raises His voice of thunder: canst thou
perhaps - asks Jehovah - do the like, thou who seemest to imagine thou
couldst govern the world more justly, if thou hadst to govern it?
וּבקוּל כּמהוּ are to be combined: of like voice to Him; the translation
follows the accents (ובקול with Rebia mugrasch).

[Job 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 40:10</span></span>

10 Deck thyself then with pomp and dignity,

And in glory and majesty clothe thyself!

11 Let the overflowings of thy wrath pour forth,

And behold all pride, and abase it!

12 Behold all pride, bring it low,

And cast down the evil-doers in their place;

13 Hide them in the dust together,

Bind their faces in secret:

14 Then I also will praise thee,

That thy right hand obtaineth thee help.

He is for once to put on the robes of the King of kings (עדה, comp. עטח,
to wrap round, [Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)), and send
forth his wrath over pride and evil-doing, for their complete removal.
הפיץ, effundere, diffundere, as Arab. afâda, vid., [Job
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#011). עברות, or rather, according to
the reading of Ben-Ascher, עברות ,rehcsA, in its prop. signif.
oversteppings, i.e., overflowings. In connection with [Job
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#011), one is directly reminded of the
judgment on everything that is high and exalted in Isa 2, where beטמנם
בּעפר also has its parallel ([Isa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010)). Not less, however, does [Job
40:14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#014) recall [Isa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#016); [Isa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005) (comp. [Psa
98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001)); Isaiah I and II have similar
descriptions to the book of Job. The ἁπ. λεγ. הדך is Hebraeo-Arab.;
hadaka signifies, like hadama, to tear, pull to the ground. In
connection with תמוּן (from טמן; Aram., Arab., טמר), the lower world,
including the grave, is thought of (comp. Arab. mat-murât, subterranean
places); חבשׁ signifies, like Arab. ḥbs IV, to chain and to imprison.
Try it only for once - this is the collective thought - to act like Me
in the execution of penal justice, I would praise thee. That he cannot
do it, and yet venture with his short-sightedness and feebleness to
charge God's rule with injustice, the following pictures of foreign
animals are now further intended to make evident to him: -

[Job 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 40:15</span></span>

15 Behold now the behmth,

Which I have made with thee:

He eateth grass like an ox.

16 Behold now, his strength is in his loins,

And his force in the sinews of his belly.

17 He bendeth his tail like a cedar branch,

The sinews of his legs are firmly interwoven.

18 His bones are like tubes of brass,

His bones like bars of iron.

בּהמות (after the manner of the intensive plur. הוללות, חכמות, which
play the part of the abstract termination), which sounds like a plur.,
but without the numerical plural signification, considered as Hebrew,
denotes the beast κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν, or the giant of beasts, is however
Hebraized from the Egyptian p-ehe-mau, (muau), i.e., the (p) ox (ehe) of
the water (mau as in the Hebraized proper name משׁה). It is, as Bochart
has first of all shown, the so-called river or Nile horse, Hippopotamus
amphibius (in [Isa 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006), בּהמות נגב,
as emblem of Egypt, which extends its power, and still is active in the
interest of others), found in the rivers of Africa, but no longer found
in the Nile, which is not inappropriately called a horse; the Arab.
water-hog is better, Italian bomarino, Eng. sea-cow ?, like the Egyptian
p-ehe-mau. The change of p and b in the exchange of Egyptian and Semitic
words occurs also elsewhere, e.g., pug' and בּוּץ, harpu and חרב (ἅρπη),
Apriu and עברים (according to Lauth). Nevertheless p-ehe-mau (not mau-t,
for what should the post-positive fem. art. do here?) is first of all
only the בהמות translated back again into the Egyptian by Jablonsky; an
instance in favour of this is still wanting. In Hieroglyph the
Nile-horse is called apet; it was honoured as divine. Brugsch dwelt in
Thebes in the temple of the Apet.

(Note: In the astronomical representations the hippopotamus is in the
neighbourhood of the North Pole in the place of the dragon of the
present day, and bears the name of hes-mut, in which mut = t. mau, "the
mother." Hes however is obscure; Birch explains it by: raging.)

In [Job 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015) עמּך signifies nothing
but "with thee," so that thou hast it before thee. This water-ox eats
חציר, green grass, like an ox. That it prefers to plunder the produce of
the fields - in Arab. chadı̂r signifies, in particular, green barley - is
accordingly self-evident. Nevertheless, it has gigantic strength, viz.,
in its plump loins and in the sinews (שׁרירי, properly the firm
constituent parts,

(Note: Staring from its primary signification (made firm, fast), Arab.
srı̂r, שׁרירא can signify e.g., also things put together from wood: a
throne, a hand-barrow, bedstead and cradle, metaphor. the foundation.
Wetzst. otherwise: "The שׂרירי הבטן are not the sinews and muscles,
still less 'the private parts' of others, but the four bearers of the
animal body = arkân el-batn, viz., the bones of the מתנים, [Job
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016), together with the two
shoulder-blades. The Arab. sarı̂r is that on which a thing is supported
or rests, on which it stands firmly, or moves about. Neshwn (i. 280)
says: ‛sarı̂r is the substratum on which a thing rests,' and the sarı̂r
er-ra's, says the same, is the place where the head rests upon the nape
of the neck. The Kms gives the same signification primo loco, which
shows that it is general; then follows in gen. Arab. muḍṭaja‛, "the
support of a thing.")

therefore: ligaments and muscles) of its clumsy belly. The brush of a
tail, short in comparison with the monster itself, is compared to a
cedar (a branch of it), ratione glabritiei, rotunditatis, spissitudinis
et firmitatis (Bochart); since the beast is in general almost without
hair, it looks like a stiff, naked bone, and yet it can bend it like an
elastic cedar branch; חפץ is Hebraeo-Arab., ḥfḍ

(Note: Wetzst. otherwise: One may compare the Arab. chafaḍa, fut. i, to
hold, sit, lie motionless (in any place), from which the signification
of desiring, longing, has been developed, since in the Semitic languages
the figure of fixing (ta‛alluq) the heard and the eye on any desired
object is at the basis of this notion (wherefore such verbs are joined
with the praep. בּ). According to this, it is to be explained, "his tail
is motionless like (the short and thick stem of) The cedar," for the
stunted tail of an animal is a mark of its strength to a Semite. In
1860, as I was visiting the neighbouring mountain fortress of el-Hosn
with the octogenarian Fjd, the sheikh of Fk in Gln, we rode past Fjd's
ploughmen; and as one of them was letting his team go slowly along, the
sheikh cried out to him from a distance: Faster! faster! They (the
steers, which thou ploughest) are not oxen weak with age, nor are they
the dower of a widow (who at her second marriage receives only a pair of
weak wretched oxen from her father or brother); but they are heifers
(3-4 year-old steers) with stiffly raised tails (wadhujûluhin
muqashmare, מקשׁמר an intensive קשׁוּר or שׁלאנן comp. שׁלאנן, [Job
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#023)).)

is a word used directly of the bending of wood (el-‛ûd).

Since this description, like the whole book of Job, is so strongly
Arabized, פחד, [Job 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#017), will also
be one word with the Arab. fachidh, the thigh; as the Arabic version
also translates: ‛urûku afchâdhihi (the veins or strings of its thigh).
The Targ., retaining the word of the text here,

(Note: Another Targ., which translates גבריה ושׁעבוזוהי, penis et
testiculi ejus, vid., Aruch s.v. שׁעבז.)

has פּחדין in [Lev 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#020) for אשׁך, a
testicle, prop. inguina, the groins; we interpret: the sinews of its
thighs or legs

(Note: According to Fleischer, fachidh signifies properly the thick-leg
(= thigh), from the root fach, with the general signification of being
puffed out, swollen, thick.)

are intertwined after the manner of intertwined vine branches, שׂריגים.

(Note: In the choice of the word ישׂרגו, the mushâgarat ed-dawâlı̂ (from
שׁגר = שׂרג), "the interweaving of the vine branches" was undoubtedly
before the poet's eye; comp. Deutsch. Morgenl. Zeitschr. xi. 477: "On
all sides in this delightful corner of the earth (the Ghta) the vine
left to itself, in diversified ramifications, often a dozen branches
resembling so many huge snakes entangled together, swings to and fro
upon the shining stem of the lofty white poplar." And ib. S. 491: "a
twisted vine almost the thickness of a man, as though formed of rods of
iron (comp. [Job 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#018)).")

But why is פחדיו pointed thus, and not פחדיו (as e.g., שׁעריו)? It is
either an Aramaizing (with אשׁריו it has another relationship) pointing
of the plur., or rather, as Khler has perceived, a regularly-pointed
dual (like רגליו), from פּחדים (like פּעמים), which is equally suitable
in connection with the signification femora as testiculi. מטיל, [Job
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#018), is also Hebraeo-Arab.; for
Arab. mṭl signifies to forge, or properly to extend by forging
(hammering), and to lengthen, undoubtedly a secondary formation of טוּל,
tâla, to be long, as makuna of kâna, madana of dâna, massara (to found a
fortified city) of sâra, chiefly (if not always) by the intervention of
such nouns as makân, medı̂ne, misr (= מצור), therefore in the present
instance by the intervention of this metı̂l (= memtûl)

(Note: The noun מטיל is also found in the Lexicon of Neshwn, i. 63:
"מטיל is equivalent to ממטוּל, viz., that which is hammered out in
length, used of iron and other metals; and one says חדידה מטילה of a
piece of iron that has been hammered for the purpose of stretching it."
The verb Neshwn explains: "מטל said of iron signifies to stretch it that
it may become long." The verb מטל can be regarded as a fusion of the
root מדד (מטט, טוּט, comp. מוטה, and Arab. mûṭ Beduin: to take long
steps) with the root טוּל, to be long. - Wetzst. The above explanation
of the origin of the verb מטל seems to us more probable.)

whence probably μέταλλον (metal), properly iron in bars or rods,
therefore metal in a wrought state, although not yet finished.

(Note: Ibn-Koreisch in Pinsker, Likkute, p. קנא, explains it without
exactness by sebikat hadı̂d, which signifies a smelted and formed piece
of iron.)

Its bones are like tubes of brass, its bones (גּרמיו, the more Aram.
word) like forged rods of iron - what an appropriate description of the
comparatively thin but firm as iron skeleton by which the plump mass of
flesh of the gigantic boar-like grass-eater is carried!

[Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 40:19</span></span>

19 He is the firstling of the ways of God;

He, his Maker, reached to him his sword.

20 For the mountains bring forth food for him,

And all the beasts of the field play beside him.

21 Under the lote-trees he lieth down,

In covert of reeds and marsh.

22 Lote-trees cover him as shade,

The willows of the brook encompass him.

23 Behold, if the stream is strong, he doth not quake;

He remaineth cheerful, if a Jordan breaketh forth upon his mouth.

24 Just catch him while he is looking,

With snares let one pierce his nose!

God's ways is the name given to God's operations as the Creator of the
world in [Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019) (comp. [Job
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014), where His acts as the Ruler of
the world are included); and the firstling of these ways is called the
Behmth, not as one of the first in point of time, but one of the hugest
creatures, un chef-d'oeuvre de Dieu (Bochart); ראשׁית not as [Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022); [Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020), of the priority of time, but as
[Amo 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001), [Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006), of rank. The art. in העשׁו is,
without the pronominal suff. being meant as an accusative (Ew. 290, d),
equal to a demonstrative pronoun (comp. Ges. 109, init): this its
Creator (but so that "this" does not refer back so much as forwards). It
is not meant that He reached His sword to behmoth, but (on which account
לו is intentionally wanting) that He brought forth, i.e., created, its
(behmoth's) peculiar sword, viz., the gigantic incisors ranged opposite
one another, with which it grazes upon the meadow as with a sickle:
ἀρούρῃσιν κακὴν ἐπιβάλλεται ἅρπην (Nicander, Theriac. 566), ἅρπη is
exactly the sickle-shaped Egyptian sword (harpu = חרב). Vegetable food
(to which its teeth are adapted) is appointed to the behmoth: "for the
mountains produce food for him;" it is the herbage of the hills (which
is scanty in the lower and more abundant in the upper valley of the
Nile) that is intended, after which this uncouth animal climbs (vid.,
Schlottm.). בּוּל is neither a contraction of יבוּל (Ges.), nor a
corruption of it (Ew.), but Hebraeo-Arab. = baul, produce, from bâla, to
beget, comp. aballa, to bear fruit (prop. seed, bulal), root בל, to
soak, wet, mix.

(Note: Whether בּליל, [Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005); [Job
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006), signifies mixed provender
(farrago), or perhaps ripe fruit, i.e., grain, so that jabol, [Jdg
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#021), in the signification "he gave
dry provender consisting of barley-grain," would be the opposite of the
jahushsh (יחשׁ) of the present day, "he gives green provender consisting
of green grass or green barley, hashı̂sh," as Wetzst. supposes, vid., on
[Isa 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#024).)

[Job 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020) describes how harmless, and
if unmolested, inoffensive, the animal is; שׁם there, viz., while it is
grazing.

In [Job 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021) Saadia correctly
translates: Arab. tḥt 'l-ḍâl; and [Job
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#022), Abulwalid: Arab. ygṭı̂h 'l-ḍl
mdlllâ lh, tegit eum lotus obumbrans eum, by interpreting Arab. 'l-ḍl,
more correctly Arab. 'l-ḍâl, with es-sidr el-berrı̂, i.e., Rhamnus
silvestris (Rhamnus Lotus, Linn.), in connection with which Schultens'
observation is to be noticed: Cave intelligas lotum Aegyptiam s. plantam
Niloticam quam Arabes Arab. nûfr. The fact that the wild animals of the
steppe seek the shade of the lote-tree, Schultens has supported by
passages from the poets. The lotus is found not only in Syria, but also
in Egypt, and the whole of Africa.

(Note: The Arab. ḍâl or Dûm-tree, which likes hot and damp valleys, and
hence is found much on the northern, and in great numbers on the
eastern, shores of the Sea of Galilee, is called in the present day
sidra, collect. sidr; and its fruit, a small yellow apple, dûma,
collect. dûm, perhaps "the not ending, perennial," because the fruit of
the previous year only falls from the tree when that of the present year
is ripe. Around Bagdad, as they told me, the Dûm-tree bears twice a
year. In Egypt its fruit is called nebq (נבק, not nibq as in Freytag),
and the tree is there far stronger and taller than in Syria, where it is
seldom more than about four and twenty feet high. Only in the Wdi
's-sidr on the mountains of Judaea have I seen several unusually large
trunks. The Kms places the signification "the sweet Dûm-tree" first of
all to Arab. ḍâl, and then "the wild D." In hotter regions there may
also be a superior kind with fine fruit, in Syria it is only wild -
Neshwn (ii. 192) says: "dâla, collect. dâl, is the wild Dûm-tree," - yet
I have always found its fruit sweet and pleasant to the taste. -
Wetzst.)

The plur. is formed from the primary form צאל, as שׁקמים from שׁקם,
Olsh. 148, b; the single tree was perhaps called צאלה (= Arab. ḍâlt), as
שׁקמה (Ew. 189, h). Ammianus Marc. xxii. 15 coincides with [Job
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021): Inter arundines celsas et
squalentes nimia densitate haec bellua cubilia ponit. צללו, [Job
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#022) (resolved from צלּו, as גּללו,
[Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007), from גּלּו),

(Note: Forms like גּלל, צלל, are unknown to the language, because it was
more natural for ease of pronunciation to make the primary form סבבּ
into סב than into סבב, גּללו (vid., p. 449), צללו, might more readily be
referred to גּלל, צלל (in which the first a is a helping vowel, and the
second a root vowel); but although the form קטל and the segolate forms
completely pass into one another in inflection, still there does not
exist a safe example in favour of the change of vowels of קטל into קטלי;
wherefore we have also derived אגלי, [Job
38:28](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#028), from אגל, not from אגל,
although, moreover, ̇̇ frequently enough alternates with ̇̇ (e.g., ישׁעך),
and a transition into ̇̇ of the ̇̇ weakened from ̇̇ (e.g., ידכם) also
occurs. But there are no forms like נטפי = נטפי from נטף in reality,
although they would be possible according to the laws of vowels. In Ges.
Handwrterb. (1863) גּללו stands under גּלל (according to the form לבב,
which, however, forms לבבו) and צללו under סלל ( a rare noun-form, which
does not occur at all from verbs double Ayin).)

is in apposition with the subj.: Lote-trees cover it as its shade
(shading it). The double play of words in [Job
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#022) is not reproduced in the English
translation.

הן, [Job 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023), pointing to something
possible, obtains almost the signification of a conditional particle, as
[Job 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014); [Job
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008); [Isa
54:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#015). The Arabic version
appropriately translates Arab. 'n ṭgâ 'l-nhr, for Arab. ṭgâ denotes
exactly like עשׁק, excessive, insolent behaviour, and is then, as also
Arab. dlm, ‛tâ, and other verbs given by Schultens, transferred from the
sphere of ethics to the overflow of a river beyond its banks, to the
rush of raging waters, to the rising and bursting forth of swollen
streams. It does not, however, terrify the behmoth, which can live as
well in the water as on the land; לא יחפּוז, properly, it does not
spring up before it, is not disturbed by it. Instead of the Jordan, [Job
40:23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023), especially in connection with
יגיח, the 'Gaihn (the Oxus) or the 'Gaihn (the Pyramus) might have been
mentioned, which have their names from the growing force with which they
burst forth from their sources (גּיח, גּוּח, comp. 'gâcha, to wash
away). But in order to express the notion of a powerful and at times
deep-swelling stream, the poet prefers the ירדּן of his fatherland,
which moreover, does not lie so very far from the scene, according to
the conception at least, since all the wadis in its neighbourhood flow
directly or indirectly (as Wdi el-Meddn, the boundary river between the
district of Suwt and the Nukra plain) into the Jordan. For ירדּן
(perhaps from ירד)

(Note: Certainly one would have expected ירדּן like גּרזן, while ירדּן
like יעבּץ, יעזר, appears formed from רדן; nevertheless ירדּן (with
changeable Ssere) can be understood as a change of vowel from ירדּן
(comp. ישׁב for ישׁב).)

does not here signify a stream (rising in the mountain) in general; the
name is not deprived of its geographical definiteness, but is a
particularizing expression of the notion given above.

The description closes in [Job 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#024)
with the ironical challenge: in its sight (בּעיניו as [Pro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#017)) let one (for once) catch it; let
one lay a snare which, when it goes into it, shall spring together and
pierce it in the nose; i.e., neither the open force nor the stratagem,
which one employs with effect with other animals, is sufficient to
overpower this monster. מוקשׁים is generally rendered as equal to חחים,
[Isa 37:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029); [Eze
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#004), or at least to the cords drawn
through them, but contrary to the uniform usage of the language. The
description of the hippopotamus

(Note: Vid., Grehm, Aus dem Leben des Nilpferds, Gartenlaube 1859, Nr.
48, etc.)

is not followed by that of the crocodile, which also elsewhere form a
pair, e.g., in Achilles Tatius, iv. 2, 19. Behemoth and leviathan, says
Herder, are the pillars of Hercules at the end of the book, the non plus
ultra of another world distant from the scene. What the same writer says
of the poet, that he does not "mean to furnish any contributions to
Pennant's Zoologie or to Linnaeus' Animal Kingdom," the expositor also
must assent to.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 41](job041)

</div>
