<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job012)  [Next](job014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#001)

[Job 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 13:1</span></span>

1 Lo, mine eye hath seen all,

Mine ear hath heard and marked it.

2 What ye know do I know also,

I do not stand back behind you.

Job has brought forward proof of what he has stated at the commencement
of this speech ([Job 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003)), that he is
not inferior to them in the knowledge of God and divine things, and
therefore he can now repeat as proved what he maintains. The plain כּל,
which in other passages, with the force of הכּל, signifies omnes ([Gen
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012); [Isa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005); [Jer
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#012)) and omnia ([Job
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#002); [Psa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#007); [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024)), has the definite sense of haec
omnia here. לה (v. 1b) is not after the Aramaic manner dat. pro acc.
objecti: my ear has heard and comprehended it (id); but dat. commodi, or
perhaps only dat. ethicus: and has made it intelligible to itself
(sibi); בּין of the apprehension accompanying perception. He has a
knowledge of the exalted and glorious majesty of God, acquired partly
from his own observation and partly from the teachings of others. He
also knows equal to (instar) their knowledge, i.e., he has a knowledge
(ידע as the idea implied in it, e.g., like [Psa
82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)) which will bear comparison with
theirs. But he will no longer contend with them.

[Job 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 13:3</span></span>

3 But I would speak to the Almighty,

And I long to reason with God.

4 And ye however are forgers of lies,

Physicians of no value are ye all.

5 Oh that ye would altogether hold your peace,

It would be accounted to you as wisdom.

6 Hear now my instruction,

Ando hearken to the answers of my lips!

He will no longer dispute with the friends; the more they oppose him,
the more earnestly he desires to be able to argue his cause before God.
אוּלם ([Job 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#003)) is disjunctive, like
ἀλλά, and introduces a new range of thoughts; lxx ου ̓ μήν δὲ ἀλλά,
verum enim vero. True, he has said in Job 9 that no one can maintain his
cause before God; but his confidence in God grows in proportion as his
distrust of the friends increases; and at the same time, the hope is
begotten that God will grant him that softening of the terror of His
majesty which he has reserved to himself in connection with this
declaration ([Job 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034), comp. [Job
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#020).). The infin. absol. הוכח, which
in [Job 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025) is used almost as a
substantive, and indeed as the subject, is here in the place of the
object, as e.g., [Isa 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005); [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006) : to prove, i.e., my cause, to
God (אל־אל, like [Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015), אל־פּניו)
I long. With ואוּלם ([Job 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#004)) the
antithesis is introduced anew: I will turn to God, you on the contrary
(καὶ ὑμεῖς δὲ). Since the verb טפל, from its primary meaning to spread
on, smear on (whence e.g., Talmudic טפלה, the act of throwing on, as
when plastering up the cracks of an oven), cogn. תּפל (whence תּפל,
plaster, and perhaps also in the signification tasteless, [Job
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#006) = sticky, greasy, slimy), does not
signify, at least not at first, consuere, but assuere (without any
relation of root with תּפר), we explain, not with Olshausen and others,
concinnatores mendacii, such as sew together lies as patchwork; but with
Hirzel and others, assutores mendacii, such as patch on lies, i.e.,
charge falsely, since they desire throughout to make him out to be a
sinner punished according to his desert. This explanation is also
confirmed by [Job 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017). Another
explanation is given by Hupfeld: sarcinatores false = inanes, inutiles,
so that שׁקר signifies what lies = what deceives, as in the parallel
member of the verse אלל,

(Note: In the Talmudic, the jugular vein, the cutting of which produces
death, is called אלל (later עצב, Arab. ‛ṣb), according to which (b.
Chullin 121a) it is explained: healer of the jugular artery, i.e., those
who try to heal what is incurable, therefore charlatans, - a strange
idea, which has arisen from the defective form of writing אלל. The lxx
translates ἰαταὶ κακῶν.)

nothingness, and also עמל ([Job 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#002))
in a similar connection, is not an objective but attributive genitive;
but [Psa 119:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#069) is decisive against
this interpretation of שׁקר טפלי. The parallelism is not so exactly
adjusted, as e.g., even רפאי does not on account of the parallel with
טפלי signify patchers, ῥάπται, but: they are not able to heal Job's
wounds with the medicine of consolation; they are medici nihili, useless
physicians. [Pro 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#028), "Even a fool,
when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise," applies to them, si
tacuisses, sapiens mansisses; or, as a rabbinical proverb of similar
meaning, quoted by Heidenheim, says, השׂגה בהשׂגה הלאות, "the fatigue of
comprehension is comprehension," i.e., the silent pause before a problem
is half the solution. The jussive form וּתהי, it would be (Ges. 128, 2),
is used in the conclusion of the wish. Thus he challenges them to hear
his תּוכחת (תּוכחה) and his רבוה. Hirzel is quite right when he says the
former does not mean defence (justification), nor the latter proofs
(counter-evidence); תוכחת is, according to his signification
(significatus, in distinction from sensus), ἔλεγχος, correptio (lxx,
Vulg.), and here not so much refutation and answer, as correction in an
ethical sense, in correspondence with which רבות is also intended of
reproaches, reproofs, or reprimands.

[Job 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 13:7</span></span>

7 Will ye speak what is wrong for God,

And speak what is deceitful for Him?

8 Will ye be partial for Him,

Or will ye play the part of God's advocates?

9 Would it be pleasant if He should search you out,

Or can ye jest with Him, as one jesteth with men?

10 He will surely expose you

If ye secretly act with partiality.

11 Will not His majesty confound you,

And His fear fall upon you?

Their advocacy of God - this is the thought of this strophe - is an
injustice to Job, and an evil service rendered to God, which cannot
escape undisguised punishment from Him. They set themselves up as God's
advocates (לאל ריב, like לבּעל ריב, [Jdg
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#031)), and at the same time accept His
person, accipiunt (as in acceptus = gratus), or lift it up, i.e.,
favour, or give preference to, His person, viz., at the expense of the
truth: they are partial in His favour, as they are twice reminded and
given to understand by the fut. energicum תּשּׂאוּן. The addition of
בּסּתר ([Job 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#010)) implies that they
conceal their better knowledge by the assumption of an earnest tone and
bearing, expressive of the strongest conviction that they are in the
right. They know that Job is not a flagrant sinner; nevertheless they
deceive themselves with the idea that he is, and by reason of this
delusion they take up the cause of God against him. Such perversion of
the truth in majorem Dei gloriam is an abomination to God. When He
searches them, His advocates, out (חקר, as Prov.[Job
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#011)), they will become conscious of
it; or will God be mocked, as one mocketh mortal men? Comp. [Gal
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007) for a similar thought. חתל is inf.
absol. after the form תּללּ, and תּהתלּוּ is also to be derived from
תּללּ, and is fut. Hiph., the preformative not being syncopated, for
תּתלּוּ (Ges. 53, rem. 7); not Piel, from התל (as [Kg1
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027)), with the doubling of the
middle radical resolved (Olsh. in his Lehrb. S. 577). God is not pleased
with λατρεία ([Joh 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002)) which gives
the honour to Him, but not to truth, such ζῆλος Θεοῦ ἀλλ ̓ ου ̓ κατ ̓
ἐπίγνωσιν ([Rom 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)), such advocacy
contrary to one's better knowledge and conscience, in which the end is
thought to sanctify the means. Such advocacy must be put to shame and
confounded when He who needs no concealment of the truth for His
justification is manifest in His שׂאת, i.e., not: in the kindling of His
wrath (after [Jdg 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038); [Isa
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027)), but: in His exaltation
(correctly by Ralbag: התנשׂאותו ורוממותו), and by His direct influence
brings all untruth to light. It is the boldest thought imaginable, that
one dare not have respect even to the person of God when one is obliged
to lie to one's self. And still it is also self-evident. For God and
truth can never be antagonistic.

[Job 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 13:12</span></span>

12 Your memorable words are proverbs of dust,

Your strongholds are become strongholds of clay!

13 Leave me in peace, and I will speak,

And let what will come on me.

14 Wherefore should I bear my flesh in my teeth?

I take my soul in my hands.

15 Behold, He slayeth me-I wait for Him:

I will only prove my way before Him.

16 Even this would by my salvation,

That a hypocrite dare not appear before Him.

The words by which they exhort and warn him are called זכרנים, not
because they recall the experience and teaching of the ancients (Hirz.),
but as sayings to which attention and thought should be given, with the
tone of זכר־נא, [Job 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007) (Hahn); as
ספר זכרון, [Mal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016), the book of
remembrance; and ספר זכרנות, [Est 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001),
the book of memorabilia or memoranda. These their loci communes are
proverbs of ashes, i.e., proverbs which in respect to the present case,
say nothing, passing away like ashes (אפר = vanity, [Isa
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020)). While [Job
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#012) says what their speeches, with
the weighty nota bene, are, [Job 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#012)
says what their גּבּים become; for ל always denotes a κίνησις = γένεσις,
and is never the exponent of the predicate in a simple clause.

(Note: The Jewish expositors compare [Ch1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#002) on לגבי, but the ל there in
לאבשׁלום is a clerical error (comp. [Sa2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)). Reiske conjectures רגבי (lumps
of clay), one of the best among his most venturesome conjectures.)

Like the Arabic dahr, גּב signifies a boss, back, then protection,
bulwark, rampart: their arguments or proofs are called גבים (עצּמות,
[Isa 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021); comp. ὀχυρώματα, [Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004)); these ramparts which they throw
up become as ramparts of clay, will be shown to be such by their being
soon broken through and falling in. Their reasons will not stand before
God, but, like clay that will not hold together, fall to pieces.

[Job 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#013)

Be silent therefore from me, he says to them, i.e., stand away from me
and leave me in peace (opp. החרישׁ אל, [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)): then will I speak, or: in order
that I may speak (the cohortative usual in apod. imper.) - he, and he
alone, will defend (i.e., against God) his cause, which they have so
uncharitably abandoned in spite of their better knowledge and
conscience, let thereby happen (עבר, similar to [Deu
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005)) to him מה, whatever may happen
(מה שׁיעבר); or more simply: whatever it may be, quidquid est, as [Sa2
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#022) ויהי מה, let happen whatever may
happen; or more simply: whatever it may be, like מה דּבר quodcunque,
[Num 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#003); מי occurs also in a similar
sense, thus placed last (Ewald, 104, d).

[Job 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014)

Wherefore should he carry away his flesh in his teeth, i.e., be intent
upon the maintenance of his life, as a wild beast upon the preservation
of its prey, by holding it between its teeth (mordicus tenet) and
carrying it away? This is a proverbial phrase which does not occur
elsewhere; for [Jer 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#002) (thy life
shall become as spoil, לשׁלל, to thee) is only similar in outward
appearance. It may be asked whether [Job
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014) continues the question begun
with על־מה (vid., on [Isa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)): and
wherefore should I take my soul in my hands, i.e., carefully protect it
as a valuable possession? (Eichh., Umbr., Vaih.). But apart from [Psa
119:109](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#109) (my soul is continually in my
hand), - where it may be asked, whether the soul is not there regarded
as treasure (according to the current religious phrase: to carry his
soul in his hand = to work out the blessedness of his soul with fear and
trembling), - בכפּיו נפשׁו שׂים signifies everywhere else ([Jdg
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#003); [Sa1
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#005); [Sa1
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#021)) as much as to risk one's life
without fear of death, properly speaking: to fight one's way through
with one's fist, perishing so soon as the strength of one's fist is gone
(Ewald); comp. the expression for the impending danger of death, [Deu
28:66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066). If this sense, which is in
accordance with the usage of the language, be adopted, it is unnecessary
with Hirz., after Ewald, 352, b, to take ונפשׁי for נפשׁי גם: also, even
my soul, etc., although it cannot be denied that ו, like καὶ and et,
sometimes signifies: also, etiam ([Isa
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#007); [Ch2
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#005); [Ecc
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006), and according to the accents,
[Hos 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006) also; on the contrary, [Sa2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#023); [Psa
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012), can at least by explained by
the copulative meaning, and [Amo 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#010)
by "and indeed"). The waw joins the positive to the negative assertion
contained in the question of [Job
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014) (Hahn): I will not eagerly make
my flesh safe, and will take my soul in my hand, i.e., calmly and
bravely expose myself to the danger of death. Thus [Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015) is most directly connected with
what precedes.

[Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015)

This is one of eighteen passages in which the Chethib is לא and the Keri
לו; [Job 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021) is another.

(Note: In Frst, Concord. p. 1367, col. 1, the following passages are
wanting: [Sa1 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#003); [Kg2
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#010); [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003); [Psa
139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016); [Pro
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#007); [Pro
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#002); [Ch1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020), which are to be supplied from
Aurivillius, diss. p. 469, where, however, on the other hand, [Sa2
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#007) is wanting. [Exo
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008) also belongs to these passages.
In this last passage Mhlau proposes a transposition of the letters thus:
לא ידעה (if she displease her master, so that he knows her not, does not
like to make her his concubine, then he shall cause her to be redeemed,
etc.). In his volume on Isaiah just published (1866), Dr. Delitzsch
appends the following note on [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009) : - "There are fifteen passages
in which the Keri substitutes לו for לא, vid., Masora magna on [Lev
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021) (Psalter, ii. 60). If we include
[Isa 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005); [Ch1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020); [Sa1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#016) also, there are then eighteen
(comp. on [Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015)); but the first
two of these passages are very doubtful, and are therefore intentionally
omitted, and in the third it is לא that is substituted for לו (Ges.
Thes. 735, b). [Sa2 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#007) also does not
belong here, for in this passage the Keri is לוּ." - Tr.\])

In the lxx, which moreover changes איחל into החל, ἄρχεσθαι, the
rendering is doubtful, the Cod. Vat. Translating ἐάν με χειρώσηται, the
Cod. Alex. ἐὰν μή με χειρ. The Mishna b. Sota, 27, b, refers to the
passage with reference to the question whether Job had served God from
love or fear, and in favour of the former appeals to [Job
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#005), since here the matter is
doubtful (הדבר שׁקול), as the present passage may be explained, "I hope
in Him," or "I hope not." The Gemara, ib. 31, a, observes that the
reading לא does not determine the sense, for [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009) is written לא, and is not
necessarily to be understood as לו, but can be so understood.

(Note: Vid., Geiger, Lesestcke aus der Mischnah (1845), S. 37f.)

Among the ancient versions, the Targ., Syr., and Jerome (etiamsi
occiderit me, in ipso sperabo) are in favour of לו. This translation of
the Vulgate is followed by the French, English, Italian, and other
versions. This utterance, in this interpretation, has a venerable
history. The Electoress Louise Henriette von Oranien (died 1667), the
authoress of the immortal hymn, "Jesus meine Zuversicht" the English
translation begins, "Jesus Christ, my sure defence," chose these words,
"Though the Lord should slay me, yet will I hope in Him," for the text
of her funeral oration. And many in the hour of death have adopted the
utterance of Job in this form as the expression of their faith and
consolation.

(Note: Vid., Gschel, Die Kurfrstinnen zu Brandenburg aus dem Hause
Hohenzollern (1857), S. 28-32.)

Among these we may mention a Jewess. The last movement of the wasted
fingers of Grace Aguilar was to spell the words, "Though He slay me, yet
will I trust in Him."

(Note: Marie Henriquez Morales, bearbeitet von Piza (1860), X. 12.)

The words, so understood, have an historic claim in their favour which
we will not dispute. Even the apostles do not spurn the use of the Greek
words of the Old Testament, though they do not accord with the proper
connection in the original text, provided they are in accordance with
sacred Scripture, and give brief and pregnant expression to a truth
taught elsewhere in the Scriptures. Thus it is with this utterance,
which, understood as the Vulgate understands it, is thoroughly Job-like,
and in some measure the ultimate solution of the book of Job. It is
also, according to its most evident meaning, an expression of perfect
resignation. We admit that if it is translated: behold, He will slay me,
I hope not, i.e., I await no other and happier issue, a thought is
obtained that also agrees with the context. But יחל does not properly
mean to hope, but to wait for; and even in [Job
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011); [Job
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014), where it stands as much without
an object as here, it has no other meaning but that of waiting; and
Luther is true to it when he translates: behold, He will destroy me, and
I cannot expect it; it is, however, strange; and Bttch. translates: I
will not wait to justify myself, which is odd. The proper meaning of
יחל, praestolari, gives no suitable sense. Thus, therefore, the writer
will have written or meant לו, since יחל ל is also elsewhere a familiar
expression with him, [Job 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#021), [Job
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#023); [Job
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#026). The meaning, then, which agrees
both with the context and with the reality, is: behold, He will slay me,
I wait for Him, i.e., I wait what He may do, even to smite with death,
only I will (אך, as frequently, e.g., [Psa
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016), does not belong to the word
which immediately follows, but to the whole clause) prove my ways to
Him, even before His face. He fears the extreme, but is also prepared
for it. Hirzel, Heiligst., Vaihinger, and others, think that Job regards
his wish for the appearing of God as the certain way of death, according
to the belief that no one can behold God and not die. But יקטלני has
reference to a different form of idea. He fears the risk of disputing
with God, and being obliged to forfeit his life; but, as לו איחל
implies, he resigns himself even to the worst, he waits for Him to whom
he resigns himself, whatever He may do to him; nevertheless (אך
restrictive, or as frequently אכן adversative, which is the same thing
here) he cannot and will not keep down the inward testimony of his
innocence, he is prepared to render Him an account of the ways in which
he has walked (i.e., the way of His will) - he can succumb in all
respects but that of his moral guiltlessness. And in [Job
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#016) he adds what will prove a
triumph for him, that a godless person, or (what is suitable, and if it
does not correspond to the primary idea,

(Note: The verb חנף signifies in the Arabic to deviate, to go on one
side (whence, e.g., ahhnaf, bandy-legged): hhanı̂f, which is derived from
it, is a so-called Arab. ḍidd, ἐναντιόσημον, which may mean both one
inclining to the good and true (one who is orthodox), and in this sense
it is a surname of Abraham, and one inclining to evil. Beidhwi explains
it by ml, inclining one's self to; the synonym, but used only in a good
sense, is Arab. 'l-‛âdl, el-‛âdil.)

still accords with the use of the word) a hypocrite, one who judges thus
of himself in his own heart, would not so come forward to answer for
himself before God (Hahn). It can be explained: that a godless person
has no access to God; but the other explanation givers a truer thought.
הוא is here used as neuter, like [Job
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#009); [Job
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#028) comp. [Job
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#003), [Exo
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#010). Correctly lxx, καὶ τοῦτό μοι
ἀποβήσεται εἰς σωτηρίαν. ישׁוּעה here (comp. [Job
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015)) has not, however, the usual
deeper meaning which it has in the prophets and in Psalms. It means here
salvation, as victory in a contest for the right. Job means that he has
already as good as won the contest, by so urgently desiring to defend
himself before God. This excites a feeling in favour of his innocence at
the onset, and secures him an acquittal.

[Job 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 13:17</span></span>

17 Hear, O hear my confession,

And let my declaration echo in your ears.

18 Behold now! I have arranged the cause,

I know that I shall maintain the right.

19 Who then can contend with me?

Then, indeed, I would be silent and expire.

Eager for the accomplishment of his wish that he might himself take his
cause before God, and as though in imagination it were so, he invites
the friends to be present to hear his defence of himself. מלּה (in
Arabic directly used for confession = religion) is the confession which
he will lay down, and אחוה the declaration that he will make in
evidence, i.e., the proof of his innocence. The latter substantive,
which signifies brotherly conduct in post-biblical Hebrew, is here an
ἅπ. λεγ. from חוה, not however with Aleph prostheticum from Kal, but
after the form אזכּרה = הזכּרה, from the Aphl = Hiphil of this verb,
which, except [Psa 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003), occurs only
in the book of Job as Hebrew (comp. the n. actionis, אחויה, [Dan
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#012)), Ewald, 156, c. It is
unnecessary to carry the שׁמעוּ on to [Job
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#017) (hear now ... with your own
ears, as e.g., [Jer 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#011)); [Job
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#017) is an independent substantival
clause like [Job 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#011); [Isa
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#009), which carries in itself the
verbal idea of תּהי or תּבא ([Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007)). They shall hear, for on his
part he has arranged, i.e., prepared (משׁפּט ערך, causam instruere, as
[Job 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#004), comp. [Job
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#005)) the cause, so that the action
can begin forthwith; and he knows that he, he and no one else, will be
found in the right. With the conviction of this superiority, he
exclaims, Who in all the world could contend with him, i.e., advance
valid arguments against his defence of himself? Then, indeed, if this
impossibility should happen, he would be dumb, and willingly die as one
completely overpowered not merely in outward appearance, but in reality
vanquished. יריב עמדי following הוא מי (comp. [Job
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)) may be taken as an elliptical
relative clause: qui litigare possit mecum (comp. [Isa
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009) with [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034), τίς ὁ καταδρίνων); but since זה
הוא מי is also used in the sense of quis tandem or ecquisnam, this
syntactic connection which certainly did exist (Ewald, 325, a) is
obliterated, and הוא serves like זה only to give intensity and vividness
to the מי. On עתּה כּי (in meaning not different to אז כּי), vid., [Job
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013); [Job
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006). In [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019) that is granted as possible
which, according to the declaration of his conscience, Job must consider
as absolutely impossible. Therefore he clings to the desire of being
able to bring his cause before God, and becomes more and more absorbed
in the thought.

[Job 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 13:20</span></span>

20 Only two things do not unto me,

Then will I not hide myself from Thy countenance:

21 Withdraw Thy hand from me,

And let Thy fear not terrify me -

22 Call then and I will answer,

Or I will speak and answer Thou me!

He makes only two conditions in his prayer, as he has already expressed
it in [Job 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034) : (1) That God would
grant him a cessation of his troubles; (2) That He would not overwhelm
him with His majesty. The chastening hand of God is generally called יד
elsewhere; but in spite of this prevalent usage of the language, כּף
cannot be understood here (comp. on the contrary [Job
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#007)) otherwise than of the hand ([Job
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034) : the rod) of God, which lies
heavily on Job. The painful pressure of that hand would prevent the
collecting and ordering of his thoughts required for meeting with God,
and the אימה (Codd. defectively אמתך) of God would completely crush and
confound him. But if God grants these two things: to remove His hand for
a time, and not to turn the terrible side of His majesty to him, then he
is ready whether God should himself open the cause or permit him to have
the first word. Correctly Mercerus: optionem ei dat ut aut actoris aut
rei personam deligat, sua fretus innocentia, sed interim sui oblitus et
immodicus. In contrast with God he feels himself to be a poor worm, but
his consciousness of innocence makes him a Titan.

He now says what he would ask God; or rather, he now asks Him, since he
vividly pictures to himself the action with God which he desires. His
imagination anticipates the reality of that which is longed for. Modern
expositors begin a new division at [Job
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023). But Job's speech does not yet
take a new turn; it goes on further continually uno tenore.

[Job 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 13:23</span></span>

23 How many are mine iniquities and sins?

Make me to know my transgression and sin! - -

24 Wherefore dost Thou hide Thy face,

And regard me as Thine enemy?

25 Wilt Thou frighten away a leaf driven to and fro,

And pursue the dry stubble?

When עון and חטּאת, פּשׁע and חטּאת, are used in close connection, the
latter, which describes sin as failing and error, signifies sins of
weakness (infirmities, Schwachheitssnde); whereas עון (prop. distorting
or bending) signifies misdeed, and פשׁע (prop. breaking loose, or away
from, Arab. fsq) wickedness which designedly estranges itself from God
and removes from favour, both therefore malignant sin (Bosheitssnde).

(Note: Comp. the development of the idea of the synonyms for sin in von
Hofmann, Schriftbeweis, i. 483ff., at the commencement of the fourth
Lehrstck.)

The bold self-confidence which is expressed in the question and
challenge of [Job 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023) is, in [Job
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#024), changed to grievous
astonishment that God does not appear to him, and on the contrary
continues to pursue him as an enemy without investigating his cause. Has
the Almighty then pleasure in scaring away a leaf that is already blown
to and fro? העלה, with He interrog., like החכם, [Job
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#002), according to Ges. 100, 4. ערץ
used as transitive here, like [Psa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018), to terrify, scare away
affrighted. Does it give Him satisfaction to pursue dried-up stubble? By
את (before an indeterminate noun, according to Ges. 117, 2) he points
δεικτικῶς to himself: he, the powerless one, completely deprived of
strength by sickness and pain, is as dried-up stubble; nevertheless God
is after him, as though He would get rid of every trace of a dangerous
enemy by summoning His utmost strength against him.

[Job 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 13:26</span></span>

26 For Thou decreest bitter things against me,

And causest me to possess the iniquities of my youth,

27 And puttest my feet in the stocks,

And observest all my ways.

Thou makest for thyself a circle round the soles of my feet,

28 Round one who moulders away as worm-eaten,

As a garment that the moth gnaweth.

He is conscious of having often prayed: "Remember not the sins of my
youth, and my transgressions: according to Thy mercy remember Thou me,"
[Psa 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007); and still he can only
regard his affliction as the inheritance (i.e., entailed upon him by
sins not repented of) of the sins of his youth, since he has no sins of
his mature years that would incur wrath, to reproach himself with. He
does not know how to reconcile with the justice of God the fact that He
again records against him sins, the forgiveness of which he implores
soon after their commission, and decrees (כּתב, as [Psa
149:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#009), and as used elsewhere in the
book of Job with reference to the recording of judgment) for him on
account of them such bitter punishment (מררות, amara, bitter calamities;
comp. [Deu 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032), "bitter" grapes).
And the two could not indeed be harmonized, if it really were thus. So
long as a man remains an object of the divine mercy, his sins that have
been once forgiven are no more the object of divine judgment. But Job
can understand his affliction only as an additional punishment. The
conflict of temptation through which he is passing has made God's
loving-kindness obscure to him. He appears to himself to be like a
prisoner whose feet are forced into the holes of a סד, i.e., the block
or log of wood in which the feet of a criminal are fastened, and which
he must shuffle about with him when he moves; perhaps connected with
Arab. sadda, occludere, opplere (foramen), elsewhere מהפּכת (from the
forcible twisting or fastening), Chald. סדיא, סדנא, Syr. sado, by which
[Act 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024), ξύλον = ποδοκάκη, is
rendered; Lat. cippus (which Ralbag compares), codex (in Plautus an
instrument of punishment for slaves), or also nervus. The verb תּשׂם
which belongs to it, and is found also in [Job
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#011) in the same connection, is of
the jussive form, but is neither jussive nor optative in meaning, as
also the future with shortened vowel (e.g., [Job
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#022); [Job
40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019)) or apocopated ([Job
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012); [Job
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#009), [Job
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#011)) is used elsewhere from the
preference of poetry for a short pregnant form. He seems to himself like
a criminal whose steps are closely watched (שׁמר, as [Job
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014)), in order that he may not have
the undeserved enjoyment of freedom, and may not avoid the execution for
which he is reserved by effecting an escape by flight. Instead of ארחתי,
the reading adopted by Ben-Ascher, Ben-Naphtali writes ארחתי, with
Cholem in the first syllable; both modes of punctuation change without
any fixed law also in other respects in the inflexion of ארח, as of
ארחה, a caravan, the construct is both ארחות, [Job
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019), and ארחות. It is scarcely
necessary to remark that the verbs in [Job
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027) are addressed to God, and are
not intended as the third pers. fem. in reference to the stocks
(Ralbag). The roots of the feet are undoubtedly their undermost parts,
therefore the soles. But what is the meaning of תּתחקּה? The Vulg.,
Syr., and Parchon explain: Thou fixest thine attention upon ... , but
certainly according to mere conjecture; Ewald, by the help of the Arabic
tahhakkaka ala: Thou securest thyself ... , but there is not the least
necessity to depart from the ordinary use of the word, as those also do
who explain: Thou makest a law or boundary (Aben-Ezra, Ges., Hahn,
Schlottm.). The verb חקה is the usual word (certainly cognate and
interchangeable with חקק) for carved-out work (intaglio), and perhaps
with colour rubbed in, or filled up with metal (vid., [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023), comp. [Eze
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014)); it signifies to hew into, to
carve, to dig a trench. Stickel is in some measure true to this meaning
when he explains: Thou scratchest, pressest (producing blood); by which
rendering, however, the Hithpa. is not duly recognised. Raschi is
better, tu t'affiches, according to which Mercerus: velut affixus
vestigiis pedum meorum adhaeres, ne qu elabi possim aut effugere. But a
closer connection with the ordinary use of the word is possible.
Accordingly Rosenm., Umbreit, and others render: Thou markest a line
round my feet (drawest a circle round); Hirz., however, in the strictest
sense of the Hithpa.: Thou diggest thyself in (layest thyself as a
circular line about my feet). But the Hithpa. does not necessarily mean
se insculpere, but, as התפשׁט sibi exuere, התפתח sibi solvere, התחנן
sibi propitium facere, it may also mean sibi insculpere, which does not
give so strange a representation: Thou makest to thyself furrows (or
also: lines) round the soles of my feet, so that they cannot move beyond
the narrow boundaries marked out by thee. With והוּא, [Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028), a circumstantial clause begins:
While he whom Thou thus fastenest in as a criminal, etc. Observe the
fine rhythmical accentuation achālo ‛asch. Since God whom he calls upon
does not appear, Job's defiance is changed to timidity. The elegiac
tone, into which his bold tone has passed, is continued in Job 14.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 14](job014)

</div>
