<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job023)  [Next](job025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)

[Job 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 24:1</span></span>

1 Wherefore are not bounds reserved by the Almighty,

And they who honour Him see not His days?

2 They remove the landmarks,

They steal flocks and shepherd them.

3 They carry away the ass of the orphan,

And distrain the ox of the widow.

4 They thrust the needy out of the way,

The poor of the land are obliged to slink away together.

The supposition that the text originally stood מדּוּע לרשׁעים משּׁדּי is
natural; but it is at once destroyed by the fact that [Job
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001) becomes thereby
disproportionately long, and yet cannot be divided into two lines of
comparatively independent contents. In fact, לרשׁעים is by no means
absolutely necessary. The usage of the language assumes it, according to
which את followed by the genitive signifies the point of time at which
any one's fate is decided. [Isa 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022);
[Jer 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#007); [Eze
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#003); [Eze
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#003); the period when reckoning is
made, or even the terminus ad quem, [Ecc
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#012); and ywm followed by the gen. of
a man, the day of his end, [Job 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032);
[Job 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#020); [Eze
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#030), and freq.; or with יהוה, the
day when God's judgment is revealed, [Joe
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015), and freq. The boldness of poetic
language goes beyond this usage, by using עתּים directly of the period
of punishment, as is almost universally acknowledged since Schultens'
day, and ימיו dna ,y of God's days of judgment or of vengeance;

(Note: On עתים, in the sense of times of retribution, Wetzstein compares
the Arab. ‛idât, which signifies predetermined reward or punishment;
moreover, עת is derived from עדת (from ועד), and עתּים is equivalent to
עדתּים, according to the same law of assimilation, by which now-a-days
they say לתּי instead of לדתּי (one who is born on the same day with me,
from Arab. lidat, lida), and רתּי instead of רדתּי (my drinking-time),
since the assimilation of the ד takes place everywhere where ת is
pronounced. The ת of the feminine termination in עתים, as in שׁקתות and
the like, perhaps also in בתים (bâttim), is amalgamated with the root.)

and it is the less ambiguous, since צפן, in the sense of the divine
predetermination of what is future, [Job
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020), especially of God's storing up
merited punishment, [Job 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#019), is an
acknowledged word of our poet. On מן with the passive, vid., Ew. 295, c
(where, however, [Job 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#004) is
erroneously cited in its favour); it is never more than equivalent to
ἀπό, for to use מן directly as ὑπό with the passive is admissible
neither in Hebrew nor in Arabic. ידעו (Keri ידעיו, for which the Targ.
unsuitably reads ידעי) are, as in [Psa
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#011); [Psa
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004), comp. supra, [Job
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#021), those who know God, not merely
superficially, but from experience of His ways, consequently those who
are in fellowship with Him. לא חזוּ is to be written with Zinnorith over
the לא, and Mercha by the first syllable of חזו. The Zinnorith
necessitates the retreat of the tone of חזו to its first syllable, as in
כי־חרה, [Psa 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008) (Br's Pslaterium, p.
xiii.); for if חזו remained Milra, לא ought to be connected with it by
Makkeph, and consequently remain toneless (Psalter, ii. 507).

Next follows the description of the moral, abhorrence which, while the
friends ([Job 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#019)) maintain a divine
retribution everywhere manifest, is painfully conscious of the absence
of any determination of the periods and days of judicial punishment.
Fearlessly and unpunished, the oppression of the helpless and
defenceless, though deserving of a curse, rages in every form. They
remove the landmarks; comp. [Deu
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017), "Cursed is he who removeth his
neighbour's landmark" (מסּיג, here once written with שׂ, while otherwise
השּׂיג from נשׂג signifies assequi, on the other hand הסּיג from סוּג
signifies dimovere). They steal flocks, ויּרעוּ, i.e., they are so
barefaced, that after they have stolen them they pasture them openly.
The ass of the orphans, the one that is their whole possession, and
their only beast for labour, they carry away as prey (נהג, as e.g., [Isa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#004)); they distrain, i.e., take away
with them as a pledge (on חבל, to bind by a pledge, obstringere, and
also to take as a pledge, vid., on [Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006), and Khler on [Zac
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)), the yoke-ox of the widow (this
is the exact meaning of שׁור, as of the Arab. thôr). They turn the needy
aside from the way which they are going, so that they are obliged to
wander hither and thither without home or right: the poor of the land
are obliged to hide themselves altogether. The Hiph. הטּה, with אביונים
as its obj., is used as in [Amo 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012);
there it is used of turning away from a right that belongs to them, here
of turning out of the way into trackless regions. אביון (vid., on [Job
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#016)) here, as frequently, is the
parallel word with ענו, the humble one, the patient sufferer; instead of
which the Keri is עני, the humbled, bowed down with suffering (vid., on
[Psa 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013)). ענוי־ארץ without any Keri
in [Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010); [Zep
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#003), and might less suitably appear
here, where it is not so much the moral attribute as the outward
condition that is intended to be described. The Pual חכּאוּ describes
that which they are forced to do.

The description of these unfortunate ones is now continued; and by a
comparison with [Job 30:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001), it is
probable that aborigines who are turned out of their original
possessions and dwellings are intended (comp. [Job
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#019), according to which the poet
takes his stand in an age in which the original relations of the races
had been already disturbed by the calamities of war and the incursions
of aliens). If the central point of the narrative lies in Haurn, or,
more exactly, in the Nukra, it is natural, with Wetzstein, to think of
the Arab. 'hl 'l-wukr or ‛rb 'l-ḥujr, i.e., the (perhaps Ituraean)
"races of the caves" in Trachonitis.

[Job 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 24:5</span></span>

5 Behold, as wild asses in the desert,

They go forth in their work seeking for prey,

The steppe is food to them for the children.

6 In the field they reap the fodder for his cattle,

And they glean the vineyard of the evil-doer.

7 They pass the night in nakedness without a garment,

And have no covering in the cold.

8 They are wet with the torrents of rain upon the mountains,

And they hug the rocks for want of shelter.

The poet could only draw such a picture as this, after having himself
seen the home of his hero, and the calamitous fate of such as were
driven forth from their original abodes to live a vagrant,
poverty-stricken gipsy life. By [Job
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005), one is reminded of [Psa
104:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021), especially since in [Job
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#011) of this Psalm the פּראים, onagri
(Kulans), are mentioned, - those beautiful animals

(Note: Layard, New Discoveries, p. 270, describes these wild asses'
colts. The Arabic name is like the Hebrew, el-ferâ, or also himâr
el-wahsh, i.e., wild ass, as we have translated, whose home is on the
steppe. For fuller particulars, vid., Wetzstein's note on [Job
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005).)

which, while young, as difficult to be broken in, and when grown up are
difficult to be caught; which in their love of freedom are an image of
the Beduin, [Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012); their
untractableness an image of that which cannot be bound, [Job
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012); and from their roaming about in
herds in waste regions, are here an image of a gregarious, vagrant, and
freebooter kind of life. The old expositors, as also Rosenm., Umbr.,
Arnh., and Vaih., are mistaken in thinking that aliud hominum
sceleratorum genus is described in [Job
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005). Ewald and Hirz. were the first
to perceive that [Job 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005) is the
further development of [Job 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#004), and
that here, as in [Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001), those who
are driven back into the wastes and caves, and a remnant of the ejected
and oppressed aborigines who drag out a miserable existence, are
described.

The accentuation rightly connects פראים במדבר; by the omission of the
Caph similit., as e.g., [Isa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012),
the comparison (like a wild ass) becomes an equalization (as a wild
ass). The perf. יצאוּ is a general uncoloured expression of that which
is usual: they go forth בפעלם, in their work (not: to their work, as the
Psalmist, in [Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023), expresses
himself, exchanging ב for ל). משׁחרי לטּרף, searching after prey, i.e.,
to satisfy their hunger ([Psa 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)),
from טרף, in the primary signification decerpere (vid., Hupfeld on [Psa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003)), describes that which in general
forms their daily occupation as they roam about; the constructivus is
used here, without any proper genitive relation, as a form of
connection, according to Ges. 116, 1. The idea of waylaying is not to be
connected with the expression. Job describes those who are perishing in
want and misery, not so much as those who themselves are guilty of evil
practices, as those who have been brought down to poverty by the
wrongdoing of others. As is implied in משׁחרי (comp. the morning [Psa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002); [Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)), Job describes their going forth
in the early morning; the children (נערים, as [Job
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019); [Job
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#005)) are those who first feel the
pangs of hunger. לו refers individually to the father in the company:
the steppe (with its scant supply of roots and herbs) is to him food for
the children; he snatches it from it, it must furnish it for him. The
idea is not: for himself and his family (Hirz., Hahn, and others); for
v. 6, which has been much misunderstood, describes how they,
particularly the adults, obtain their necessary subsistence. There is no
MS authority for reading בּלי־לו instead of בּלילו; the translation
"what is not to him" (lxx, Targ., and partially also the Syriac version)
is therefore to be rejected. Raschi correctly interprets יבולו as a
general explanation, and Ralbag תבואתו: it is, as in [Job
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005), mixed fodder for cattle, farrago,
consisting of oats or barley sown among vetches and beans, that is
intended. The meaning is not, however, as most expositors explain it,
that they seek to satisfy their hunger with food for cattle grown in the
fields of the rich evil-doer; for קצר does not signify to sweep
together, but to reap in an orderly manner; and if they meant to steal,
why did they not seize the better portion of the produce? It is correct
to take the suff. as referring to the רשׁע which is mentioned in the
next clause, but it is not to be understood that they plunder his fields
per nefas; on the contrary, that he hires them to cut the fodder for his
cattle, but does not like to entrust the reaping of the better kinds of
corn to them. It is impracticable to press the Hiph. יקצירו of the
Chethib to favour this rendering; on the contrary, הקציר stands to קצר
in like (not causative) signification as הנחה to נחה (vid., on [Job
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#018)). In like manner, [Job
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006) is to be understood of hired
labour. The rich man prudently hesitates to employ these poor people as
vintagers; but he makes use of their labour (whilst his own men are
fully employed at the wine-vats) to gather the straggling grapes which
ripen late, and were therefore left at the vintage season. the older
expositors are reminded of לקשׁ, late hay, and explain ילקּשׁוּ as
denom. by יכרתו לקשׁו (Aben-Ezra, Immanuel, and others) or יאכלו לקשׁו
(Parchon); but how unnatural to think of the second mowing, or even of
eating the after-growth of grass, where the vineyard is the subject
referred to! On the contrary, לקּשׁ signifies, as it were, serotinare,
i.e., serotinos fructus colligere (Rosenm.):

(Note: In the idiom of Hauran, לקשׂ, fut. i, signifies to be late, to
come late; in Piel, to delay, e.g., the evening meal, return, etc.; in
Hithpa. telaqqas, to arrive too late. Hence laqı̂s לקישׂ and loqsı̂ לקשׂי,
delayed, of any matter, e.g., לקישׁ and זרע לקשׂי, late seed (= לקשׁ,
[Amo 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001), in connection with which the
late rain in April, which often fails, is reckoned on), ולד לקשׂי, a
child born late (i.e., in old age); bakı̂r בכיר and bekrı̂ בכרי are the
opposites in every signification. - Wetzst.)

this is the work which the rich man assigns to them, because he gains by
it, and even in the worst case can lose but little.

[Job 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007) tell how miserably they are
obliged to shift for themselves during this autumnal season of labour,
and also at other times. Naked (ערום, whether an adverbial form or not,
is conceived of after the manner of an accusative: in a naked, stripped
condition, Arabic ‛urjânan) they pass the night, without having anything
on the body (on לבוּשׁ, vid., on [Psa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019)), and they have no (אין supply
להם) covering or veil (corresponding to the notion of בּגד) in the cold.

(Note: All the Beduins sleep naked at night. I once asked why they do
this, since they are often disturbed by attacks at night, and I was told
that it is a very ancient custom. Their clothing (kiswe, כסוה), both of
the nomads of the steppe (bedû) and of the caves (wa‛r), is the same,
summer and winter; many perish on the pastures when overtaken by
snow-storms, or by cold and want, when their tents and stores are taken
from them in the winter time by an enemy. - Wetzst.)

They become thoroughly drenched by the frequent and continuous storms
that visit the mountains, and for want of other shelter are obliged to
shelter themselves under the overhanging rocks, lying close up to them,
and clinging to them, - an idea which is expressed here by חבּקוּ, as in
[Lam 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005), where, of those who were
luxuriously brought up on purple cushions, it is said that they "embrace
dunghills;" for in Palestine and Syria, the forlorn one, who, being
afflicted with some loathsome disease, is not allowed to enter the
habitations of men, lies on the dunghill (mezâbil), asking alms by day
of the passers-by, and at night hiding himself among the ashes which the
sun has warmed.

(Note: Wetzstein observes on this passage: In the mind of the speaker,
מחסה is the house made of stone, from which localities not unfrequently
derive their names, as El-hasa, on the east of the Dead Sea; the
well-known commercial town El-has, on the east of the Arabian peninsula,
which is generally called Lahs; the two of El-hasja (אלחסיה), north-east
of Damascus, etc.: so that חבקו צור forms the antithesis to the
comfortable dwellings of the Arab. ḥaḍarı̂, hadarı̂, i.e., one who is
firmly settled. The roots חבק, חבך, seem, in the desert, to be only
dialectically distinct, and like the root עבק, to signify to be pressed
close upon one another. Thus חבקה (pronounced hibtsha), a crowd = zahme,
and asâbi‛ mahbûke (מחבוּכה), the closed fingers, etc. The locality,
hibikke (Beduin pronunciation for habka, חבכה with the Beduin Dag.
euphonicum), described in my Reisebericht, has its name from this
circumstance alone, that the houses have been attached to (fastened
into) the rocks. Hence חבּק in this passage signifies to press into the
fissure of a rock, to seek out a corner which may defend one (dherwe)
against the cold winds and rain-torrents (which are far heavier among
the mountains than on the plain). The dherwe (from Arab. ḏarâ, to afford
protection, shelter, a word frequently used in the desert) plays a
prominent part among the nomads; and in the month of March, as it is
proverbially said the dherwe is better than the ferwe (the skin), they
seek to place their tents for protection under the rocks or high banks
of the wadys, on account of the cold strong winds, for the sake of the
young of the flocks, to which the cold storms are often very
destructive. When the sudden storms come on, it is a general thing for
the shepherds and flocks to hasten to take shelter under overhanging
rocks, and the caverns (mughr, Arab. mugr) which belong to the
troglodyte age, and are e.g., common in the mountains of Hauran; so
that, therefore, [Job 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#008) can as well
refer to concealing themselves only for a time (from rain and storm) in
the clefts as to troglodytes, who constantly dwell in caverns, or to
those dwelling in tents who, during the storms, seek the dherwe of rock
sides.)

The usual accentuation, מזרם with Dech, הרים with Munach, after which it
should be translated ab inundatione montes humectantur, is false; in
correct Codd. זרם has also Munach; the other Munach is, as in [Job
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#005), [Job
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#009), [Job
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006), and freq., a substitute for
Dech. Having sketched this special class of the oppressed, and those who
are abandoned to the bitterest want, Job proceeds with his description
of the many forms of wrong which prevail unpunished on the earth:

[Job 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 24:9</span></span>

9 They tear the fatherless from the breast,

And defraud the poor.

10 Naked, they slink away without clothes,

And hungering they bear the sheaves.

11 Between their walls they squeeze out the oil;

They tread the wine-presses, and suffer thirst.

12 In the city vassals groan, And the soul of the oppressed crieth out -

And Eloah heedeth not the anomaly.

The accentuation of [Job 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#009) (יגזלו
with Dech, משׁד with Munach) makes the relation of שׁד יתום genitival.
Heidenheim (in a MS annotation to Kimchi's Lex.) accordingly badly
interprets: they plunder from the spoil of the orphan; Ramban better:
from the ruin, i.e., the shattered patrimony; both appeal to the Targum,
which translates מביזת יתום, like the Syriac version, men bezto de-jatme
(comp. Jerome: vim fecerunt depraedantes pupillos). The original
reading, however, is perhaps (vid., Buxtorf, Lex. col. 295) מבּיזא, ἀπὸ
βυζίου, from the mother's breast, as it is also, the lxx (ἀπὸ μαστοῦ),
to be translated contrary to the accentuation. Inhuman creditors take
the fatherless and still tender orphan away from its mother, in order to
bring it up as a slave, and so to obtain payment. If this is the meaning
of the passage, it is natural to understand יחבּלוּ, [Job
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#009), of distraining; but (1) the poet
would then repeat himself tautologically, vid., [Job
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#003), where the same thing is far more
evidently said; (2) חבל, to distrain, would be construed with על,
contrary to the logic of the word. Certainly the phrase חבל על may be in
some degree explained by the interpretation, "to impose a fine" (Ew.,
Hahn), or "to distrain" (Hirz., Welte), or "to oppress with fines"
(Schlottm.); but violence is thus done to the usage of the language,
which is better satisfied by the explanation of Ralbag (among modern
expositors, Ges., Arnh., Vaih., Stick., Hlgst.): and what the
unfortunate one possesses they seize; but this על = אשׁר על directly as
object is impossible. The passage, [Deu
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025), cited by Schultens in its
favour, is of a totally different kind.

But throughout the Semitic dialects the verb חבל also signifies "to
destroy, to treat injuriously" (e.g., Arab. el-châbil, a by-name of
Satan); it occurs in this signification in [Job
34:31](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#031), and according to the analogy of
הרע על, [Kg1 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#020), can be construed
with על as well as with ל. The poet, therefore, by this construction
will have intended to distinguish the one חבל from the other, [Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006); [Job
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#003); and it is with Umbreit to be
translated: they bring destruction upon the poor; or better: they take
undue advantage of those who otherwise are placed in trying
circumstances.

The subjects of [Job 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010) are these
עניים, who are made serfs, and become objects of merciless oppression,
and the poet here in [Job 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010) indeed
repeats what he has already said almost word for word in [Job
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007) (comp. [Job
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#019)); but there the nakedness was
the general calamity of a race oppressed by subjugation, here it is the
consequence of the sin of merces retenta laborum, which cries aloud to
heaven, practised on those of their own race: they slink away (הלּך, as
[Job 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028)) naked (nude), without
(בּלי = מבּלי, as perhaps sine = absque) clothing, and while suffering
hunger they carry the sheaves (since their masters deny them what,
according to [Deu 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004), shall not be
withheld even from the beasts). Between their walls (שׁוּרת like שׁרות,
[Jer 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010), Chaldee שׁוּריּא), i.e.,
the walls of their masters who have made them slaves, therefore under
strict oversight, they press out the oil (יצהירוּ, ἅπ. γεγρ.), they
tread the wine-vats (יקבים, lacus), and suffer thirst withal (fut.
consec. according to Ew. 342, a), without being allowed to quench their
thirst from the must which runs out of the presses (נּתּות, torcularia,
from which the verb דּרך is here transferred to the vats). Bttch.
translates: between their rows of trees, without being able to reach out
right or left; but that is least of all suitable with the olives. Carey
correctly explains: "the factories or the garden enclosures of these
cruel slaveholders." This reference of the word to the wall of the
enclosure is more suitable than to walls of the press-house in
particular. From tyrannical oppression in the country,

(Note: Brentius here remarks: Quantum igitur judicium in eos futurum
est, qui in homines ejusdem carnis, ejusdem patriae, ejusdem fidei,
ejusdem Christi committunt quod nec in bruta animalia committendum est,
quod malum in Germania frequentissimum est. Vae igitur Germaniae!)

Job now passes over to the abominations of discord and was in the
cities.

[Job 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012)

It is natural, with Umbr., Ew., Hirz., and others, to read מתים like the
Peschito; but as mı̂te in Syriac, so also מתים in Hebrew as a noun
everywhere signifies the dead (Arab. mauta), not the dying, mortals
(Arab. matna); wherefore Ephrem interprets the praes. "they groan" by
the perf. "they have groaned." The pointing מתים, therefore, is quite
correct; but the accentuation which, by giving Mehupach Zinnorith to
מעיר, and Asla legarmeh to מתים, places the two words in a genitival
relation, is hardly correct: in the city of men, i.e., the inhabited,
thickly-populated city, they groan; not: men (as Rosenm. explains,
according to [Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006); [Pro
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#006)) groan; for just because מתים
appeared to be too inexpressive as a subject, this accentuation seems to
have been preferred. It is also possible that the signification fierce
anger ([Hos 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009)), or anguish ([Jer
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#008)), was combined with עיר, comp.
Arab. gayrt, jealousy, fury (= קנאה), of which, however, no trace is
anywhere visible.

(Note: Wetzstein translates [Hos 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009)
: I will not come as a raging foe, with ב of the attribute = Arab.
b-ṣifat 'l-‛ayyûr (comp. [Jer 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#008),
עיר, parall. שׁדד) after the form קים, to which, if not this עיר,
certainly the עיר, ἐγρήγορος, occurring in [Dan
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010), and freq., corresponds. What we
remarked above, p. 483, on the form קים, is cleared up by the following
observation of Wetzstein: "The form קים belongs to the numerous class of
segolate forms of the form פעל, which, as belonging to the earliest
period of the formation of the Semitic languages, take neither plural
nor feminine terminations; they have often a collective meaning, and are
not originally abstracta, but concreta in the sense of the Arabic part.
act. mufâ‛l. This inflexible primitive formation is frequently found in
the present day in the idiom of the steppe, which shows that the Hebrew
is essentially of primeval antiquity (uralt). Thus the Beduin says: hû
qitlı̂ (הוּא קטלי), he is my opponent in a hand-to-hand combat; nithı̂
(נטחי), my opponent in the tournament with lances; chı̂lfı̂ (חלפי) and
diddı̂ (צדּי), my adversary; thus a step-mother is called dı̂r (ציר), as
the oppressor of the step-children, and a concubine dirr (צרר), as the
oppressor of her rival. The Kamus also furnishes several words which
belong here, as tilb (טלב), a persecutor." Accordingly, קים is derived
from קום, as also עיר, a city, from עור (whence, according to a
prevalent law of the change of letters, we have עיר first of all, plur.
עירים, [Jdg 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004)), and signifies the
rebelling one, i.e., the enemy (who is now in the idiom of the steppe
called qômâni, from qôm, a state of war, a feud), as עיר, a keeper and
ציר, a messenger; עיר (קיר) is also originally concrete, a wall
(enclosure).)

With Jer., Symm., and Theod., we take מתים as the sighing ones
themselves; the feebleness of the subject disappears if we explain the
passage according to such passages as [Deu
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#034); [Deu
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#006), comp. [Jdg
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048) : it is the male inhabitants
that are intended, whom any conqueror would put to the sword; we have
therefore translated men (men of war), although "people" ([Job
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#003)) also would not have been
unsuitable according to the ancient use of the word. נאק is intended of
the groans of the dying, as [Jer
51:52](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#052); [Eze
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#024), as [Job
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012) also shows: the soul of those
that are mortally wounded cries out. חללים signifies not merely the
slain and already dead, but, according to its etymon, those who are
pierced through those who have received their death-blow; their soul
cries out, since it does not leave the body without a struggle. Such
things happen without God preventing them. לא־ישׂים תּפלה, He observeth
not the abomination, either = לא ישׂים בלבו, [Job
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#022) (He layeth it not to heart), or,
since the phrase occurs nowhere elliptically, = לא ישׂים לבו על, [Job
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008); [Job
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#023)) He does not direct His heart,
His attention to it), here as elliptical, as in [Job
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#020); [Isa
41:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#020). True, the latter phrase is
never joined with the acc. of the object; but if we translate after שׂים
בּ, [Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018) : non imputat, He does
not reckon such תפלה, i.e., does not punish it, בּם (בּהם) ought to be
supplied, which is still somewhat liable to misconstruction, since the
preceding subject is not the oppressors, but those who suffer
oppression. תּפלה is properly insipidity (comp. Arab. tafila, to stink),
absurdity, self-contradiction, here the immorality which sets at nought
the moral order of the world, and remains nevertheless unpunished. The
Syriac version reads תּפלּה, and translates, like Louis Bridel (1818):
et Dieu ne fait aucune attention leur prire.

[Job 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 24:13</span></span>

13 Others are those that rebel against the light,

They will know nothing of its ways,

And abide not in its paths.

14 The murderer riseth up at dawn,

He slayeth the sufferer and the poor,

And in the night he acteth like a thief.

15 And the eye of the adulterer watcheth for the twilight;

He thinks: "no eye shall recognise me,"

And he putteth a veil before his face.

With המּה begins a new turn in the description of the moral confusion
which has escaped God's observation; it is to be translated neither as
retrospective, "since they" (Ewald), nor as distinctive, "they even"
(Bttch.), i.e., the powerful in distinction from the oppressed, but
"those" (for המה corresponds to our use of "those," אלּה to "these"), by
which Job passes on to another class of evil-disposed and wicked men.
Their general characteristic is, that they shun the light. Those who are
described in [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014) are described
according to their general characteristic in [Job
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013); accordingly it is not to be
interpreted: those belong to the enemies of the light, but: those are,
according to their very nature, enemies of the light. The Beth is the
so-called Beth essent.; היוּ (comp. [Pro
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#026)) affirms what they are become by
their own inclination, or as what they are fashioned, viz., as ἀποστάται
φωτός (Symm.); מרד (on the root מר, vid., on [Job
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#002)) signifies properly to push one's
self against anything, to lean upon, to rebel; מרד therefore signifies
one who strives against another, one who is obstinate (like the Arabic
mârid, merı̂d, comp. mumâri, not conformable to the will of another). The
improvement מרדי אור (not with Makkeph, but with Mahpach of mercha
mahpach. placed between the two words, vid., Br's Psalterium, p. x.)
assumes the possibility of the construction with the acc., which occurs
at least once, [Jos 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019). They are
hostile to the light, they have no familiarity with its ways (הכּיר, as
[Jos 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#017), [Psa
142:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005); [Rut
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#019), to take knowledge of anything,
to interest one's self in its favour), and do not dwell (ישׁבוּ, Jer.
reversi sunt, according to the false reading ישׁבוּ) in its paths, i.e.,
they neither make nor feel themselves at home there, they have no peace
therein. The light is the light of day, which, however, stands in
deeper, closer relation to the higher light, for the vicious man hateth
τὸ φῶς, [Joh 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020), in every sense; and
the works which are concealed in the darkness of the night are also ἔργα
τοῦ σκότους, [Rom 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012) (comp. [Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)), in the sense in which light
and darkness are two opposite principles of the spiritual world. It need
not seem strange that the more minute description of the conduct of
these enemies of the light now begins with לאור. It is impossible that
this should mean: still in the darkness of the night (Stick.), prop.
towards the light, when it is not yet light. Moreover, in biblical
Hebrew, אור does not signify evening, in which sense it occurs in
Talmudic Hebrew (Pesachim 1a, Seder olam rabba, c. 5, אור שׁביעי,
vespera septima), like אורתּא (= נשׁף) in Talmudic Aramaic. The meaning,
on the contrary, is that towards daybreak (comp. הבקר אור, [Gen
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#003)), therefore with early morning,
the murderer rises up, to go about his work, which veils itself in
darkness ([Psa 10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008)) by day, viz.,
to slay (comp. on יקטל...יקוּם, Ges. 142, 3, c) the unfortunate and the
poor, who pass by defenceless and alone. One has to supply the idea of
the ambush in which the waylayer lies in wait; and it is certainly
inconvenient that it is not expressed.

The antithesis וּבלּילה, [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014),
shows that nothing but primo mane is meant by לאור. He who in the
day-time goes forth to murder and plunder, at night commits petty
thefts, where no one whom he could attack passes by. Stickel translates:
to slay the poor and wretched, and in the night to play the thief; but
then the subjunctivus ויהי ought to precede (vid., e.g., [Job
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#005)), and in general it cannot be
proved without straining it, that the voluntative form of the future
everywhere has a modal signification. Moreover, here יהי does not differ
from [Job 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012); [Job
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023), but is only a poetic shorter
form for יהיה: in the night he is like a thief, i.e., plays the part of
the thief. And the adulterer's eye observes the darkness of evening
(vid., [Pro 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#009)), i.e., watches
closely for its coming on (שׁמר, in the usual signification observare,
to be on the watch, to take care, observe anxiously), since he hopes to
render himself invisible; and that he may not be recognised even if
seen, he puts on a mask. סתר פּנים is something by which his countenance
is rendered unrecognisable (lxx ἀποκρυβὴ προσώπου), like the Arab. sitr,
sitâreh, a curtain, veil, therefore a veil for the face, or, as we say
in one word borrowed from the Arabic mascharat, a farce (masquerade):
the mask, but not in the proper sense.

(Note: The mask was perhaps never known in Palestine and Syria; סתר פנים
is the mendı̂l or women's veil, which in the present day (in Hauran
exclusively) is called sitr, and is worn over the face by all married
women in the towns, while in the country it is worn hanging down the
back, and is only drawn over the face in the presence of a stranger. If
this explanation is correct the poet means to say that the adulterer, in
order to remain undiscovered, wears women's clothes comp. [Deu
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005); and, in fact, in the Syrian
towns (the figure is taken from town-life) women's clothing is always
chosen for that kind of forbidden nocturnal undertaking, i.e., the man
disguises himself in an ı̂zâr, which covers him from head to foot, takes
the mendı̂l, and goes with a lantern (without which at night every person
is seized by the street watchman as a suspicious person) unhindered into
a strange house. - Wetzst.)

[Job 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 24:16</span></span>

16 In the dark they dig through houses,

By day they shut themselves up,

They will know nothing of the light.

17 For the depth of night is to them even as the dawn of the morning,

For they know the terrors of the depth of night.

The handiwork of the thief, which is but slightly referred to in [Job
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014), is here more particularly
described. The indefinite subj. of חתר, as is manifest from what
follows, is the band of thieves. The בּ, which is elsewhere joined with
chtr (to break into anything), is here followed by the acc. בּתּים (to
be pronounced bâttim, not bottim),

(Note: Vid., Aben-Ezra on [Exo 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007).
The main proof that it is to be pronounced bâttim is, that written
exactly it is בּתּים, and that the Metheg according to circumstances, is
changed into an accent, as [Exo 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#007);
[Exo 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007); [Jer
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#022); [Eze
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#004), which can only happen by Kametz,
not by Kometz (K. chatph); comp. Khler on [Zac
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002).)

as in the Talmudic, חתר שׁנּו, to pick one's teeth (and thereby to make
them loose), b. Kidduschin, 24 b. According to the Talmud, Ralbag, and
the ancient Jewish interpretation in general, [Job
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016) is closely connected to btym:
houses which they have marked by day for breaking into, and the mode of
its accomplishment; but חתם nowhere signifies designare, always
obsignare, to seal up, to put under lock and key, [Job
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017); [Job
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007); [Job
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#007); according to which the Piel,
which occurs only here, is to be explained: by day they seal up, i.e.,
shut themselves up for their safety (למו is not to be accented with
Athnach, but with Rebia mugrasch): they know not the light, i.e., as
Schlottm. well explains: they have no fellowship with it; for the
biblical ידע, γινώσκειν, mostly signifies a knowledge which enters into
the subject, and intimately unites itself with it. In [Job
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017) one confirmation follows
another. Umbr. and Hirz. explain: for the morning is to them at once the
shadow of death; but יחדּו, in the signification at the same time, as we
have taken יחד in [Job 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016)
(nevertheless of simultaneousness of time), is unsupportable: it
signifies together, [Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011); [Job
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#032); and the arrangement of the words
למו...יחדּו (to them together) is like [Isa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#020); [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003); [Jer
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#012). Also, apart from the erroneous
translation of the יחדו, which is easily set aside, Hirzel's rendering
of [Job 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017) is forced: the morning,
i.e., the bright day, is to them all as the shadow of death, for each
and every one of them knows the terrors of the daylight, which is to
them as the shadow of death, viz., the danger of being discovered and
condemned. The interpretation, which is also preferred by Olshausen, is
far more natural: the depth of night is to them as the dawn of the
morning (on the precedence of the predicate, comp. [Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013) and [Amo
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008) : walking in the darkness of the
early morning), for they are acquainted with the terrors of the depth of
night, i.e., they are not surprised by them, but know how to anticipate
and to escape them. [Job 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#015) also,
where the night, which vanishes before the rising of the sun, is called
the "light" of the evil-doer, favours this interpretation (not the
other, as Olsh. thinks). The accentuation also favours it; for is בקר
had been the subj., and were to be translated: the morning is to them
the shadow of death, it ought to have been accented בקר למו צלמות, Dech,
Mercha, Athnach. It is, however, accented Munach, Munach, Athnach, and
the second Munach stands as the deputy of Dech, whose value in the
interpunction it represents; therefore בקר למו is the predicate: the
shadow of death is morning to them. From the plur. the description now,
with יכּיר, passes into the sing., as individualizing it. בּלהות constr.
of בּלּהות, is without a Dagesh in the second consonant. Mercier
admirably remarks here: sunt ei familiares et noti nocturni terrores,
neque eos timet aut curat, quasi sibi cum illis necessitudo et
familiaritas intercederet et cum illis ne noceant foedus aut pactum
inierit. Thus by their skill and contrivance they escape danger, and
divine justice allows them to remain undiscovered and unpunished, - a
fact which is most incomprehensible.

It is now time that this thought was once again definitely expressed,
that one may not forget what these accumulated illustrations are
designed to prove. But what now follows in [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) seems to express not Job's
opinion, but that of his opponents. Ew., Hirz., and Hlgst. regard [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018), [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022), as thesis and antithesis. To
the question, What is the lot that befalls all these evil-doers? Job is
thought to give a twofold answer: first, to [Job
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021), an ironical answer in the sense
of the friends, that those men are overtaken by the merited punishment;
then from [Job 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022) is his own
serious answer, which stands in direct contrast to the former. But (1)
in [Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) there is not the
slightest trace observable that Job does not express his own view: a
consideration which is also against Schlottman, who regards [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) as expressive of the view of an
opponent. (2) There is no such decided contrast between [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) and [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022), for [Job
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019) and [Job
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024) both affirm substantially the
same thing concerning the end of the evil-doer. In like manner, it is
also not to be supposed, with Stick., Lwenth., Bttch., Welte, and Hahn,
that Job, outstripping the friends, as far as [Job
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021), describes how the evil-doer
certainly often comes to a terrible end, and in [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022) how the very opposite of this,
however, is often witnessed; so that this consequently furnishes no
evidence in support of the exclusive assertion of the friends. Moreover,
[Job 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024) compared with [Job
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019), where there is nothing to
indicate a direct contrast, is opposed to it; and [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022), which has no appearance of
referring to a direct contrast with what has been previously said, is
opposed to such an antithetical rendering of the two final strophes.
[Job 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022) might more readily be
regarded as a transition to the antithesis, if [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) could, with Eichh., Schnurr.,
Dathe, Umbr., and Vaih., after the lxx, Syriac, and Jerome, be
understood as optative: "Let such an one be light on the surface of the
water, let ... be cursed, let him not turn towards," etc., but [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) is not of the optative form; and
[Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018), where in that case אל־יפנה
would be expected, instead of אל־יפנה, shows that [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018), where, according to the syntax,
the optative rendering is natural, is nevertheless not to be so
rendered. The right interpretation is that which regards both [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) and [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022) as Job's own view, without
allowing him absolutely to contradict himself. Thus it is interpreted,
e.g., by Rosenmller, who, however, as also Renan, errs in connecting
[Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) with the description of the
thieves, and understands [Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) of
their slipping away, [Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) of
their dwelling in horrible places, and [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018) of their avoidance of the
vicinity of towns.

[Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 24:18</span></span>

18 For he is light upon the surface of the water;

Their heritage is cursed upon the earth;

He turneth no more in the way of the vineyard.

19 Drought, also heat, snatch away snow water -

So doth Shel those who have sinned.

20 The womb forgetteth him, worms shall feast on him,

He is no more remembered;

So the desire of the wicked is broken as a tree -

21 He who hath plundered the barren that bare not,

And did no good to the widow.

The point of comparison in [Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018)
is the swiftness of the disappearing: he is carried swiftly past, as any
light substance on the surface of the water is hurried along by the
swiftness of the current, and can scarcely be seen; comp. [Job
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#026) : "My days shoot by as ships of
reeds, as an eagle which dasheth upon its prey," and [Hos
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#007), "Samaria's king is destroyed
like a bundle of brushwood (lxx, Theod., φρύγανον) on the face of the
water," which is quickly drawn into the whirlpool, or buried by the
approaching wave.

(Note: The translation: like foam (spuma or bulla), is also very
suitable here. Thus Targ., Symm., Jerome, and others; but the
signification to foam cannot be etymologically proved, whereas קצף in
the signification confringere is established by קצפה, breaking, [Joe
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007), and Arab. qṣf; so that
consequently קצף, as synon. of אף, signifies properly the breaking
forth, and is then allied to אברה.)

But here the idea is not that of being swallowed up by the waters, as in
the passage in Hosea, but, on the contrary, of vanishing from sight, by
being carried rapidly past by the rush of the waters. If, then, the
evil-doer dies a quick, easy death, his heritage (חלקה, from חלק, to
divide) is cursed by men, since no one will dwell in it or use it,
because it is appointed by God to desolation on account of the sin which
is connected with it (vid., on [Job
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#028)); even he, the evil-doer, no
more turns the way of the vineyard (פּנה, with דּרך, not an acc. of the
obj., but as indicating the direction = אל־דּרך; comp. [Sa1
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#018) with [Sa1
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#017) of the same chapter), proudly to
inspect his wide extended domain, and overlook the labourers. The curse
therefore does not come upon him, nor can one any longer lie in wait for
him to take vengeance on him; it is useless to think of venting upon him
the rage which his conduct during life provoked; he is long since out of
reach in Shel.

That which Job says figuratively in [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018), and in [Job
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013) without a figure: "in a moment
they go down to Shel," he expresses in [Job
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019) under a new figure, and,
moreover, in the form of an emblematic proverb (vid., Herzog's
Real-Encyklopdie, xiv. 696), according to the peculiarity of which, not
כּן, but either only the copulative Waw ([Pro
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#025)) or nothing whatever ([Pro
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022)), is to be supplied before שׁאול
חטאו. חטאוּ is virtually an object: eos qui peccarunt. [Job
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019) is a model-example of extreme
brevity of expression, Ges. 155, 4, b. Sandy ground (ציּה, arid land,
without natural moisture), added to it (גּם, not: likewise) the heat of
the sun - these two, working simultaneously from beneath and above,
snatch away (גּזלוּ, cogn. גּזר, root גז, to cut, cut away, tear away;
Arab. jzr, fut. i, used of sinking, decreasing water) מימי שׁלג, water
of (melted) snow (which is fed from no fountain, and therefore is
quickly absorbed), and Shel snatches away those who have sinned (= גּזלה
את־אשׁר חטאוּ). The two incidents are alike: the death of those whose
life has been a life of sin, follows as a consequence easily and
unobserved, without any painful and protracted struggle. The sinner
disappears suddenly; the womb, i.e., the mother that bare him, forgets
him (רחם, matrix = mater; according to Ralbag: friendship, from רחם, to
love tenderly; others: relationship, in which sense Arab. raḥimun = רחם
is used), worms suck at him (מתקו for מתקתּוּ, according to Ges. 147, a,
sugit eum, from which primary notion of sucking comes the signification
to be sweet, [Job 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033) : Syriac,
metkat ennun remto; Ar. imtasahum, from the synonymous Arab. maṣṣa =
מצץ, מצה, מזה), he is no more thought of, and thus then is mischief
(abstr. pro concr. as [Job 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016))
broken like a tree (not: a staff, which עץ never, not even in [Hos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#012), directly, like the Arabic ‛asa,
‛asât, signifies). Since עולה is used personally, רעה וגו, [Job
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021), can be connected with it as an
appositional permutative. His want of compassion (as is still too often
seen in the present day in connection with the tyrannical conduct of the
executive in Syria and Palestine, especially on the part of those who
collected the taxes) goes the length of eating up, i.e., entirely
plundering, the barren, childless ([Gen
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#030); [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)), and therefore helpless woman,
who has no sons to protect and defend her, and never showing favour to
the widow, but, on the contrary, thrusting her away from him. There is
as little need for regarding the verb רעה here, with Rosenm. after the
Targ., in the signification confringere, as cognate with רעע, רצץ, as
conversely to change תּרעם, [Psa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009),
into תּרעם; it signifies depascere, as in [Job
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#026), here in the sense of
depopulari. On the form ייטיב for יימיב, vid., Ges. 70, 2, rem.; and on
the transition from the part. to the v. fin., vid., Ges. 134, rem. 2.
Certainly the memory of such an one is not affectionately cherished;
this is equally true with what Job maintains in [Job
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#032), that the memory of the
evil-doer is immortalized by monuments. Here the allusion is to the
remembrance of a mother's love and sympathetic feeling. The fundamental
thought of the strophe is this, that neither in life nor in death had he
suffered the punishment of his evil-doing. The figure of the broken tree
(broken in its full vigour) also corresponds to this thought; comp. on
the other hand what Bildad says, [Job
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#016) : "his roots dry up beneath, and
above his branch is lopped off" (or: withered). The severity of his
oppression is not manifest till after his death.

In the next strophe Job goes somewhat further. But after having, in [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022), [Job
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#023), said that the life of the
ungodly passes away as if they were the favoured of God, he returns to
their death, which the friends, contrary to experience, have so
fearfully described, whilst it is only now and then distinguished from
the death of other men by coming on late and painlessly.

[Job 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 24:22</span></span>

22 And He preserveth the mighty by His strength;

Such an one riseth again, though he despaired of life.

23 He giveth him rest, and he is sustained,

And His eyes are over their ways.

24 They are exalted - a little while, - then they are no more,

And they are sunken away, snatched away like all others,

And as the top of the stalk they are cut off. -

25 And if it is not so, who will charge me with lying,

And make my assertion worthless?

Though it becomes manifest after their death how little the ungodly, who
were only feared by men, were beloved, the form of their death itself is
by no means such as to reveal the retributive justice of God. And does
it become at all manifest during their life? The Waw, with which the
strophe begins, is, according to our rendering, not adversative, but
progressive. God is the subject. משׁך, to extend in length, used
elsewhere of love, [Psa 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#011); [Psa
109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012), and anger, [Psa
85:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#006), is here transferred to persons:
to prolong, preserve long in life. אבּירים are the strong, who bid
defiance not only to every danger ([Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006)), but also to all divine
influences and noble impulses ([Isa
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#012)). These, whose trust in their
own strength God might smite down by His almighty power, He preserves
alive even in critical positions by that very power: he (the אבּיר)
stands up (again), whilst he does not trust to life, i.e., whilst he
believes that he must succumb to death (האמין as [Psa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013), comp. Genesis, S. 368; חיּין,
Aramaic form, like מלּין, [Job 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#002);
[Job 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#011); the whole is a contracted
circumstantial clause for והוא לא וגו). He (God) grants him לבטח, in
security, viz., to live, or even directly: a secure peaceful existence,
since לבטח is virtually an object, and the ל is that of condition (comp.
לרב, [Job 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#003)). Thus Hahn, who,
however, here is only to be followed in this one particular, takes it
correctly: and that he can support himself, which would only be possible
if an inf. with ל had preceded. Therefore: and he is supported or he can
support himself, i.e., be comforted, though this absolute use of נשׁען
cannot be supported; in this instance we miss על־טוּבו, or some such
expression ([Job 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#015)). God sustains
him and raises him up again: His eyes (עיניחוּ = עיניו) are (rest) on
the ways of these men, they stand as it were beneath His special
protection, or, as it is expressed in [Job
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003) : He causes light to shine from
above upon the doings of the wicked. "They are risen up, and are
conscious of the height (of prosperity) - a little while, and they are
no more." Thus [Job 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024) is to be
explained. The accentuation רומו with Mahpach, מעט with Asla legarmeh
(according to which it would have to be translated: they stand on high a
short time), is erroneous. The verb רוּם signifies not merely to be
high, but also to rise up, raise one's self, e.g., [Pro
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#011), and to show one's self exalted,
here extulerunt se in altum or exaltati sunt; according to the form of
writing רומּוּ, רוּם is treated as an Ayin Waw verb med. O, and the
Dagesh is a so-called Dag. affecuosum (Olsh. 83, b), while רמּוּ (like
רבּוּ, [Gen 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023)) appears to assume
the form of a double Ayin verb med. O, consequently רמם (Ges. 67, rem.
1).

מעט, followed by Waw of the conclusion, forms a clause of itself, as
more frequently עוד מעט ו (yet a little while, then ... ), as, e.g., in
an exactly similar connection in [Psa
37:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#010); here, however, not expressive
of the sudden judgment of the ungodly, but of their easy death without a
struggle (εὐθανασία): a little, then he is not (again a transition from
the plur. to the distributive or individualizing sing.). They are, viz.,
as [Job 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024) further describes, bowed
down all at once (an idea which is expressed by the perf.), are snatched
off like all other men. המּכוּ is an Aramaizing Hophal-form, approaching
the Hoph. of strong verbs, for הוּמכּוּ (Ges. 67, rem. 8), from מכך, to
bow one's self ([Psa 106:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#043)), to be
brought low ([Ecc 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#018)); comp. Arab.
mkk, to cause to vanish, to annul. יקּפצוּן (for which it is unnecessary
with Olsh. to read יקּבצוּן, after [Eze
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#005)) signifies, according to the
primary signification of קפץ, comprehendere, constringere, contrahere
(cogn. קבץ, קמץ, קמט, comp. supra, p. 481): they are hurried together,
or snatched off, i.e., deprived of life, like the Arabic qbḍh allâh
(קפצו אלהים) and passive qubiḍa, equivalent to, he has died. There is no
reference in the phrase to the componere artus, [Gen
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033); it is rather the figure of
housing (gathering into the barn) that underlies it; the word, however,
only implies seizing and drawing in. Thus the figure which follows is
also naturally (comp. קמץ, Arab. qabḍat, manipulus) connected with what
precedes, and, like the head of an ear of corn, i.e., the corn-bearing
head of the wheat-stalk, they are cut off (by which one must bear in
mind that the ears are reaped higher up than with us, and the standing
stalk is usually burnt to make dressing for the field; vid., Ges. Thes.
s.v. קשׁ).

(Note: Another figure is also presented here. It is a common thing for
the Arabs (Beduins) in harvest-time to come down upon the fields of
standing corn - especially barley, because during summer and autumn this
grain is indispensable to them as food for their horses - of a district,
chiefly at night, and not unfrequently hundreds of camels are laden at
one time. As they have no sickles, they cut off the upper part of the
stalk with the ‛aqfe (a knife very similar to the Roman sica) and with
sabres, whence this theft is called qard קרץ, sabring off; and that
which is cut off, as well as the uneven stubble that is left standing,
is called qarid. - Wetzst.)).

On ימּלוּ (fut. Niph. = ימּלּוּ), vid., on [Job
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#002); [Job
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#016); the signification praedicuntur,
as observed above, is more suitable here than marcescunt (in connection
with which signification [Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026)
ought to be compared, and the form regarded as fut. Kal). Assured of the
truth, in conformity with experience, of that which has been said, he
appeals finally to the friends: if it be not so (on אפו = אפוא in
conditional clauses, vid., [Job 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024)),
who (by proving the opposite) is able to charge me with lying and bring
to nought (לאל = לאין, Ew. 321, b, perhaps by אל being conceived of as
originally infin. from אלל (comp. אליל), in the sense of non-existence,
Arab. 'l-‛adam) my assertion?

The bold accusations in the speech of Eliphaz, in which the
uncharitableness of the friends attains its height, must penetrate most
deeply into Job's spirit. But Job does not answer like by like. Even in
this speech in opposition to the friends, he maintains the passionless
repose which has once been gained. Although the misjudgment of his
character has attained its height in the speech of Eliphaz, his answer
does not contain a single bitter personal word. In general, he does not
address them, not as though he did not wish to show respect to them, but
because he has nothing to say concerning their unjust and wrong conduct
that he would not already have said, and because he has lost all hope of
his reproof taking effect, all hope of sympathy with his entreaty that
they would spare him, all hope of understanding and information on their
part.

In the first part of the speech (Job 23) he occupies himself with the
mystery of his own suffering lot, and in the second part (Job 24) with
the reverse of this mystery, the evil-doers' prosperity and immunity
from punishment. How is he to vindicate himself against Eliphaz, since
his lament over his sufferings as unmerited as accounted by the friends
more and more as defiant obstinacy (מרי), and consequently tends to
bring him still deeper into that suspicion which he is trying to remove?
His testimony concerning himself is of no avail; for it appears to the
friends more self-delusive, hypocritical, and sinful, the more decidedly
he maintains it; consequently the judgment of God can alone decide
between him and his accusers. But while the friends accuse him by word
of mouth, God himself is pronouncing sentence against him by His acts, -
his affliction is a de facto accusation of God against him. Therefore,
before the judgment of God can become a vindication of his affliction
against the friends, he must first of all himself have defended and
proved his innocence in opposition to the Author of his affliction.
Hence the accusation of the friends, which in the speech of Eliphaz is
become more direct and cutting than heretofore, must urge on anew with
all its power the desire in Job of being able to bring his cause before
God.

At the outset he is confident of victory, for his consciousness does not
deceive him; and God, although He is both one party in the cause and
judge, is influenced by the irresistible force of the truth. Herein the
want of harmony in Job's conception of God, the elevation of which into
a higher unity is the goal of the development of the drama, again shows
itself. He is not able to think of the God who pursues him, the innocent
one, at the present time with suffering, as the just God; on the other
hand, the justice of the God who will permit him to approach His
judgment throne, is to him indisputably sure: He will attend to him, and
for ever acquit him. Now Job yields to the arbitrary power of God, but
then he will rise by virtue of the justice and truth of God. His longing
is, therefore, that the God who now afflicts him may condescend to hear
him: this seems to him the only way of convincing God, and indirectly
the friends, of his innocence, and himself of God's justice. The basis
of this longing is the desire of being free from the painful conception
of God which he is obliged to give way to. For it is not the darkness of
affliction that enshrouds him which causes Job the intensest suffering,
but the darkness in which it has enshrouded God to him, - the angry
countenance of God which is turned to him. But if this is sin, that he
is engaged in a conflict concerning the justice of the Author of his
affliction, it is still greater that he indulges evil thoughts
respecting the Judge towards whose throne of judgment he presses
forward. He thinks that God designedly avoids him, because He is well
aware of his innocence; now, however, he will admit no other thought but
that of suffering him to endure to the end the affliction decreed. Job's
suspicion against God is as dreadful as it is childish. This is a
profoundly tragic stroke. It is not to be understood as the sarcasm of
defiance; on the contrary, as one of the childish thoughts into which
melancholy bordering on madness falls. From the bright height of faith
to which Job soars in [Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025). he
is here again drawn down into the most terrible depth of conflict, in
which, like a blind man, he gropes after God, and because he cannot find
Him thinks that He flees before him lest He should be overcome by him.
The God of the present, Job accounts his enemy; and the God of the
future, to whom his faith clings, who will and must vindicate him so
soon as He only allows himself to be found and seen - this God is not to
be found! He cannot get free either from his suffering or from his
ignominy. The future for him is again veiled in a twofold darkness.

Thus Job does not so much answer Eliphaz as himself, concerning the
cutting rebukes he has brought against him. He is not able to put them
aside, for his consciousness does not help him; and God, whose judgment
he desires to have, leaves him still in difficulty. But the mystery of
his lot of affliction, which thereby becomes constantly more torturing,
becomes still more mysterious from a consideration of the reverse side,
which he is urged by Eliphaz more closely to consider, terrible as it
may be to him. He, the innocent one, is being tortured to death by an
angry God, while for the ungodly there come no times of punishment, no
days of vengeance: greedy conquerors, merciless rulers, oppress the poor
to the last drop of blood, who are obliged to yield to them, and must
serve them without wrong being helped by the right; murderers, who shun
the light, thieves, and adulterers, carry on their evil courses
unpunished; and swiftly and easily, without punishment overtaking them,
or being able to overtake them, Shel snatches them away, as heat does
the melted snow; even God himself preserves the oppressors long in the
midst of extreme danger, and after a long life, free from care and laden
with honour, permits them to die a natural death, as a ripe ear of corn
is cut off. Bold in the certainty of the truth of his assertion, Job
meets the friends: if it is not so, who will convict me as a liar?! What
answer will they give? They cannot long disown the mystery, for
experience outstrips them. Will they therefore solve it? They might, had
they but the key of the future state to do it with! But neither they nor
Job were in possession of that, and we shall therefore see how the
mystery, without a knowledge of the future state, struggled through
towards solution; or even if this were impossible, how the doubts which
it excites are changed to faith, and so are conquered.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 25](job025)

</div>
