<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job019)  [Next](job021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#001)

[Job 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 20:1</span></span>

1 Then began Zophar the Naamathite, and said:

2 Therefore do my thoughts furnish me with a reply,

And indeed by reason of my feeling within me.

3 The correction of my reproach I must hear,

Nevertheless the spirit of my understanding informeth me.

4 Knowest thou this which is from everlasting,

Since man was placed upon the earth:

5 That the triumphing of the evil-doer is not long,

And the joy of the godless is but for a moment?

All modern expositors take [Job 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#002)
as an apology for the opposition which follows, and the majority of them
consider בּעבוּר as elliptical for בעבור זאת, as Tremell., Piscator, and
others have done, partly (but wrongly) by referring to the Rebia
mugrasch. Ewald observes: "בעבור stands without addition, because this
is easily understood from the כן in לכן." But although this ellipsis is
not inadmissible (comp. לכן = לכן אשׁר, [Job
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#025); כעל, [Isa
59:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#018)), in spite of it [Job
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#002) furnishes no meaning that can be
accepted. Most expositors translate: "and hence the storm within me"
(thus e.g., Ewald); but the signification perturbatio animi, proposed by
Schultens for חוּשׁי, after the Arab. ḥâš, is too remote from the usage
of Hebrew. Moreover, this Arab. ḥâš signifies prop. to scare, hunt, of
game; not, however: to be agitated, to storm, - a signification which
even the corresponding Hebr. חוּשׁ, properare, does not support. Only a
few expositors (as Umbreit, who translates: because of my storm within
me) take בעבור (which occurs only this once in the book of Job) as
praepos., as it must be taken in consideration of the infin. which
follows (comp. [Exo 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016); [Exo
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#020); [Sa1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#006); [Sa2
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#003)). Further, לכן (only by Umbreit
translated by "yet," after the Arab. lâkin, lâkinna, which it never
signifies in Hebr., where ל is not = לא, but = ל with Kametz before the
tone) with that which follows is referred by several expositors to the
preceding speech of Job, e.g., Hahn: "under such circumstances, if thou
behavest thus;" by most, however, it is referred to [Job
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#003), e.g., Ew.: "On this account he
feels called upon by his thoughts to answer, and hence his inward
impulse leaves him no rest: because he hears from Job a contemptuous
wounding reproof of himself." In other words: in consequence of the
reproach which Job casts upon him, especially with his threat of
judgment, Zophar's mind and feelings fall into a state of excitement,
and give him an answer to which he now gives utterance. This prospective
sense of לכן may at any rate be retained, though בעבור is taken as a
preposition (wherefore ... and indeed on account of my inward
commotion); but it is far more natural that the beginning of Zophar's
speech should be connected with the last word of Job's. [Job
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#002) may really be so understood if we
connect חושׁי, not with Arab. ḥâš, חושׁ, to excite, to make haste (after
which also Saad. and Aben-Ezra: on account of my inward hastening or
urging), but with Arab. ḥs, to feel; in this meaning chsh is usual in
all the Semitic dialects, and is even biblical also; for [Ecc
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#025) is to be translated: who hath
feeling (pleasure) except from Him (read ממנו)? i.e., even in pleasure
man is not free, but has conditions fixed by God.

With לכן (used as in [Job 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003)) Zophar
draws an inference from Job's conduct, esp. from the turn which his last
speech has taken, which, as ישׁיבוּני שׂעיפּי

(Note: Thus it is to be read according to the Masoretic note, ומלא לית
(i.e., plene, as nowhere else), which occurs in Codd., as is also
attested by Kimchi in his Gramm., Moznajim, p. 8; Aben-Ezra in his
Gramm., Zachoth 1, b; and the punctuator Jekuthil, in his Darche
ha-Nikkud (chapter on the letters יהוא).)

affirms, urges him involuntarily and irresistibly forward, and indeed,
as he adds with Waw explic.: on account of the power of feeling dwelling
in him, by which he means both his sense of truth and his moral feeling,
in general the capacity of direct perception, not perception that is
only attained after long reflection. On שׂעיפי, of thoughts which, as it
were, branch out, vid., on [Job 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013),
and Psychol. S. 181. השׁיב signifies, as everywhere, to answer, not
causative, to compel to answer. חוּשׁי is n. actionis in the sense of
רגישׁתּי (Targ.), or הרגישׁי (Ralbag), which also signifies "my feeling
(αἴσθησις)," and the combination חושׁי בי is like [Job
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#021); [Job
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013). Wherein the inference consists
in self-evident, and proceeds from [Job
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004). In [Job
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#003) expression is given to the ground
of the conclusion intended in לכן: the chastisement of my dishonour,
i.e., which tends to my dishonour (comp. [Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005), chastisement which conduces to
our peace), I must hear (comp. on this modal signification of the
future, e.g., [Job 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002)); and in [Job
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#003) Zophar repeats what he has said
in [Job 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#002), only somewhat
differently applied: the spirit, this inner light (vid., [Job
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008); Psychol. S. 154, f), answers him
from the perception which is peculiar to himself, i.e., out of the
fulness of this perception it furnishes him with information as to what
is to be thought of Job with his insulting attacks, viz., (this is the
substance of the השׁיב of the thoughts, and of the ענות of the spirit),
that in this conduct of Job only his godlessness is manifest. This is
what he warningly brings against him, [Job
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004) : knowest thou indeed (which,
according to [Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001); [Kg1
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#019), sarcastically is equivalent to:
thou surely knowest, or in astonishment: what dost thou not know?!) this
from the beginning, i.e., this law, which has been in operation from
time immemorial (or as Ew.: hoccine scis aeternum esse, so that מני־עד
is not a virtual adj., but virtual predicate-acc.), since man was placed
(שׂים infin., therefore prop., since one has placed man) upon the earth
(comp. the model passage, [Deu 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032)),
that the exulting of the wicked is מקּרוב, from near, i.e., not
extending far, enduring only a short time (Arab. qrı̂b often directly
signifies brevis); and the joy of the godless עדי־רגע, only for a
moment, and continuing no longer?

[Job 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 20:6</span></span>

6 If his aspiration riseth to the heavens,

And he causeth his head to touch the clouds:

7 Like his dung he perisheth for ever;

Those who see him say: Where is he?

8 As a dream he flieth away, and they cannot find him;

And he is scared away as a vision of the night.

9 The eye hath seen him, and never again,

And his place beholdeth him no more.

10 His children must appease the poor,

And his hands give up his wealth.

11 His bones were full of youthful vigour;

Now it is laid down with him in the dust.

If the exaltation of the evil-doer rises to heaven, and he causes his
head to reach to the clouds, i.e., to touch the clouds, he
notwithstanding perishes like his own dung. We are here reminded of what
Obadiah, [Job 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004), says of Edom, and
Isaiah, [Isa 14:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013), says of the
king of Babylon. שׂיא is equivalent to נשׂיא, like שׂוא, [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010) = נשׂוא; the first weak radical
is cast away, as in כּילי = נכילי, fraudulentus, machinator, [Isa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005), and according to Olsh. in שׁיבה
= ישׁיבה, [Sa2 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#033). הגּיע is to be
understood as causative (at least this is the most natural) in the same
manner as in [Isa 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#012), and freq. It
is unnecessary, with Ew., Hirz., and Hlgst., after Schultens, to transl.
כגללו, [Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007), according to the
Arab. jlâl (whence the name Gell-ed-dn): secundum majestatem suam, or
with Reiske to read בגללו, in magnificentia sua, and it is very
hazardous, since the Hebrew גלל has not the meaning of Arab. jll,
illustrem esse. Even Schultens, in his Commentary, has retracted the
explanation commended in his Animadv., and maintained the correctness of
the translation, sicut stercus suum (Jer. sicut sterquilinium), which is
also favoured by the similar figurative words in [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010) : as one burneth up (not:
brushes away) dung (הגּלל), probably cow-dung as fuel, until it is
completely gone. גּללו (or גּללו with an audible Shev) may be derived
from גּלל, but the analogy of צללו favours the primary form גּל (Ew.
255, b); on no account is it גּלל. The word is not low, as [Eze
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012), comp. [Zep
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017), shows, and the figure, though
revolting, is still very expressive; and how the fulfilment is to be
thought of may be seen from an example from [Kg2
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#037), according to which, "as dung
upon the face of the field shall it be, so that they cannot say: this is
Jezebel."

(Note: In Arabic, gille (גּלּה) and gelle (גּלּה) is the usual and
preferred fuel (hence used as synon. of hhattab) formed of the dung of
cows, and not indeed yoke-oxen (baqar 'ammle), because they have more
solid fodder, which produces no material for the gelle, but from cattle
that pasture in the open fields (baqar bat.tle), which are almost
entirely milking cows. This dung is collected by women and children in
the spring from the pastures as perfectly dry cakes, which have the
green colour of the grass. Every husbandman knows that this kind of dung
- the product of a rapid, one might say merely half, digestion, even
when fresh, but especially when dry - is perfectly free from smell. What
is collected is brought in baskets to the forming or pressing place
(mattba'a, מטבּעה), where it is crumbled, then with water made into a
thick mass, and, having been mixed with chopped straw, is formed by the
women with the hand into round cakes, about a span across, and three
fingers thick. They resemble the tanners' tan-cakes, only they are not
square. Since this compound has the form of a loaf it is called qurss
(which also signifies a loaf of bread); and since a definite form is
given to it by the hand, it is called ttabu' (טבּוּע), collective
ttbbi', which צפוּעי (צפיעי), [Eze
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#015), resembles in meaning; for ssaf',
צפע (cogn. ssafhh, צפח), signifies to beat anything with the palm of the
hand. First spread out, then later on piled up, the gelle lies the whole
summer in the mattba'a. The domes (qubeb) are not formed until a month
before the rainy season, i.e., a circular structure is built up of the
cakes skilfully placed one upon another like bricks; it is made from six
to eight yards high, gradually narrowed and finished with a vaulted
dome, whence this structure has its name, qubbe (קבּה). Below it
measures about eight or ten paces, it is always hollow, and is filled
from beneath by means of an opening which serves as a door. The outside
of the qubbe is plastered over with a thick solution of dung; and this
coating, when once dried in the sun, entirely protects the building,
which is both storehouse and store, against the winter rains. When they
begin to use the fuel, they take from the inside first by means of the
doorway, and afterwards (by which time the heavy rains are over) they
use up the building itself, removing the upper part first by means of a
ladder. By the summer the qubbe has disappeared. Many large households
have three or four of these stores. Where walled-in courts are spacious,
as is generally the case, they stand within; where not, outside. The
communities bordering on the desert, and exposed to attacks from the
Arabs, place them close round their villages, which gives them a
peculiar appearance. When attacked, the herds are driven behind these
buildings, and the peasants make their appearance between them with
their javelins. Seetzen reckons the gelle among the seven
characteristics of the district of Haurn (Basan).

It appears that [Eze 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012). - where the
prophet is allowed the usual cow-dung, the flame of which has no smell
whatever, and its ashes, which smoulder for a long time, are as clean as
wood ashes, instead of the cakes (גּללי) of human dung - is to be
explained according to this custom. My fellow-travellers have frequently
roasted mushrooms (futtr) and truffles (faq', פּקע) in the early spring
in the glowing ashes of the gelle. On the other hand, it would be an
error to infer from this passage that the Semites made use of human dung
for fuel; the Semites (including the Nomads) are the most scrupulously
particular people respecting cleanliness. According to the above, [Zep
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017) may be explained: "their flesh
shall become like dung," i.e., be burned or destroyed like dung. And
also we understand the above passage in the book of Job, "as his heap of
dung-cakes shall he be consumed away," exactly like [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010) : "I will burn (take away) the
remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man burneth the dung-cakes until
they are consumed," The suff. in כּגללו refers to the habitation of the
evil-doer, above whose grovelling joy the high dome of the dung-cakes
rises, which, before one becomes aware of it, has disappeared; and
throughout the description of the sudden destruction of the evil-doer,
[Kg1 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#008), [Kg1
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#009), the reader must keep the figure
of this dome and its disappearing before his mind. If it be objected
that by such a rendering כּגלליו would be expected, [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010) shows that גּלל (גּל) was also
used as a collective, and the Arabic gelle is never used in any other
way, which is the more remarkable, as one from the first regards its
termination as the "Arab. t of unity." My attendants on my journey from
Damascus (where there is no gelle, and consequently the word is not
used) always took it so, and formed the plural gellt and the collective
gilel, and were always laughed at and corrected: say Arab. aqrts jllt or
tbb' jllt! - Wetzst.)

The continuation here, [Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007), is
just the same: they who saw him (partic. of what is past, Ges. 134, 1)
say: where is he? As a dream he flieth away, so that he is not found,
and is scared away (ידּד Hoph., not ידּד Kal) as a vision of the night
(חזּיון everywhere in the book of Job instead of חזון, from which it
perhaps differs, as visum from visio), which one banishes on waking as a
trick of his fancy (comp. [Psa 73:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020);
[Isa 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#007).). Eyes looked upon him
(שׁזף only in the book of Job in this signification of a fixed scorching
look, cogn. שׁדף, adurere, as is manifest from [Sol
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006)), and do it no more; and his place
(מקומו construed as fem., as [Gen
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#024); [Sa2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#012), Cheth.) shall not henceforth
regard him (שׁוּר, especially frequent in the book of Job, prop. to go
about, cogn. תור, then to look about one). The futt. here everywhere
describe what shall meet the evil-doer. Therefore Ewald's transl., "his
fists smote down the weak," cannot be received. Moreover, חפניו, which
must then be read instead of בּנין, does not occur elsewhere in this
athletic signification; and it is quite unnecessary to derive ירצּוּ
from a רצּה = רצּץ (to crush, to hurl to the ground), or to change it to
ירצּוּ (Schnurrer) or ירצּצוּ (Olsh.); for although the thought, filios
ejus vexabunt egeni (lxx according to the reading θλάσειαν, and Targ.
according to the reading ירעעוּן), is not unsuitable for [Job
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#010), a sense more natural in
connection with the position of bnyw, and still more pleasing, is gained
if רצּה is taken in the usual signification: to conciliate, appease, as
the Targ. according to the reading ירעוּן (Peschito-word for
ἀποκαταλλάσσειν), and Ges., Vaih., Schlottm., and others, after
Aben-Ezra, Ralbag, Merc.: filii ejus placabunt tenues, quos scilicet
eorum pater diripuerat, vel eo inopiae adigentur, ut pauperibus sese
adjungere et ab illis inire gratiam cognantur. Its retributive relation
to [Job 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019) is also retained by this
rendering. The children of the unfeeling oppressor of the poor will be
obliged, when the tyrant is dead, to conciliate the destitute; and his
hands, by means of his children, will be obliged to give back his
property, i.e., to those whom his covetousness had brought to beggary
(און, exertion, strength, [Job 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#007),
then as hown, and synon. חיל, wealth, prob. from the radical meaning to
breathe, which is differently applied in the Arabic aun, rest, and haun,
lightness). Carey thinks that the description is retrospective: even he
himself, in his lifetime, which, however, does not commend itself, since
here it is throughout the deceased who is spoken of. As in [Job
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#009), so now in [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011) also, perf. and fut.
interchange, the former of the past, the latter of the future. Jerome,
by an amalgamation of two distinct radical significations, translates:
ossa ejus implebuntur (it should be impleta erant) vitiis adolescentiae
ejus, which is to be rejected, because עלוּם, [Psa
90:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#008), is indeed intended of secret
sin, but signifies generally that which is secret (veiled). On the
contrary, עלוּמים, [Job 33:25](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#025),
certainly signifies adolescentia (Arab. gulûmat), and is accordingly,
after lxx, Targ., and Syr., to be translated: his bones were full of
youthful vigour. In [Job 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011),
תּשׁכּב, as [Job 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#019), can refer to
the purely plural עצמותיו, but the predicate belonging to it would then
be plur. in [Job 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011), and sing. in
[Job 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011); on which account the
reference to עלוּמו, which is in itself far more suitable, is to be
preferred (Hirz., Schlottm.): his youthful vigour, on which he relied,
lies with him in the dust (of the grave).

[Job 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 20:12</span></span>

12 If wickedness tasted sweet in his mouth,

He hid it under his tongue;

13 He carefully cherished it and did not let it go,

And retained it in his palate:

14 His bread is now changed in his bowels,

It is the gall of vipers within him.

15 He hath swallowed down riches and now he spitteth them out,

God shall drive them out of his belly.

16 He sucked in the poison of vipers,

The tongue of the adder slayeth him.

The evil-doer is, in [Job 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012),
likened to an epicure; he keeps hold of wickedness as long as possible,
like a delicate morsel that is retained in the mouth (Renan: comme un
bonbon qu'on laisse fondre dans la bouche), and seeks to enjoy it to the
very last. המתּיק, to make sweet, has here the intransitive
signification dulcescere, Ew. 122, c. הכחיד, to remove from sight,
signifies elsewhere to destroy, here to conceal (as the Piel, [Job
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#010); [Job
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#018)). חמל, to spare, is construed
with על, which is usual with verbs of covering and protecting. The
conclusion of the hypothetical antecedent clauses begins with [Job
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014); the perf. נהפּך (with Kametz by
Athnach) describes the suddenness of the change; the מרורת which follows
is not equivalent to למרורת (Luther: His food shall be turned to adder's
gall in his body), but [Job 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014)
expresses the result of the change in a substantival clause. The bitter
and poisonous are synonymous in the ancient languages; hence we find the
meanings poison and gall ([Job 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#025))
in מררה, and ראשׁ signifies both a poisonous plant which is known by its
bitterness, and the poison of plants like to the poison of serpents
([Job 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016); [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033)). חיל ([Job
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015)) is property, without the
accompanying notion of forcible acquisition (Hirz.), which, on the
contrary, is indicated by the בּלע. The following fut. consec. is here
not aor., but expressive of the inevitable result which the performance
of an act assuredly brings: he must vomit back the property which he has
swallowed down; God casts it out of his belly, i.e., (which is implied
in בּלע, expellere) forcibly, and therefore as by the pains of colic.
The lxx, according to whose taste the mention of God here was contrary
to decorum, trans. ἐξ οἰκίας (read κοιλίας, according to Cod. Alex.)
αὐτοῦ ἐξελκύσει αὐτὸν ἄγγελος (Theod. δυνάστης). The perf., [Job
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015), is in [Job
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016) changed into the imperf. fut.
יינק, which more strongly represents the past action as that which has
gone before what is now described; and the ασυνδέτως, fut. which
follows, describes the consequence which is necessarily and directly
involved in it. [Psa 140:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#004) may be
compared with [Job 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016), [Pro
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#032) with [Job
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016). He who sucked in the poison of
low desire with a relish, will meet his punishment in that in which he
sinned: he is destroyed by the poisonous deadly bite of the serpent, for
the punishment of sin is fundamentally nothing but the nature of sin
itself brought fully out.

[Job 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 20:17</span></span>

17 He shall not delight himself in streams,

Like to rivers and brooks of honey and cream.

18 Giving back that for which he laboured, he shall not swallow it;

He shall not rejoice according to the riches he hath gotten.

19 Because he cast down, let the destitute lie helpless;

He shall not, in case he hath seized a house, finish building it.

20 Because he knew no rest in his craving,

He shall not be able to rescue himself with what he most loveth.

As poets sing of the aurea aetas of the paradise-like primeval age:
Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris ibant,

(Note: Ovid, Metam. i. 112, comp. Virgil, Ecl. iv. 30:

Et durae quercus sudabant roscida mella;

and Horace, Epod. xvi. 47

Mella cava manant ex ilice, montibus altis

Levis crepante lympha desilit pede.)

and as the land of promise is called in the words of Jehovah in the
Thora, "a land flowing with milk and honey," the puffed-up prosperity to
which the evil-doer has attained by injustice is likened to streams
(פּלגּות, prop. dividings, and indeed perhaps of a country = districts,
[Jdg 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015)., or as here, of a fountain
= streams) of rivers, of brooks (two gen. appositionis which are
co-ordinate, of which Hupfeld thinks one must be crossed out; they,
however, are not unpoetical, since, just as in [Psa
78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009), the flow of words is suspended,
Ew. 289, c) of honey and cream (comp. cream and oil, [Job
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006)), if נהרי נחלי is not perhaps
(which is more in accordance with the accentuation) intended as an
explanatory permutative of בפלגות: he shall not feast himself upon
streams, streamings of rivers of honey and cream (Dachselt); and by
אל־ירא (seq. Beth, to fasten one's gaze upon anything = feast one's self
upon it), the prospect of enjoying this prosperity, and indeed, since
the moral judgment and feeling are concerned in the affirmation of the
fact (אל, as [Job 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022); [Psa
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003); [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003), [Pro
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#025)), the privilege of this prospect,
is denied. This thought, that the enjoyment aimed at and anticipated
shall not follow the attainment of this height of prosperity, is
reiterated in a twofold form in [Job
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018).

[Job 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018) is not to be translated: He
gives back that which he has gained without swallowing it down, which
must have been ישׁיב; the syntactic relation is a different one: the Waw
of ולא is not expressive of detail; the detailing is implied in the
partic., which is made prominent as an antecedent, as if it were:
because, or since, he gives out again that which he has acquired (ינע
only here instead of יגיע, [Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003)
and freq.), he has no pleasure in it, he shall or may not altogether
swallow it down (Targ. incorrectly ולא־יגמר, after the Arabic blg, to
penetrate, attain an object). The formation of the clause corresponds
entirely with [Job 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018). All attempts
at interpretation which connect כּחיל תּמוּרתו with משׁיב, [Job
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018), are to be objected to: (he
gives it back again) as property of his restitution, i.e., property that
is to be restored (Schlottm.), or the property of another (Hahn). Apart
from the unsuitableness of the expression to the meaning found in it, it
is contrary to the relative independence of the separate lines of the
verse, which our poet almost always preserves, and is also opposed by
the interposing of ולא יבלע. The explanation chosen by Schult., Oet.,
Umbr., Hirz., Renan, and others, after the Targ., is utterly impossible:
as his possession, so his exchange (which is intended to mean:
restitution, giving up); this, instead of כּחיל, must have been not
merely כּחיל, but כּחילו. The designed relation of the members of the
sentence is, without doubt, that כחיל תמורתו is a nearer defining of ולא
יעלס, after the manner of an antecedent clause, and from which, that it
may be emphatically introduced, it begins by means of Waw apod. (to
which Schult. not unsuitably compares [Jer
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019); [Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013)). The following explanation is
very suitable: according to the power, i.e., entire fulness of his
exchange, but not in the sense of "to the full amount of its value"
(Carey, as Rosenm.), connected with משׁיב, but connected with what
follows: "how great soever his exchange (gain), still he does not
rejoice" (Ew.). But it is not probable that חיל here signifies power = a
great quantity, where property and possessions are spoken of. The most
natural rendering appears to me to be this: according to the relation of
the property of his exchange (תמורה from מור, Syr. directly emere, cogn.
מהר, מחר, and perhaps also מכר, here of exchange, barter, or even
acquisition, as [Job 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#031); comp. [Job
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#017), of the means of exchange),
i.e., of the property exchanged, bartered, gained by barter by him, he
is not to enjoy, i.e., the rejoicing which might have been expected in
connection with the greatness of the wealth he has amassed, departs from
him.

Jerome is not the only expositor who (as though the Hebrew tenses were
subject to no rule, and might mean everything) translates [Job
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019), domum rapuit et non aedificvit
eam (equivalent to quam non aedificaverat). Even Hupfeld translates
thus, by taking ולא יבנהו as imperfect = והוּא לא בנהוּ; but he, of
course, fails to furnish a grammatical proof for the possibility of
inferring a plusquamperfectum sense. It might sooner be explained:
instead of building it (Lit. Centralblatt, 1853, Nr. 24). But according
to the syntax, [Job 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019) must be an
antecedent clause: because he crushed, left (therefore: crushed by
himself) the destitute alone;

(Note: The Targ. translates: because he brought to ruin the business of
the poor (עזב after עזּבון in Ezekiel); and Parchon: because he brought
to ruin the courts of the poor (after the Mishna-word מעזיבה, a paved
floor); but עזב, according to the Masora on [Isa
58:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002) (comp. Kimchi, Michlol, p. 35),
is to be read עזב as a verb.)

and [Job 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019) the conclusion: he has
pillaged a house, and will not build it, i.e., in case he has plundered
a house, he will not build it up. For בּית גּזל, according to the
accents, which are here correct, is not to be translated: domus, quam
rapuit, but hypothetically: si (ἐὰν) domum rapuit, to which ybnhw wl' is
connected by Waw apod. (comp. [Job
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021)); and בּנה signifies here, as
frequently, not: to build, but: to build round, build additions to,
continue building (comp. [Ch2 11:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005);
[Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003), [Psa
89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)). In [Job
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020) similar periodizing occurs:
because he knew not שׁלו (neutral = שׁלוה, [Pro
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#001); Ew. 293, c), contentment, rest,
and sufficiency (comp. [Isa 59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008), לא
ידע שׁלום) in his belly, i.e., his craving, which swallows up
everything: he will not be able to deliver himself (מלּט like פּלּט,
[Job 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#007), as intensive of Kal: to
escape, or also = מלּט נפשׁו, which [Amo
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#015) seems to favour) with (בּ as [Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)) his dearest treasure (thus
e.g., Ewald), or: he will not be able to rescue his dearest object,
prop. not to effect a rescue with his dearest object, the obj., as [Job
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#004), [Job
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#010); [Job
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#012), conceived of as the instrument
(vid., e.g., Schlottm.). The former explanation is more natural and
simple. חמוּד, that which is exceedingly desired ([Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)), of health and pleasantness;
[Isa 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009), of idols, as the cherished
objects of their worshippers), is the dearest and most precious thing to
which the sinner clung with all his soul, not, as Bttch. thinks, the
soul itself.

(Note: Hupfeld interprets: non fruitur securus ventre suo h. e. cibo quo
venter potitus erat et deliciis quas non salvas retinebit (or also [Job
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020) as a clause by itself: cum
deliciis suis non evadet), but without any proof that ידע בּ can signify
frui, and בטן metonymically food, whereas the assertion that שׁלו cannot
be equivalent to שׁלו, and cannot be used of rest with reference to the
desire, is unfounded. In Hebrew the neuter adj. can be used as a
substantive, just as in Greek, e.g., τὸ ἀσφαλές, security, τὸ εὐτυχές,
success (comp. e.g., the combination בתמים ואמת), and שלח signifies
release and ease (Arab. followed by ‛n), without distinction of what
disturbs, be it danger, or pain, or any kind of emotion whatever.)

[Job 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 20:21</span></span>

21 Nothing escaped his covetousness,

Therefore his prosperity shall not continue.

22 In the fulness of his need it shall be strait with him,

Every hand of the needy shall come upon him.

23 It shall come to pass: in order to fill his belly,

He sendeth forth the glow of His anger into him,

And He causeth it to rain upon him into his flesh.

24 He must flee from an iron weapon,

Therefore a brazen bow pierceth him through.

25 It teareth, then it cometh forth out of his body,

And the steel out of his gall,

The terrors of death come upon him.

The words of [Job 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021) are: there was
nothing that escaped (שׂריד, as [Job
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#019), from שׂרד, Arab. šarada,
aufugere) his eating (from אכל, not from אכל), i.e., he devoured
everything without sparing, even to the last remnant; therefore טוּבו,
his prosperity, his abundant wealth, will not continue or hold out
(יחיל, as [Psa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005), to be solid,
powerful, enduring, whence חיל, Arab. ȟı̂lat, ḥawl). Hupf. transl.
differently: nihil ei superstes ad vescendum, itaque non durant ejus
bona; but שׂריד signifies first elapsum, and על־כן propterea; and we may
retain these first significations, especially since [Job
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021) is not future like [Job
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021). The tone of prediction taken up
in [Job 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021) is continued in what
follows. The inf. constr. מלאות (prop. מלאות, but with Cholem by the
Aleph, since the Waw is regarded as יתיר, superfluous), formed after the
manner of the verbs Lamed He (Ew. 238, c), is written like קראות, [Jdg
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001) (comp. on the other hand the
scriptio devectiva, [Lev 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033); [Lev
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004)); and שׂפקו (with Sin, as Norzi
decides after Codd., Kimchi, and Farisol, not Samech) is to be derived
from שׂפק (ספק), sufficientia (comp. the verb, [Kg1
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#010)): if his sufficiency exists in
abundance, not from שׂפק = Arab. safqat, ṣafqat, complosio, according to
which Schultens explains: if his joyous clapping of hands has reached
its highest point (Elizabeth Smith: "while clapping the hands in the
fulness of joy"), to which מלאות is not suitable, and which ought at
least to be שׁפק כּפּיו. Therefore: in the fulness of his need shall he
be straitened (יצר with the tone drawn back for יצר on account of the
following monosyllable, although also apocopated futt. follow further on
in the strict future signification, according to poetic usage), by which
not merely the fearful foreboding is meant, which just in the fullest
overflow makes known his impending lot, but the real calamity, into
which his towering prosperity suddenly changes, as [Job
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#022) shows: All the hands of the
destitute come upon him (בּוא seq. acc.: invadere) to avenge on him the
injustice done to the needy. It is not necessary to understand merely
such as he has made destitute, it is כּל־יד; the assertion is therefore
general: the rich uncompassionate man becomes a defenceless prey of the
proletaries.

[Job 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023)

The יהי which opens this verse (and which also occurs elsewhere, e.g.,
[Job 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012), in a purely future
signification), here, like ויהי, [Sa2
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024) (Ew. 333, b), serves to introduce
the following ישׁלּח (it shall happen: He shall send forth); ויהי (e.g.,
[Gen 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)) frequent in the historical
style, and והיה in the prophetical, are similarly used. In order to fill
his belly, which is insatiable, God will send forth against him His
glowing wrath (comp. [Lam 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013), from
on high hath He sent fire into my bones), and will rain upon him into
his flesh, or his plumpness (Arab. fi lachmihi). Thus we believe
בּלחוּמו must be understood by referring to [Zep
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017); where, perhaps not without
reference to this speech of Zophar, the כּגּללים, which serves to
explain [Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007), coincides with
וּלחמּם, which serves to explain this בלחומו; and the right meaning is
not even missed by the lxx, which translates καὶ τὰς σάρκας αὐτῶν ὡς
βόλβιτα.

(Note: This passage is translated: and their blood is poured forth as
dust, i.e., useless rubbish (Arab. el-ghabra אלעברה), and their flesh as
filth. The form of inflection לחמּם is referable to לחם after the form
לאם.)

A suitable thought is obtained if לחוּם is taken in the signification,
food: He will rain upon him his food, i.e., what is fit for him (with
Beth of the instrument instead of the accusative of the object), or: He
will rain down (His wrath) upon him as his food (with Beth essent.,
according to which Ew.: what can satisfy him; Bridel: pour son aliment;
Renan: en guise de pain); but we give the preference to the other
interpretation, because it is at once natural in this book, abounding in
Arabisms, to suppose for לחום the signification of the Arab. laḥm, which
is also supported in Hebrew by [Zep
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017); further, because the Targ.
favours it, which transl. בּשׁלדיהּ, and expositors, as Aben-Ezra and
Ralbag, who interpret by בבשׂרו; finally, because it gives an
appropriate idea, to which [Lam 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013)
presents a commendable parallel, comp. also [Jam
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003), and Koran, Sur. 2, 169: "those
who hide what God has sent down by the Scripture, and thereby obtain a
small profit, eat only fire into their belly." That עלימו can be used
pathetically for עליו is unmistakeably clear from [Job
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002), comp. [Job
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#023), and on [Psa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007); the morally indignant speech
which threatens punishment, intentionally seeks after rare solemn words
and darksome tones. Therefore: Upon his flesh, which has been nourished
in unsympathizing greediness, God rains down, i.e., rain of fire, which
scorches it. This is the hidden background of the lot of punishment, the
active principle of which, though it be effected by human agency, is the
punitive power of the fire of divine wrath. [Job
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024) describe, by illustration, how
it is worked out. The evil-doer flees from a hostile superior power, is
hit in the back by the enemy's arrows; and since he, one who is
overthrown, seeks to get free from them, he is made to feel the terrors
of inevitably approaching death.

[Job 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024)

The two futt. may be arranged as in a conditional clause, like [Psa
91:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#007), comp. [Amo
9:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002); and this is, as it seems, the
mutual relation of the two expressions designed by the poet (similar to
[Isa 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018)): if he flee from the
weapons of iron, i.e., the deadly weapon in the thick of the fight, he
succumbs to that which is destructive by and by: the bow of brass
(נחוּשׁה poet. for נחשׁת, as [Psa
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#035), although it might also be an
adj., since eth, as the Arab. qaws shows, is really a feminine
termination) will pierce him through (fut. Kal of חלף, Arab. chlf, to
press further and further, press after, here as in [Jdg
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026)). The flight of the disheartened
is a punishment which is completed by his being hit while fleeing by the
arrow which the brazen bow sends with swift power after him. In [Job
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#025) the Targ. reads מגּוהּ with He
mappic., and translates: he (the enemy, or God) draws (stringit), and it
(the sword) comes out of its sheath, which is to be rejected because גּו
cannot signify vagina. Kimchi and most Jewish expositors interpret מגּוה
by מגּוּף; the lxx also translates it σῶμα. To understand it according
to גּו (back), of the hinder part of the body, gives no suitable sense,
since the evil-doer is imagined as hit in the back, the arrow
consequently passing out at the front;

(Note: Thus sings the warrior Cana'an Tjr (died about 1815) after the
loss of his wife: -

"My grief for her is the brief of him whose horse is dashed in pieces in
the desert.

The way is wild, and there is no help from the travellers who have
hurried on before.

My groaning is like the groaning of one who, mortally wounded between
the shoulders,

Will flee, and trails after him the lance that is fastened in him."

\- Wetzst.)

whereas the signification body is suitable, and is also made
sufficiently certain by the cognate form גּויּה. The verb שׁלף, however,
is used as in [Jdg 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#022) : he who is
hit drawn the arrow out, then it comes out of his body, into which it is
driven deep; and the glance, i.e., the metal head of the arrow (like
להב, [Jdg 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#022), the point in
distinction from the shaft), out of his gall (מררה = מררה, [Job
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#013), so called from its bitterness,
as χολή, χόλος, comp. χλόος, χλωρός, from the green-yellow colour),
since, as the Syriac version freely translates, his gall-bladder is
burst.

(Note: Abulwalid (in Kimchi) understands the red gall, i.e., the
gall-bladder, by מרורה, after the Arabic marâre. If this is pierced, its
contents are emptied into the lower part of the body, and the man dies.)

Is יהלך, as a parallel word to ויּצא, to be connected with ממררתו, or
with what follows? The accentuation varies. The ordinary interpunction
is וברק with Dech, ממררתו Mercha, or more correctly Mercha-Zinnorith,
יהלך Rebia mugrasch (according to which, Ew., Umbr., Vaih., Welte, Hahn,
Schlottm., and Olsh. divide); ממררתו is, however, also found with
Athnach. Although the latter mode of accentuation is only feebly
supported, we nevertheless consider it as the more correct, for עליו
אמים, in the mind of the poet, can hardly have formed a line of the
verse. If, however, יהלך עליו אמים is now taken together, it is a matter
for inquiry whether it is to be explained: he passes away, since terrors
come upon him (Schult., Rosenm., Hirz., Von Gerl., Carey), or: terrors
come upon him (lxx, Targ., Syr., Jer., Ramban). We consider the latter
as the only correct interpretation; for if יהלך ought to be understood
after [Job 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#020); [Job
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#022), the poet would have expressed
himself ambiguously, since it is at least as natural to consider אמים as
the subject of יהלך, as to take עליו אמים as an adverbial clause. The
former, however, is both natural according to the syntax (vid., Ges.
147, a) and suitable in matter: terrors (i.e., of certain death to him
in a short time) draw on upon him, and accordingly we decide in its
favour.

[Job 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 20:26</span></span>

26 All darkness is reserved for his treasured things,

A fire that is not blown upon devoureth him;

It feedeth upon what is left in his tent.

27 The heavens reveal his iniquity,

And the earth riseth up against him.

28 The produce of his house must vanish,

Flowing away in the day of God's wrath.

. . . . . .

29 This is the lot of the wicked man from Elohim,

And the heritage decreed for him from God.

As in [Psa 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014) God's store of
earthly goods for the children of men is called צפוּן (צפין), so here
the stores laid up by man himself are called צפוּניו. Total darkness,
which will finally destroy them, is decreed by God against these stores
of the godless, which are brought together not as coming from the hand
of God, but covetously, and regardless of Him. Instead of טמוּן it might
also have been צפוּן ([Job 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020); [Job
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#019); [Job
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)), and instead of לצפוּניו also
לטמוּניו ([Deu 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019)); but טמוּן is,
as [Job 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#013) shows, better suited to
darkness (on account of the ט, this dull-toned muta, with which the word
begins). כּל־חשׁך signifies sheer darkness, as in [Psa
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006), כל־הבל, sheer nothingness; [Psa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014), כל־כבודה, sheer splendour; and
perhaps [Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005), כל־כבוד, sheer
glory. And the thought, expressed with somewhat of a play upon words,
is, that to the θησαυρίζειν of the godless corresponds a θησαυρίζειν of
God, the Judge ([Rom 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005); [Jam
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003)): the one gathers up treasures,
and the other nothing but darkness, to whom at an appointed season they
shall be surrendered. The תּאכלהוּ which follows is regarded by Ges. as
Piel instead of תּאכּלהוּ, but such a resolving of the characteristic
sharpened syllable of Piel is unsupportable; by Hirz., Olsh. 250, b, and
Pual instead of תּאכּלהוּ, but אכּל signifies to be eaten, not (so that
it might be connected with an accusative of the obj.) to get to eat; by
Ew., Hupf., as Kal for תּאכלהוּ, which is possible both from the letters
and the matter (vid., on [Psa 94:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020));
but more correctly it is regarded as Poel, for such Poel forms from
strong roots do occur, as שׁפט (vid., on [Job
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015)), and that the Cholem of these
forms can be shortened into Kametz-chatuph is seen from ודרשׁוּ, [Psa
109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010) (vid., Psalter in loc.).

(Note: Such a contraction is also presented in the readings תּרצחוּ,
[Psa 62:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004); מלשׁני, [Psa
101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005); and ויּחלקם, [Ch1
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#006); [Ch1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003). All these forms are not resolved
forms of Piel (Ges., Berth., Olsh. 248, a), but contracted forms of Poel
with Kametz-chatuph instead of Cholem. תּהתלּוּ, [Job
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#009), is not a resolved form of Piel,
but a non-syncopated Hiphil. It should be observed that the
Chateph-Kametz in "wedorschu" above and at p. 328 is used as an
unmistakeable sign of the ŏ. - Tr.\])

The Poel is in the passage before us the intensive of Kal: a fire which
is not blown upon shall eat him up. By this translation נפּח is
equivalent to נפּחה, since attention is given to the gender of אשׁ in
the verb immediately connected with it, but it is left out of
consideration in the verbs נפח and ירע which stand further form it,
which Olshausen thinks doubtful; there are, however, not a few examples
which may be adduced in favour of it, as [Kg1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011); [Isa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#009); comp. Ges. 147, rem. 1.
Certainly the relative clause לא נפח may also be explained by supplying
בּהּ: into which one has not blown, or that one has not blown on (Symm.,
Theod., ἄνευ φυσήματος): both renderings are possible, according to [Eze
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#020), [Eze
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#022); but since the masc. ירע
follows, having undoubtedly אשׁ as its subject, we can unhesitatingly
take the Synallage gen. as beginning even with נפח. A fire which needs
no human help for its kindling and its maintenance is intended (comp. on
לא ביד, [Job 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#020)); therefore "fire
of God," [Job 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016). This fire feasts
upon what has escaped (שׂריד, as [Job
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021); [Job
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#019)), i.e., whatever has escaped
other fates, in his tent. yeera\` (Milel) is fut. apoc. Kal; the form of
writing ירע (fut. apoc. Niph.) proposed by Olsh. on account of the
change of gender, i.e., it is devoured, is to be rejected for the reason
assigned in connection with נפח. The correct interpretation has been
brought forward by Schultens.

It is not without reference to [Job
16:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#018), where Job has called upon
earth and heaven as witnesses, that in [Job
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#027) Zophar continues: "the heavens
reveal his guilt, and the earth rises against him;" heaven and earth
bear witness to his being an abhorrence, not worthy of being borne by
the earth and shone upon by the light of heaven; they testify this,
since their powers from below and above vie with one another to get rid
of him. מתקוממה is connected closely with לו (which has Lamed raphatum)
by means of Mercha-Zinnorith, and under the influence of the law,
according to which before a monosyllabic accented word the tone is drawn
back from the last syllable of the preceding word to the penultima (Ew.
73, 3), is accented as Milel on account of the pause.

(Note: This mode of accentuation, which is found in Codd. and is
attested by grammarians (vid., Norzi), is grammatically more
intelligible than that of our editions, which have the Mercha with the
final syllable. For while מתקוממה, as Milel, is the pausal-form of the
fem. part. Hithpalel for מתקוממה (מתקוממת) with a pausal instead of , it
ought to be as Milra, a passive form; but the Hithpalal has no meaning
here, and is in general not firmly supported within the range of
biblical Hebrew.)

In [Job 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#028), Ges., Olsh., and others
translate: the produce of his house, that which is swept together, must
vanish away in the day of His wrath; נגּרות corrasae (opes), Niph. from
גּרר. But first, the suff. is wanting to נגרות; and secondly, בּיום אפּו
has no natural connection in what precedes. The Niph. נגרות in the
signification diffluentia, derived from נגר morf devire, to flow away
(comp. Arab. jry, to flow), is incomparably better suited to the passage
(comp. [Sa2 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014), where Luther
transl.: as water which glides away into the earth). The close of the
description is similar to [Isa 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#011) :
"In the day that thou plantedst, thou causedst it to increase, and with
the morning thy seed was in flowera harvest-head in the day of deep
wounding and deadly sorrow." So here everything that the evil-doer
hoards up is spoken of as "vanishing in the day of God's wrath."

The speech now closes by summing up like Bildad's, [Job
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#021) : "This is the portion or
inheritance of, i.e., the lot that is assigned or falls to, the wicked
man (אדם רשׁע, a rare application of אדם, comp. [Pro
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012), instead of which אישׁ is more
usual) from Elohim, and this the heritage of his (i.e., concerning him)
decree from God." אמר (אמר) with an objective suff., which also occurs
elsewhere of the almighty word of command of God (vid., on [Hab
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009)), signifies here God's judicial
arrangement or order, in this sense just as Arabic as Hebraic, for also
in Arab. amr (plur. awâmir) signifies command and order.

The speech of Zophar, Job 20, is his ultimatum, for in the third course
of the controversy he takes no part. We have already seen from his first
speech, Job 11, that he is the most impassioned of the friends. His
vehemence is now the less excusable, since Job in his previous speech
has used the truly spiritual language of importunate entreaty and
earnest warning in reply to the friends. The friends would now have done
well if they had been silent, and still better if they had recognised in
the sufferer the tried and buffeted servant of God, and had withdrawn
their charges, which his innermost nature repudiates. But Zophar is not
disposed to allow the reproach of the correction which they received to
rest upon him; in him we have an illustration of the fact that a man is
never more eloquent than when he has to defend his injured honour, but
that he is also never more in danger of regarding the extravagant images
of natural excitement as a higher inspiration, or, however, as striking
justifications coming from the fulness of a superior perception. It has
been rightly remarked, that in Zophar the poet described to us one of
those hot-heads who pretend to fight for religion that is imperilled,
while they are zealous for their own wounded vanity. Instead of being
warned by Job's threat of judgment, he thrusts back his attempt at
producing dismay be a similar attempt. He has nothing new to bring
forward in reply to Job; the poet has skilfully understood how to turn
the heart of his readers step by step from the friends, and in the same
degree to gain its sympathy for Job. For they are completely spent in
their one dogma; and while in Job an endless multitude of thoughts and
feelings surge up one after another, their heart is as hermetically
closed against every new perception and emotion. All that is new in the
speech of Zophar, and in those of the friends generally, in this second
course of the controversy, is, that they no longer try to lure Job on to
penitence by promises, but endeavour to bring him to a right state of
mind, or rather to weaken his supposedly-mad assault upon themselves, by
presenting to him only the most terrible images. It is not possible to
illustrate the principle that the covetous, uncompassionate rich man is
torn away from his prosperity by the punishment God decrees for him,
more fearfully and more graphically than Zophar does it; and this
terrible description is not overdrawn, but true and appropriate-but in
opposition to Job it is the extreme of uncharitableness which outdoes
itself: applied to him, the fearful truth becomes a fearful lie. For in
Zophar's mind Job is the godless man, whose rejoicing does not last
long, who indeed raises himself towards heaven, but as his own dung must
he perish, and to whom the sin of his unjust gain is become as the
poison of the viper in his belly. The arrow of God's wrath sticks fast
in him; and though he draw it out, it has already inflicted on him a
deservedly mortal wound! The fire of God which has already begun to
consume his possessions, does not rest until even the last remnant in
his tent is consumed. The heavens, where in his self-delusion he seeks
the defender of his innocence, reveal his guilt, and the earth, which he
hopes to have as a witness in his favour, rises up as his accuser. Thus
mercilessly does Zophar seek to stifle the new trust which Job conceives
towards God, to extinguish the faith which bursts upwards from beneath
the ashes of the conflict. Zophar's method of treatment is
soul-destroying; he seeks to slay that life which germinates from the
feeling of death, instead of strengthening it. He does not, however,
succeed; for so long as Job does not become doubtful of his innocence,
the uncharitableness of the friends must be to him the thread by which
he finds his way through the labyrinth of his sufferings to the God who
loves him, although He seems to be angry with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 21](job021)

</div>
