<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job021)  [Next](job023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#001)

[Job 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 22:1</span></span>

1 Then began Eliphaz the Temanite, and said:

2 Is a man profitable unto God?

No, indeed! the intelligent man is profitable to himself.

3 Hath the Almighty any profit if thou art righteous,

Or gain if thou strivest to walk uprightly?

4 Will He reprove thee for thy fear of God,

Will He go with thee into judgment?

5 Is not thy wickedness great,

Thine iniquities infinite?

The verb סכן, in the signification to be profitable, is peculiar to the
book of Job (although also סכן and סכנת elsewhere, according to its
primary signification, does not differ from מועיל, מועילה, by which it
is explained by Kimchi); the correct development of the notion of this
verb is to be perceived from the Hiph., which occurs in [Job
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#021) in this speech of Eliphaz (vid.,
Ges. Thes.): it signifies originally, like שׁכן, Arab. skn, to rest,
dwell, especially to dwell beside one another, then to become accustomed
to one another (comp. שׁכן, a neighbour, and Arab. sakanun, a friend,
confidant), and to assist one another, to be serviceable, to be
profitable; we can say both סכנתּי, I have profit, [Job
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#009), and סכן, it is profitable, [Job
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#003); [Job
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#003), here twice with a personal
subj., and first followed by ל, then with the על usual also elsewhere in
later prose (e.g., טוב על, [Ch1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#002),
comp. supra, [Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003), to be
pleasant) and poetry, which gladly adopts Aramaisms (as here and [Psa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006), שׁפר על, well-pleased), instead
of ל, whence here עלימו, as [Job
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023), pathetic for עליו. The
question, which is intended as a negative, is followed by the negative
answer (which establishes its negative meaning) with כּי; משׂכּיל is,
like [Psa 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002), the intelligent, who
wills and does what is good, with an insight into the nature of the
extremes in morality, as in [Pro 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003)
independent morality which rests not merely on blind custom is called
מוסר השׂכל. היה חפץ ל, it is to the interest of any one (different from
[Sa1 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022), vid., on [Job
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#021)), and היה בצע ל, it is to the
gain of any one (prop. the act of cutting, cutting off, i.e., what one
tears in pieces), follow as synonyms of סכן. On the Aramaizing doubling
of the first radical in the Hiph. תתּם (instead of תתם), vid., Ges. 67,
rem. 8, comp. 3. It is translated an lucrum (ei) si integras facias vias
tuas. The meaning of the whole strophe is mainly determined according to
the rendering of המיּראתך (like המבינתך, [Job
39:26](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#026), with Dech, and as an exception
with Munach, not removed to the place of the Metheg; vid., Psalter, ii.
491, Anm. 1). If the suff. is taken objectively (from fear of thee),
e.g., Hirz., we have the following line of thought: God is neither
benefited by human virtue nor injured by human sin, so that when He
corrects the sinner He is turning danger from himself; He neither
rewards the godly because He is benefited by his piety, nor punishes the
sinner because by his sinning he threatens Him with injury. Since,
therefore, if God chastises a man, the reason of it is not to be found
in any selfish purpose of God, it must be in the sin of the man, which
is on its own account worthy of punishment. But the logical relation in
which [Job 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005) stands to [Job
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#004) does not suit this: perhaps from
fear of thee ... ? no, rather because of thy many and great sins! Hahn
is more just to this relation when he explains: "God has no personal
profit to expect from man, so that, somewhat from fear, to prevent him
from being injurious, He should have any occasion to torment him with
sufferings unjustly." But if the personal profit, which is denied, is
one that grows out of the piety of the man, the personal harm, which is
denied as one which God by punishment will keep far from Himself, is to
be thought of as growing out of the sin of the man; and the logical
relation of [Job 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005) to [Job
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#004) is not suited to this, for. [Job
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005) assigns the reason of the
chastisement to the sin, and denies, as it runs, not merely any motive
whatever in connection with the sin, but that the reason can lie in the
opposite of sin, as it appears according to Job's assertion that,
although guiltless, he is still suffering from the wrath of God.

Thus, then, the suff. of המיראתך is to be taken subjectively: on account
of thy fear of God, as Eliphaz has used יראתך twice already, [Job
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#006); [Job
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#004). By this subjective rendering
[Job 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#004) and [Job
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005) form a true antithesis: Does God
perhaps punish thee on account of thy fear of God? Does He go (on that
account) with thee into judgment? No (it would be absurd to suppose
that); therefore thy wickedness must be great (in proportion to the
greatness of thy suffering), and thy misdeeds infinitely many. If we now
look at what precedes, we shall have to put aside the thought drawn into
[Job 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002) and [Job
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#003) by Ewald (and also by Hahn):
whether God, perhaps with the purpose of gaining greater advantage from
piety, seeks to raise it by unjustly decreed suffering; for this thought
has nothing to indicate it, and is indeed certainly false, but on
account of the force of truth which lies in it (there is a decreeing of
suffering for the godly to raise their piety) is only perplexing.

First of all, we must inquire how it is that Eliphaz begins his speech
thus. All the exhortations to penitence in which the three exhaust
themselves, rebound from Job without affecting him. Even Eliphaz, the
oldest among them, full of a lofty, almost prophetic consciousness, has
with the utmost solicitude allured and terrified him, but in vain. And
it is the cause of God which he brings against him, or rather his own
well-being that he seeks, without making an impression upon him. Then he
reminds him that God is in Himself the all-sufficient One; that no
advantage accrues to Him from human uprightness, since His nature,
existing before and transcending all created things, can suffer neither
diminution nor increase from the creature; that Job therefore, since he
remains inaccessible to that well-meant call to penitent humiliation,
has refused not to benefit Him, but himself; or, what is the reverse
side of this thought (which is not, however, expressed), that he does no
injury to Him, only to himself. And yet in what except in Job's sin
should this decree of suffering have its ground? If it is a
self-contradiction that God should chastise a man because he fears Him,
there must be sin on the side of Job; and indeed, since the nature of
the sin is to be measured according to the nature of the suffering,
great and measureless sin. This logical necessity Eliphaz now regards as
real, without further investigation, by opening out this bundle of sins
in the next strophe, and reproaching Job directly with that which
Zophar, [Job 20:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019), aiming at Job,
has said of the רשׁע. In the next strophe he continues, with כי explic.:

[Job 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 22:6</span></span>

6 For thou distrainedst thy brother without cause,

And the clothes of the naked thou strippedst off.

7 Thou gavest no water to the languishing,

And thou refusedst bread to the hungry.

8 And the man of the arm-the land was his,

And the honourable man dwelt therein.

9 Thou sentest widows away empty,

And the arms of the orphan are broken.

The reason of exceeding great suffering most be exceeding great sins.
Job must have committed such sins as are here cited; therefore Eliphaz
directly attributes guilt to him, since he thinks thus to tear down the
disguise of the hypocrite. The strophe contains no reference to the
Mosaic law: the compassionate Mosaic laws respecting duties towards
widows and orphans, and the poor who pledge their few and indispensable
goods, may have passed before the poet's mind; but it is not safe to
infer it from the expression. As specific Mohammedan commandments among
the wandering tribes even in the present day have no sound, so the poet
dare not assume, in connection with the characters of his drama, any
knowledge, of the Sinaitic law; and of this he remains conscious
throughout: their standpoint is and remains that of the Abrahamic faith,
the primary commands (later called the ten commands of piety, el-felâhh)
of which were amply sufficient for stigmatizing that to which this
strophe gives prominence as sin. It is only the force of the connection
of the matter here which gives the futt. which follow כי a retrospective
meaning. חבל is connected either with the accusative of the thing for
which the pledge is taken, as in the law, which meets a response in the
heart, [Exo 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025).; or with the accus.
of the person who is seized, as here אחיך; or, if this is really (as Br
asserts) a mistake that has gained a footing, which has Codd. and old
printed editions against it, rather אחיך. lxx, Targ., Syr., and Jer.
read the word as plural. ערוּמים (from ערום), like γυμνοί, [Jam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015), nudi (comp. Seneca, de
beneficiis, v. 13: si quis male vestitum et pannosum videt, nudum se
vidisse dicit), are, according to our mode of expression, the
half-naked, only scantily (vid., [Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002)) clothed.

[Job 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#008)

The man of the arm, זרוע, is in Eliphaz' mind Job himself. He has by
degrees acquired the territory far and wide for himself, by having
brought down the rightful possessors by open violence ([Job
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019)), or even by cunning and
unfeeling practices, and is not deterred by any threat of a curse ([Job
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#028)): לו הארץ, he looked upon it as
his, and his it must become; and since with his possessions his
authority increased, he planted himself firmly in it, filled it out
alone, like a stout fellow who takes the room of all others away. Umbr.,
Hahn, and others think Job's partiality for power and rank is described
in [Job 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#008); but both assertions read
straightforward, without any intimation of co-operation. The address is
here only suspended, in order to describe the man as he was and is. The
all-absorbing love of self regulated his dealings. In possession of the
highest power and highest rank, he was not easy of access. Widows and
orphans, that they might not perish, were obliged to turn suppliantly to
him. But the widows he chased away with empty hands, and the arms of the
orphans were crushed. From the address a turn is also here taken to an
objective utterance turned from the person addressed, intended however
for him; the construction is like מצות יעכל, unleavened bread is eaten,
[Exo 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#007), according to Ew. 295, b.
The arms are not conceived of as stretched out for help (which would
rather be ידי), nor as demanding back their perverted right, but the
crushing of the arms, as [Psa 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#017);
[Eze 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#022), and frequently implies a
total destruction of every power, support, and help, after the analogy
of the Arabic phrase compared by Ges. in his Thes. pp. 268b, 433b. The
arm, זרוע (Arab. ḏirâ‛, oftener ‛aḍud or sâ‛id), signifies power, [Job
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#009), [Psa
57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001) :16; force and violence, [Job
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#008), [Job
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#009); self-help, and help from
without, [Psa 83:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009) (comp. [Psa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)). Whatever the orphans possessed
of goods, honour, and help still available, is not merely broken, it is
beaten into fragments.

[Job 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 22:10</span></span>

10 Therefore snares are round about thee,

And fear terrifieth thee suddenly;

11 Or percievest thou not the darkness,

And the overflow of waters, which covereth thee?

On account of this inhuman mode of action by which he has challenged the
punishment of justice, snares are round about him (comp. Bildad's
picture of this fate of the evil-doer, [Job
18:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008)), destruction encompasses him
on every side, so that he sees no way out, and must without any escape
succumb to it. And the approaching ruin makes itself known to him time
after time by terrors which come suddenly upon him and disconcert him;
so that his outward circumstances being deranged and his mind
discomposed, he has already in anticipation to taste that which is
before him. In [Job 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#011), לא תראה is
by no means to be taken as an eventual circumstantial clause, whether it
is translated affirmatively: or darkness (covers thee), that thou canst
not see; or interrogatively: or does darkness (surround thee), that thou
seest not? In both cases the verb in the principal clause is wanting;
apart from the new turn, which או introduces, being none, it would then
have to be explained with Lwenthal: or has the habit of sinning already
so dulled thy feeling and darkened thine eye, that thou canst not
perceive the enormity of thy transgression? But this is a meaning forced
from the words which they are not capable of; it must have been at least
או חשׁך בּעדך, or something similar. Since או חשׁך (to be accented
without Makkeph with Mnach, Dech) cannot form a principal clause of
itself, תראה is without doubt the verb belonging to it: or (או as [Job
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#003)) seest thou not darkness?
Because, according to his preceding speeches, Job does not question the
magnitude of his sufferings, but acknowledges them in all their
fearfulness; therefore Hahn believes it must be explained: or shouldst
thou really not be willing to see thy sins, which encompass thee as
thick dark clouds, which cover thee as floods of water? The two figures,
however, can only be understood of the destruction which entirely
shrouds Job in darkness, and threatens to drown him. But destruction, in
the sense in which Eliphaz asks if Job does not see it, is certainly
intended differently to what it was in Job's complaints. Job complains
of it as being unmerited, and therefore mysterious; Eliphaz, on the
other hand, is desirous that he should open his eyes that he may
perceive in this darkness of sorrow, this flood of suffering, the
well-deserved punishment of his heinous sins, and anticipate the worst
by penitence. לא תכסּךּ is a relative clause, and belongs logically also
to חשׁך, comp. [Isa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002), where שׁפעת
is also found in [Job 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006) (from שׁפע,
abundare; comp. Arab. šf‛, ספק, [Job
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#022)). Eliphaz now insinuates that
Job denies the special providence of God, because he doubts the
exceptionless, just government of God. In the second strophe he has
explained his affliction as the result of his uncharitableness; now he
explains it as the result of his unbelief, which is now become manifest.

[Job 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 22:12</span></span>

12 Is not Eloah high as the heavens?

See but the head of the stars, how exalted!

13 So then thou thinkest: "What doth God know?

Can He judge through the thick cloud?

14 Clouds veil Him that He seeth not,

And in the vault of heaven He walketh at His pleasure."

Because Job has denied the distribution of worldly fortune, of outward
prosperity and adversity, according to the law of the justice that
recompenses like for like, Eliphaz charges him with that unbelief often
mentioned in the Psalms ([Psa 73:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#011);
[Psa 94:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007); comp. [Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015); [Eze
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#012)), which denies to the God in
heaven, as Epicurus did to the gods who lead a blessed life in the
spaces between the worlds, a knowledge of earthly things, and therefore
the preliminary condition for a right comprehension of them. The mode of
expression here is altogether peculiar. גּבהּ שׁמים is not acc. loci, as
the like accusatives in combination with the verb שׁכן, [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015), may be taken: the substantival
clause would lead one to expect בּגבהּ, or better בּגבהי ([Job
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#008)); it is rather (similar to [Job
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#008)) nomin. praedicati: Eloah is the
height of the heavens = heaven-high, as high as the heavens, therefore
certainly highly, and indeed very highly, exalted above this earth. In
this sense it is continued with Waw explic.: and behold (= behold then)
the head of the stars, that, or how (כּי as in [Gen
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015); [Sa1
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#029), quod = quam) exalted they are.
וּראה has Asla (Kadma) in correct texts, and רמו is written רמּוּ
(râmmu) with a so-called Dag. affectuosum (Olsh. 83, b). It may be
received as certain that ראשׁ, the head (vertex), beside ראה (not ספר),
does not signify the sum (Aben-Ezra). But it is questionable whether the
genitive that follows ראשׁ is gen. partitivus: the highest among the
stars (Ew., Hirz., Schlottm.), or gen. epexegeticus: the head, i.e., (in
relation to the rest of the universe) the height, which is formed by the
stars, or even which they occupy (Ges. coelum stellatum); the partitive
rendering is to be preferred, for the Semitic perception recognises, as
the plural שׁמים implies, nearer and more distant celestial spheres. The
expression "head of the stars" is therefore somewhat like fastigium
coeli (the extreme height, i.e., the middle of the vault of heaven), or
culmen aereum (of the aether separating the strata of air above); the
summit of the stars rising up into the extremest spheres is intended (we
should say: the fixed stars, or to use a still more modern expression,
the milky way), as also the רמו naturally refers to ראשׁ כוכבים as one
notion (summitas astrorum = summa astra).

The connection of what follows with Waw is not adversative (Hirz., Ew.,
and others: and yet thou speakest), it is rather consecutive (Hahn: and
since thou speakest; better: and in consequence of this thou speakest;
or: thus speakest thou, thinkest thou then). The undeniable truth that
God is exalted, and indeed absolute in His exaltation, is misapplied by
Job to the false conclusion: what does God know, or (since the perf. in
interrogative sentences frequently corresponds to the Latin conjunctive,
vid., on [Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003)) how should God
know, or take knowledge, i.e., of anything that happens on earth? In
[Job 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#013) the potential takes the
place of this modal perfect: can He rule judicially behind the dark
clouds, i.e., over the world below from which He is shut out? בּעד (of
like verbal origin with the Arab. b‛da, post, prop. distance,
separation, succession, but of wider use) signifies here, as in [Job
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010); [Job
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007), behind, pone, with the secondary
notion of being encompassed or covered by that which shuts off. Far from
having an unlimited view of everything earthly from His absolute height,
it is veiled from His by the clouds, so that He sees not what occurs
here below, and unconcerned about it He walks the circle of the heavens
(that which vaults the earth, the inhabitants of which seem to Him,
according to [Isa 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022), as
grasshoppers); התלּך is here, after the analogy of Kal, joined with the
accus. of the way over which He walks at His pleasure: orbem coelum
obambulat. By such unworthy views of the Deity, Job puts himself on a
par with the godless race that was swept away by the flood in ancient
days, without allowing himself to be warned by this example of
punishment.

[Job 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 22:15</span></span>

15 Wilt thou observe the way of the ancient world,

Which evil men have trodden,

16 Who were withered up before their time,

Their foundation was poured out as a stream,

17 Who said unto God: Depart from us!

And what can the Almighty do to them?

18 And notwithstanding He had filled their houses with good-

The counsel of the wicked be far from me!

While in [Psa 139:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#024) דרך עולם
prospectively signifies a way of eternal duration (comp. [Eze
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#020), עם עולם, of the people who
sleep the interminably long sleep of the grave), ארח עולם signifies here
retrospectively the way of the ancient world, but not, as in [Jer
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016); [Jer
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015), the way of thinking and acting
of the pious forefathers which put their posterity to shame, but of a
godless race of the ancient world which stands out as a terrible example
to posterity. Eliphaz asks if Job will observe, i.e., keep (שׁמר as in
[Psa 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)), this way trodden by
people (מתי, comp. אנשׁי, [Job 34:36](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#036))
of wickedness. Those worthless ones were withered up, i.e., forcibly
seized and crushed, ולא־עת, when it was not yet time (ולא after the
manner of a circumstantial clause: quum nondum, as [Psa
139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016)), i.e., when according to God's
creative order their time was not yet come. On קמּטוּ,

(Note: This קמטו, according to the Masora, is the middle word of the
book of Job (חצי הספר).)

vid., on [Job 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008); lxx correctly,
συνελήφθησαν ἄωροι, nevertheless συλλαμβάνειν is too feeble as a
translation of קמט; for as Arab. qbṣ signifies to take with the tip of
the finer, whereas Arab. qbḍ signifies to take with the whole bent hand,
so קמט, in conformity to the dull, emphatic final consonant, signifies
"to bind firmly together." In [Job
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#016) יוּצק is not perf. Pual for יצּק
(Ew. 83, b), for this exchange, contrary to the law of vowels, of the
sharp form with the lengthened form is without example; it must at least
have been written יוּצּק (comp. [Jdg
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#029)). It is fut. Hoph., which,
according to [Job 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#015), might be
יצּק; here, however, it is with a resolving, not assimilation, of the
Jod, as in [Lev 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010). The fut. has
the signification of the imperfect which it acquires in an historic
connection. It is not to be translated: their place became a stream
which has flowed away (Hirz.), for the היה which would be required by
such an interpretation could not be omitted; also not: flumen effusum
est in fundamentum eorum (Rosenm., Hahn, and others), which would be
ליסודם, and would still be very liable to be misunderstood; also not:
whose foundation was a poured-out stream (Umbr., Olsh.), for then there
would be one attributive clause inserted in the other; but: their solid
ground became fluid like a stream (Ew., Hlgst., Schlottm.), so that נהר,
after the analogy of the verbs with two accusative, Ges. 139, 2, is a
so-called second acc. of the obj. which by the passive becomes a
nominative (comp. [Job 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#002)), although
it might also be an apposition of the following subj. placed first: a
stream (as such, like such a one) their solid ground was brought into a
river; the ground on which they and their habitations stood was placed
under water and floated away: without doubt the flood is intended;
reference to this perfectly accords with the patriarchal pre-and
extra-Israelitish standpoint of the book of Job; and the generation of
the time of the flood (דור המבול) is accounted in the holy scriptures of
the Old and New Testament as a paragon of godlessness, the
contemporaries of Noah are the απειθοῦντες, סוררים, κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν (comp.
[Pe1 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020) with [Psa
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)).

Accordingly they are now here also further described ([Job
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#017)) as those who said to God,
"Depart from us," and what could the Almighty do to them (למו instead of
לנוּ, which was to be expected, since, as in [Job
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028), there is a change from the
oratio directa to obliqua)! Olshausen explains with Hahn: "with respect
to what thou sayest: and what then does the Almighty do to them (for
it)? He fills their houses with prosperity, while the counsel of the
wicked is far from me (notwithstanding I am unfortunate)." But this
explanation is as forced (since ומה without a אמרת or תאמר standing with
it is taken as the word of Job) as it is contrary to the syntax (since
the circumstantial clause with והוא is not recognised, and on the other
hand ועצת וגו, instead of which it ought at least to have been וּממּנּי
וגו, is regarded as such an one). No indeed, just this is an exceedingly
powerful effect, that Eliphaz describes those godless ones who dismiss
God with סור ממנו, to whom, according to Job's assertion, [Job
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013)., undimmed prosperity is
portioned out, by referring to a memorable fact as that which has fallen
under the strict judgment of God; and that with the very same words with
which Job, [Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016), declines
communion with such prosperous evil-doers: "the counsel of the wicked be
far from me," he will have nothing more to do, not with the wicked
alone, but, with a side glance at Job, even with those who place
themselves on a level with them by a denial of the just government of
God in the world. פּעל ל, as the following circumstantial clause shows,
is intended like [Psa 68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029), comp.
[Job 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#020); [Isa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012) : how can the Almighty then help
or profit them? Thus they asked, while He had filled their houses with
wealth - Eliphaz will have nothing to do with this contemptible
misconstruction of the God who proves himself so kind to those who dwell
below on the earth, but who, though He is rewarded with ingratitude, is
so just. The truly godly are not terrified like [Job
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008), that retributive justice is not
to be found in God's government of the world; on the contrary, they
rejoice over its actual manifestation in their own case, which makes
them free, and therefore so joyous.

[Job 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 22:19</span></span>

19 The righteous see it and rejoice,

And the innocent mock at them:

20 "Verily our opponent is destroyed,

And the fire hath devoured their abundance."

This thought corresponds to that expressed as a wish, hope, or
anticipation at the close of many of the Psalms, that the retributive
justice of God, though we may have to wait a long time for it, becomes
at length the more gloriously manifest to the joy of those hitherto
innocently persecuted, [Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011). The
obj. of יראוּ, as in [Psa 107:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042), is
this its manifestation. למו is not an ethical dative, as in [Psa
80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007), but as in [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004) refers to the ungodly whose
mocking pride comes to such an ignominious end. What follow in [Job
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#020) are the words of the godly; the
introductory לאמר is wanting, as e.g., [Psa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003). אם־לא can signify neither si non,
as [Job 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024); [Job
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#025); [Job
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#031), nor annon, as in a disjunctive
question, [Job 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002); [Job
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025); it is affirmative, as [Job
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011); [Job
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005); [Job
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#036) - an Amen to God's peremptory
judgment. On נכחד (he is drawn away, put aside, become annulled), vid.,
supra, p. 398. קימנוּ (for which Aben-Ezra is also acquainted with the
reading קימנוּ with קמץ קטן, i.e., צירי) has a pausal springing from ,
as [Job 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#027), מתקוממה for מתקוממה;
[Rut 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#002), לרמותנו; [Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010), ראני (together with the reading
ראני, comp. [Ch1 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#017), לרמותני). The
form קים is remarkable; it may be more readily taken as part. pass.
(like שׂים, positus) than as nom. infin. (the act of raising for those
who raise themselves); perhaps the original text had קמינו (קמינוּ).
יתרם is no more to be translated their remnant (Hirz.) here than in [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014), at least not in the sense of
[Exo 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011); that which exceeds the
necessity is intended, their surplus, their riches. It is said of Job in
b. Megilla, 28a: איוב ותרן בממוניה הוה, he was extravagant (prodigus)
with his property. The fire devouring the wealth of the godless is an
allusion to the misfortune which has befallen him.

After this terrible picture, Eliphaz turns to the exhortation of him who
may be now perhaps become ripe for repentance.

[Job 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 22:21</span></span>

21 Make friends now with Him, so hast thou peace;

Thereby good will come unto thee.

22 Receive now teaching from His mouth,

And place His utterances in thy heart.

23 If thou returnest to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up again;

If thou puttest away iniquity far from thy tents.

24 And lay by in the dust the gold ore,

And under the pebbles of the brooks the gold of Ophir.

25 So shall the Almighty be to thee gold ore in abundance,

And silver to thee of the brightest lustre.

The relationship of the verbs סכן, שׁכן, and Arab. sakana, has been
already discussed on [Job 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002) : the
Hiph. signifies to be on friendly terms with any one; to enter into, or
to stand in, an intimate relationship to any one ([Psa
139:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#003)); then also (as the Greek
φιλεῖν) to get accustomed to, to be used to ([Num
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#030)). The second imper. is
consecutive, as e.g., [Pro 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#004) : and
have as the result of it peace (Arab. fa'âslam) = so shalt thou have
peace, Ges. 130, 2. In [Job 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021) the
first thing to be done is to clear up the form תּבואתך or (according to
another reading which is likewise well attested) תּבואתך. Olshausen (in
Hirz. and in his Gramm.) and Rdiger (in Thes. p. 11, suppl.) explain
this form the same as the other forms which come under consideration in
connection with it, viz., תּבואתה (veniat), [Deu
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016), and ותּבאתי, Keri ותּבאת (et
venisses, addressed to Abigail), [Sa1
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#034), as errors in writing; whereas
Ew., 191, c, sees in תּבואתך the erroneous form תּבואה = תּבוא with a
superfluous feminine termination, in תּבואתה an extension of the double
feminine by the unaccented ah of intention, and in תּבאתי a transfer of
the inflexion of the perf. to the fut. Confining ourselves to the form
which occurs here, we refer to what was said above: תבואתך is not a
forma mixta from תּבואך and בּאתך, but the mistaken double feminine
תּבואה with suff., the ah of which, although the tone is on the penult.,
is not He voluntativum, as [Isa 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019),
but He femin. The exception of such double feminines is made as certain
in Hebrew by the regular form נגלתה ( = נגלת with a second feminine
termination), and by examples like [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); [Eze
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#020), and also [Jos
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017); [Sa2
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#026); [Amo
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#003) (comp. even Olsh. in his Gramm. S.
449), as the double plural and its further formation by a feminine
termination in Arabic. It is therefore unnecessary, with Olsh. and Rd.,
after the precedent of the ancient versions, to read תּבוּאתך (which is
found in 19 Codd. in de Rossi): proventus tuus bonus erit. The suff. in
בּהם, as [Isa 64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004); [Eze
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#018), comp. עליהם, [Isa
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#016), is intended as neuter, as the
fem. is used elsewhere (e.g., [Isa
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#016), בּהן): by it, i.e., by such
conduct, good (prosperity) shall come to thee, and indeed, as the בוא
construed with the acc. implies, in a sudden change of thy previous lot,
coming about without any further effort on thy part. In the certainty
that it is God's word which he presents to his friend (the very
certainty which Eliphaz also expresses elsewhere, e.g., [Job
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#011)), he further admonishes him
([Job 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#022)) to receive instruction
from God's mouth (מפּיו as [Pro 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#006)),
and to allow His (God's) utterances a place in his heart, not to let
them die away without effect, but to imprint them deeply on his mind.

[Job 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#023)

If he return to the Almighty (שׁוּב עד as freq., e.g., [Isa
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#022), comp. [Isa
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024), instead of the otherwise usual
שׁוב אל, of thorough and complete conversion), he will be built up
again, by his former prosperity being again raised from its ruins. בּנה,
to build, always according to the connection, has at one time the idea
of building round about, continuing to build, or finishing building
(vid., on [Job 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019)); at another of
building up again ([Job 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014); [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)), referred to persons, the idea
of increasing prosperity ([Mal 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015)),
or of the restoration of ruined prosperity ([Jer
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#006); [Jer
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#007)), here in the latter sense. The
promissory תּבּנה is surrounded by conditional clauses, for [Job
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#023) (comp. [Job
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#014)) is a second conditional clause
still under the government of אם, which is added for embellishment; it
opens the statement of that in which penitence must be manifested, if it
is to be thorough. The lxx translates ἐὰν δὲ ἐπιστραφῇς καὶ ταπεινώσῃς,
i.e., תּענה, which Ewald considers as the original; the omission of the
אם (which the poet otherwise in such connections has formerly heaped up,
e.g., [Job 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005)., [Job
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013)) is certainly inconvenient. And
yet we should not on that account like to give up the figure indicated
in תבנה, which is so beautiful and so suited to our poet. The statement
advanced in the latter conditional clause is then continued in [Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024) in an independent imperative
clause, which the old versions regard as a promise instead of
exhortation, and therefore grossly misinterpret. The Targ. translates:
and place on the dust a strong city (i.e., thou shalt then, where there
is now nothing but dust, raise up such), as if בּצר could be equivalent
to בּצּרון or מבצר, - a rendering to which Saadia at least gives a turn
which accords with the connection: "regard the stronghold (Arab. 'l-ḥṣn)
as dust, and account as the stones of the valleys the gold of Ophir;"
better than Eichhorn: "pull down thy stronghold of violence, and
demolish (הפיר) the castles of thy valleys." On the other hand,
Gecatilia, who understands בצר proportionately more correctly of
treasures, translates it as a promise: so shalt thou inherit treasures
(Arab. dchâyr) more numerous than dust, and gold ore (Arab. tbr') (more
than) the stones of the valleys; and again also Rosenm. (repones prae
pulvere argentum) and Welte interpret [Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024) as a promise; whereas other
expositors, who are true to the imperative שׁית, explain שׁית ni
aestimare, and על־עפר pulveris instar (Grot., Cocc., Schult., Dathe,
Umbr.), by falsely assigning to על here, as to ל elsewhere, a meaning
which it never has anywhere; how blind, on the other hand, since the
words in their first meaning, pone super pulverem, furnish an excellent
thought which is closely connected with the admonition to rid one's self
of unjust possessions. בּצר, like Arab. tibr (by which Abulwalid
explains it), is gold and silver ore, i.e., gold and silver as they are
broken out of the mine, therefore (since silver is partially pure, gold
almost pure, and always containing more or less silver) the most
precious metal in its pure natural state before being worked, and
consequently also unalloyed (comp. Arab. nḍı̂r and nuḍâr, which likewise
signifies aurum argentumve nativum, but not ab excidendo, but a nitore);
and "to lay in the dust" is equivalent to, to part with a thing as
entirely worthless and devoid of attraction. The meaning is therefore:
put away from thee the idol of previous metal with contempt (comp. [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)), which is only somewhat
differently expressed in the parallel: lay the Ophir under the quartz
(וּבצוּר agreeing with בצר) of the brooks (such as is found in the beds
of empty wdys), i.e., place it under the rubble, after it has lost for
thee its previous bewitching spell. As cloth woven from the filaments of
the nettle is called muslin, from Mossul, and cloth with figures on it
"damask, דּמשׁק" ([Amo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012)), from
Damascus,

(Note: We leave it undecided whether in a similar manner silk has its
name μέταξα (μάταξα), Armenian metaks, Aramaic מטכסא, מטקסין, from
Damascus (Ewald and Friedr. Mller).)

and aloes-wood Arab. mndl, from Coromandel; so the gold from Ophir,
i.e., from the coast of the Abhra, on the north coast of the Runn (Old
Indian Irina, i.e., Salt Sea), east of the mouth of the Indus,

(Note: Thus אופיר has been explained by Lassen in his pamphlet de
Pentapotamia, and his Indische Alterthumskunde (i. 539). The lxx (Cod.
Vat.) and Theodot. have Σωφείρ, whence Ges. connects Ophir with Arrian's
Οὔππαρα and Edrisi's Sufra in Guzerat, especially since Sofir is
attested as the Coptic name for India. The matter is still not settled.)

is directly called אופיר. When Job thus casts from him temporal things,
by the excessive cherishing of which he has hitherto sinned, then God
himself will be his imperishable treasure, his everlasting higher
delight. He frees himself from temporal בּצר; and the Almighty,
therefore the absolute personality of God himself, will be to him
instead of it בּצרים, gold as from the mine, in rich abundance. This is
what the contrast of the plur. (בצרך without Jod plur. is a false
reading) with the sing. implies; the lxx, Syriac version, Jerome, and
Arabic version err here, since they take the בּ of בּצריך as a
preposition.

The ancient versions and lexicographers furnish no explanation of
תּועפות. The Targ. translates it תּקוף רוּמא, and accordingly it is
explained by both חסן (strength) and גבה (height), without any reason
being assigned for these significations. In the passage before us the
lxx transl. ἀργύριον πεπυρωμένον from עף, in the Targum signification to
blow, forge; the Syriac versions, argentum computationum (חושׁבנין),
from עף in the Targum-Talmudic signification to double (= Hebr. כפל).
According to the usage of the language in question, יעף, from the Hiph.
of which תועפות is formed, signifies to become feeble, to be wearied;
but even if, starting from the primary notion, an available
signification is attained for the passage before us (fatigues = toilsome
excitement, synon. יגיע) and [Psa 95:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004)
(climbings = heights), the use of the word in the most ancient passages
citable, [Num 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022); [Num
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#008), כּתועפת ראם לו, still remains
unexplained; for here the notion of being incapable of fatigue,
invincibility, or another of the like kind, is required, without any
means at hand for rightly deriving it from יעף, to become feeble,
especially as the radical signification anhelare supposed by Gesenius
(comp. און from the root אן) is unattested. Accordingly, we must go back
to the root וף, יף, discussed on [Psa
95:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004), which signifies to rise aloft,
to be high, and from which יפע, or with a transposition of the
consonants יעף (comp. עיף and יעף), acquires the signification of
standing out, rising radiantly, shining afar off, since יעף, to become
weary, is allied to the Arab. wgf, fut. i; this יעף (יפע), on the other
hand, to Arab. yf', ascendere, adolescere, Arab. wf‛, elatum, adultum
esse, and Arab. wfâ, eminere, and tropically completum, perfectum esse.
Thus we obtain the signification enimentiae for תועפות. In [Psa
95:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004), as a numerical plur., it
signifies the towerings (tops) of the mountains, and here, as in the
passages cited from Numbers, either prominent, eminent attributes, or as
an intensive plur. excellence; whence, agreeing with Ewald, we have
translated "silver of the brightest lustre" (comp. יפעה, eminentia,
splendor, [Eze 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#007)).

[Job 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 22:26</span></span>

26 For then thou shalt delight thyself in the Almighty,

And lift up they countenance to Eloah;

27 If thou prayest to Him, He will hear thee,

And thou shalt pay thy vows.

28 And thou devisest a plan, and it shall be established to thee,

And light shineth upon thy ways.

29 If they are cast down, thou sayest, "Arise!"

And him that hath low eyes He saveth.

30 He shall rescue him who is not guiltless,

And he is rescued by the purity of thy hands.

כּי־אז might also be translated "then indeed" (vid., on [Job
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#015)), as an emphatic resumption of
the promissory והיה (tum erit), [Job
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#025); but what follows is really the
confirmation of the promise that God will be to him a rich recompense
for the earthly treasures that he resigns; therefore: for then thou
shalt delight thyself in the Almighty (vid., the primary passage, [Psa
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004), and the dependent one, [Isa
58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014); comp. infra, [Job
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#010)), i.e., He will become a source
of highest, heartfelt joy to thee (על as interchanging with בּ by שׂמח).
Then shall he be able to raise his countenance, which was previously
depressed (נפלוּ, [Gen 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#006).), in the
consciousness of his estrangement from God by dearly cherished sin and
unexpiated guilt, free and open, confident and joyous, to God. If he
prays to Him (תּעתּיר may be thus regarded as the antecedent of a
conditional clause, like יברח, [Job
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024)), He will hear him; and what he
has vowed in prayer he will now, after that which he supplicated is
granted, thankfully perform; the Hiph. העתּיר (according to its etymon:
to offer the incense of prayer) occurs only in Ex 8-10 beside this
passage, whereas גּזר (to cut in pieces, cut off) occurs here for the
first time in the signification, to decide, resolve, which is the usual
meaning of the word in the later period of the language. On ותגזר (with
Pathach, according to another reading with Kametz-chatuph), vid., Ges.
47, rem. 2. Moreover, the paratactic clauses of [Job
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#028) are to be arranged as we have
translated them; קוּם signifies to come to pass, as freq. (e.g., [Isa
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#007), in connection with היה, to come
into being). That which he designs (אמר) is successful, and is realized,
and light shines upon his ways, so that he cannot stumble and does not
miss his aim, - light like moonlight or morning light; for, as the
author of the introductory Proverbs, to which we have already so often
referred as being borrowed from the book of Job (comp. [Job
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#024) with [Pro
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008)), ingeniously says, ch. [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018) : "The path of the righteous is
as the morning light (כּאור נגהּ, comp. [Dan
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020)), which shineth brighter and
brighter into the height of day (i.e., noonday brightness)."

[Job 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#029)

השׁפּילוּ refers to דּרכיך; for if it is translated: in case they lower
(Schlottm., Renan, and others), the suff. is wanting, and the thought is
halting. As השׁפּיל signifies to make low, it can also signify to go
down ([Jer 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018)), and said of ways,
"to lead downwards" (Rosenm., Ew., Hahn). The old expositors go
altogether astray in [Job 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#029),
because they did not discern the exclamative idea of גּוה. The noun גּוה
- which is formed from the verb גּוה = גּאה, as גּאהּ, arrogance, [Pro
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#013); גּהה, healing, [Pro
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022); כּהה, mitigation, [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019) (distinct from גּוה, the body,
the fem. of גּו), without the necessity of regarding it as syncopated
from גּאוה (Olsh. 154, b), as שׁלה, [Sa1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017), from שׁאלה - does not here
signify pride or haughtiness, as in [Job
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#017); [Jer
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017), but signifies adverbially
sursum (therefore synon. of סלה, which, being formed from סל, elevatio,
with He of direction and Dag. forte implic., as פּדּנה, הרה = paddannah,
harrah, - perhaps, however, it is to be read directly סלּה, with He
fem., - is accordingly a substantive made directly into an adverb, like
גּוה): suppose that (כּי = ἐάν, as אם = εἰ) thy ways lead downwards,
thou sayest: on high! i.e., thy will being mighty in God, thy confidence
derived from the Almighty, will all at once give them another and more
favourable direction: God will again place in a condition of prosperity
and happiness, - which יושׁע (defectively written; lxx: σώσει; Jer. and
Syr., however, reading יוּשׁע: salvabitur), according to its etymon,
Arab. 'ws‛, signifies, - him who has downcast eyes (lxx κύφοντα
ὀφθαλμοῖς).

[Job 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030)

It may seem at first sight, that by אי־נקי, the not-guiltless (אי

(Note: In Rabbinic also this abbreviated negative is not אי (as Dukes
and Gieger point it), but according to the traditional pronunciation,
אי, e.g., אי אפשׁר (impossibilie).)

= אין = אין, e.g., [Isa 40:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029); [Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010), Ges. 152, 1), Eliphaz means Job
himself in his present condition; it would then be a mild periphrastic
expression for "the guilty, who has merited his suffering." If thou
returnest in this manner to God, He will - this would be the idea of
[Job 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030) - free thee, although thy
suffering is not undeserved. Instead now of proceeding: and thou shalt
be rescued on account of the purity of thy hands, i.e., because thou
hast cleansed them from wrong, Eliphaz would say: and this not-guiltless
one will be rescued, i.e., thou, the not-guiltless, wilt be rescued, by
the purity of thy hands. But one feels at once how harsh this synallage
would be. Even Hirzel, who refers [Job
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030) to Job, refers [Job
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030) to some one else. In reality,
however, another is intended in both cases (Ew., Schlottm., Hahn,
Olsh.); and [Job 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030) is just so
arranged as to be supplemented by בּבר כּפּיך, [Job
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030). Even old expositors, as Seb.
Schmid and J. H. Michaelis, have correctly perceived the relation:
liberabit Deus et propter puritatem manuum tuarum alios, quos propria
innocentia ipsos deficiens non esset liberatura. The purity of the hands
([Psa 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021)) is that which Job will
have attained when he has put from him that which defiles him (comp.
[Job 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030) with [Job
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009)). Hirzel has referred to [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033) in connection with [Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024); one is here reminded of the
words of our Lord to Peter, [Luk 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)
: σύ ποτὲ ἐπιστρέψας στήριξον τοὺς ἀδελφούς σου. Eliphaz, although
unconsciously, in these last words expresses prophetically what will be
fulfilled in the issue of the history in Job himself.

The speech of Eliphaz opens the third course of the controversy. In the
first course of the controversy the speeches of the friends, though
bearing upon the question of punishment, were embellished with alluring
promises; but these promises were incapable of comforting Job, because
they proceeded upon the assumption that he is suffering as a sinner
deserving of punishment, and can only become free from his punishment by
turning to God. In the second course of the controversy, since Job gave
no heed to their exhortations to penitence, the friends drew back their
promises, and began the more unreservedly to punish and to threaten, by
presenting to Job, in the most terrifying pictures of the ruin of the
evil-doer, his own threatening destruction. The misconstruction which
Job experiences from the friends has the salutary effect on him of
rooting him still more deeply in the hope that God will not let him die
without having borne witness to his innocence. But the mystery of the
present is nevertheless not cleared up for Job by this glimpse of faith
into the future. On the contrary, the second course of the controversy
ends so, that to the friends who unjustly and uncharitably deny instead
of solving the mystery of his individual lot, Job now presents that
which is mysterious in the divine distribution of human fortune in
general, the total irreconcilableness of experience with the idea of the
just divine retribution maintained by them. In that speech of his, Job
21, which forms the transition to the third course of the controversy,
Job uses the language of the doubter not without sinning against God.
But since it is true that the outward lot of man by no means always
corresponds to his true moral condition, and never warrants an
infallible conclusion respecting it, he certainly in that speech gives
the death-blow to the dogma of the friends. The poet cannot possibly
allow them to be silent over it. Eliphaz, the most discreet and
intelligent, speaks. His speech, considered in itself, is the purest
truth, uttered in the most appropriate and beautiful form. But as an
answer to the speech of Job the dogma of the friends itself is destroyed
in it, by the false conclusion by which it is obliged to justify itself
to itself. The greatness of the poet is manifest from this, that he
makes the speeches of the friends, considered in themselves, and apart
from the connection of the drama, express the most glorious truths,
while they are proved to be inadequate, indeed perverted and false, in
so far as they are designed to solve the existing mystery. According to
their general substance, these speeches are genuine diamonds; according
to their special application, they are false ones.

How true is what Eliphaz says, that God neither blesses the pious
because he is profitable to Him, nor punishes the wicked because he is
hurtful to Him; that the pious is profitable not to God, but to himself;
the wicked is hurtful not to God, but himself; that therefore the
conduct of God towards both is neither arbitrary nor selfish! But if we
consider the conclusion to which, in these thoughts, Eliphaz only takes
a spring, they prove themselves to be only the premises of a false
conclusion. For Eliphaz infers from them that God rewards virtue as
such, and punishes vice as such; that therefore where a man suffers, the
reason of it is not to be sought in any secondary purpose on the part of
God, but solely and absolutely in the purpose of God to punish the sins
of the man. The fallacy of the conclusion is this, that the possibility
of any other purpose, which is just as far removed from self-interest,
in connection with God's purpose of punishing the sins of the man, is
excluded. It is now manifest how near theoretical error and practical
falsehood border on one another, so that dogmatical error is really in
the rule at the same time ἀδικία. For after Eliphaz, in order to defend
the justice of divine retribution against Job, has again indissolubly
connected suffering and the punishment of sin, without acknowledging any
other form of divine rule but His justice, any other purpose in
decreeing suffering than the infliction of punishment (from the
recognition of which the right and true comfort for Job would have
sprung up), he is obliged in the present instance, against his better
knowledge and conscience, to distort an established fact, to play the
hypocrite to himself, and persuade himself of the existence of sins in
Job, of which the confirmation fails him, and to become false and unjust
towards Job even in favour of the false dogma. For the dogma demands
wickedness in an equal degree to correspond to a great evil, unlimited
sins to unlimited sufferings. Therefore the former wealth of Job must
furnish him with the ground of heavy accusations, which he now expresses
directly and unconditionally to Job. He whose conscience, however, does
not accuse him of mammon-worship, [Job
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#024), is suffering the punishment of
a covetous and compassionless rich man. Thus is the dogma of the justice
of God rescued by the unjust abandonment of Job.

Further, how true is Eliphaz' condemnatory judgment against the
free-thinking, which, if it does not deny the existence of God, still
regards God as shut up in the heavens, without concerning himself about
anything that takes place on earth! The divine judgment of total
destruction came upon a former generation that had thought thus
insolently of God, and to the joy of the righteous the same judgment is
still executed upon evil-doers of the same mind. This is true, but it
does not apply to Job, for whom it is intended. Job has denied the
universality of a just divine retribution, but not the special
providence of God. Eliphaz sets retributive justice and special
providence again here in a false correlation. He thinks that, so far as
a man fails to perceive the one, he must at once doubt the other, -
another instance of the absurd reasoning of their dogmatic
one-sidedness. Such is Job's relation to God, that even if he failed to
discover a single trace of retributive justice anywhere, he would not
deny His rule in nature and among men. For his God is not a mere notion,
but a person to whom he stands in a living relation. A notion falls to
pieces as soon as it is found to be self-contradictory; but God remains
what He is, however much the phenomenon of His rule contradicts the
nature of His person. The rule of God on earth Job firmly holds,
although in manifold instances he can only explain it by God's absolute
and arbitrary power. Thus he really knows no higher motive in God to
which to refer his affliction; but nevertheless he knows that God
interests himself about him, and that He who is even now his Witness in
heaven will soon arise on the dust of the grave in his behalf. For such
utterances of Job's faith Eliphaz has no ear. He knows no faith beyond
the circle of his dogma.

The exhortations and promises by which Eliphaz then ([Job
22:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021)) seeks to lead Job back to
God are in and of themselves true and most glorious. There is also
somewhat in them which reflects shame on Job; they direct him to that
inward peace, to that joy in God, which he had entirely lost sight of
when he spoke of the misfortune of the righteous in contrast with the
prosperity of the wicked.

(Note: Brentius: Prudentia carnis existimat benedictionem extrinsecus in
hoc seculo piis contingere, impiis vero maledictionem, sed veritas
docet, benedictionem piis in hoc seculo sub maledictione, vitam sub
morte, salutem sub damnatione, e contra impiis sub benedictoine
maledictionem, sub vita mortem, sub salute damnationem contingere.)

But even these beauteous words of promise are blemished by the false
assumption from which they proceed. The promise, the Almighty shall
become Job's precious ore, rests on the assumption that Job is now
suffering the punishment of his avarice, and has as its antecedent: "Lay
thine ore in the dust, and thine Ophir beneath the pebbles of the
brook." Thus do even the holiest and truest words lose their value when
they are not uttered at the right time, and the most brilliant sermon
that exhorts to penitence remains without effect when it is prompted by
pharisaic uncharitableness. The poet, who is general has regarded the
character of Eliphaz as similar to that of a prophet (vid., [Job
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012).), makes him here at the close of
his speech against his will prophesy the issue of the controversy. He
who now, considering himself as נקי, preaches penitence to Job, shall at
last stand forth as אי נקי, and will be one of the first who need Job's
intercession as the servant of God, and whom he is able mediatorially to
rescue by the purity of his hands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 23](job023)

</div>
