<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job005)  [Next](job007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001)

[Job 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 6:1</span></span>

1 Then began Job, and said:

2 Oh that my vexation were but weighed,

And they would put my suffering in the balance against it!

3 Then it would be heavier than the sand of the sea:

Therefore my words are rash.

4 The arrows of the Almighty are in me,

The burning poison whereof drinketh up my spirit;

The terrors of Eloah set themselves in array against me.

Vexation (כּעשׂ) is what Eliphaz has reproached him with ([Job
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002)). Job wishes that his vexation
were placed in one scale and his היּה (Keri הוּה) in the other, and
weighed together (יחד). The noun היּה (הוּה), from הוה (היה), flare,
hiare, signifies properly hiatus, then vorago, a yawning gulf, χάσμα,
then some dreadful calamity (vid., Hupfeld on [Psa
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010)). נשׂא, like נטל, [Isa
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015), to raise the balance, as
pendere, to let it hang down; attollant instead of the passive. This is
his desire; and if they but understood the matter, it would then be
manifest (כּי־עתּה, as [Job 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013),
which see), or: indeed then would it be manifest (כּי certainly in this
inferential position has an affirmative signification: vid., [Gen
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#022); [Gen
29:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#032), and comp. [Sa1
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#034); [Sa2
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#027)) that his suffering is heavier
than the unmeasurable weight of the sand of the sea. יכבּד is neuter
with reference to והיּתי. לעוּ, with the tone on the penult., which is
not to be accounted for by the rhythm as in [Psa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020); [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007), cannot be derived from לעה, but
only from לוּע, not however in the signification to suck down, but from
לוּע = לעה, Arab. lagiya or also lagâ, temere loqui, inania effutire, -
a signification which suits excellently here.

(Note: ילע, [Pro 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#025), which is
doubly accented, and must be pronounced as oxytone, has also this
meaning: the snare of a man who has thoughtlessly uttered what is holy
(an interjectional clause = such an one has implicated himself), and
after (having made) vows will harbour care (i.e., whether he will be
able to fulfil them).)

His words are like those of one in delirium. עמּדי is to be explained
according to [Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003); חמתם,
according to [Psa 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015). יערכוּני is
short for עלי מלחמה יערכי, they make war against me, set themselves in
battle array against me. Bttcher, without brachylogy: they cause me to
arm myself, put one of necessity on the defensive, which does not suit
the subject. The terrors of God strike down all defence. The wrath of
God is irresistible. The sting of his suffering, however, is the wrath
of God which his spirit drinks as a draught of poison (comp. [Job
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#020)), and consequently wrings from
him, even from his deepest soul, the thought that God is become his
enemy: therefore his is an endless suffering, and therefore is it that
he speaks so despondingly.

[Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 6:5</span></span>

5 Doth the wild ass bray at fresh grass?

Or loweth an ox over good fodder?

6 Is that which is tasteless eaten unsalted?

Or is there flavour in the white of an egg?

7 That which my soul refused to touch,

The same is as my loathsome food.

The meaning of the first two figures is: He would not complain, if there
were really no cause for it; of the two others: It is not to be expected
that he should smile at his suffering, and enjoy it as delicate food.
על־בּלילו I have translated "over good fodder," for בּליל is mixed
fodder of different kinds of grain, farrago. "Without salt" is virtually
adjective to תּפל, insipid, tasteless. What is without salt one does not
relish, and there is no flavour in the slime of the yolk of an egg,
i.e., the white of an egg (Targ.),

(Note: Saadia compares b. Aboda zara, 40, a, where it is given as a mark
of the purity of the eggs in the roe of fish: מבפנים וחלמון מב מבחוץ
חלבון, when the white is outside and the yellow within.)

or in the slime of purslain (according to Chalmetho in the Peschito,
Arab. ḥamqâ), fatua = purslain), which is less probable on account of
ריר (slime, not: broth): there is no flavour so that it can be enjoyed.
Thus is it with his sufferings. Those things which he before inwardly
detested (dirt and dust of leprosy) are now sicut fastidiosa cibi mei,
i.e., as loathsome food which he must eat. The first clause, [Job
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#007), must be taken as an elliptic
relative clause forming the subject: vid., Ges. 123, 3, c. Such
disagreeable counsel is now like his unclean, disgusting diet. Eliphaz
desires him to take them as agreeable. דּוי in כּדרי is taken by Ges.
Ew., Hahn, Schlottm., Olsh. (165, b), as constr. from דּוי, sickness,
filth; but דּוי, as plur. from דּוה, sick, unclean (especially of female
menstruation, [Isa 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022)), as
Heiligst. among modern commentators explains it, is far more suitable.
Hitz. (as anonym. reviewer of Ewald's Job in the liter. Centralblatt)
translates: they (my sufferings) are the morsels of my food; but the
explanation of המּה is not correct, nor is it necessary to go to the
Arabic for an explanation of כּדרי. It is also unnecessary, with
Bttcher, to read כּדוי (such is my food in accordance with my disease);
Job does not here speak of his diet as an invalid.

[Job 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 6:8</span></span>

8 Would that my request were fulfilled,

And that Eloah would grant my expectation,

9 That Eloah were willing and would crush me,

Let loose His hand and cut me off:

10 Then I should still have comfort -

(I should exult in unsparing pain) -

That I have not disowned the words of the Holy One.

His wish refers to the ending of his suffering by death. Hupfeld prefers
to read ותאותי instead of ותקותי ([Job
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#008)); but death, which he desires, he
even indeed expects. This is just the paradox, that not life, but death,
is his expectation. "Cut me off," i.e., my soul or my life, my thread of
life ([Job 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#008); [Isa
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#012)). The optative יתּן מי (Ges.
136, 1) is followed by optative futt., partly of the so-called jussive
form, as יאל, velit (Hiph. from ואל, velle), and יתּר, solvat (Hiph.
from נתר). In the phrase יד התּיר, the stretching out of the hand is
regarded as the loosening of what was hitherto bound. The conclusion
begins with וּתהי, just like [Job
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#005). But it is to be asked whether by
consolation speedy death is to be understood, and the clause with כּי
gives the ground of his claim for the granting of the wish, - or whether
he means that just this: not having disowned the words of the Holy One
(comp. [Job 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#011)., and אמרי־אל in the
mouth of Balaam, the non-Israelitish prophet, [Num
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004), [Num
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#016)), would be his consolation in
the midst of death. With Hupfeld we decide in favour of the latter, with
[Psa 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050) in view: this
consciousness of innocence is indeed throughout the whole book Job's
shield and defence. If, however, נחמתי (with Kametz impurum) points
towards כּי, quod, etc., the clause ואסלּדה is parenthetical. The
cohortative is found thus parenthetical with a conjunctive sense also
elsewhere ([Psa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006); [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)). Accordingly: my comfort - I
would exult, etc. - would be that I, etc. The meaning of סלד,
tripudiare, is confirmed by the lxx ἡλλόμην, in connection with the
Arabic ṣalada (of a galloping horse which stamps hard with its
fore-feet), according to which the Targ. also translates ואבוּע (I will
rejoice).

(Note: The primary meaning of סלד, according to the Arabic, is to be
hard, then, to tread hard, firm, as in pulsanda tellus; whereas the
poetry of the synagogue (Pijut) uses סלּד in the signification to
supplicate, and סלד, litany (not: hymn, as Zunz gives it); and the
Mishna-talmudic סלד signifies to singe, burn one's self, and to draw
back affrighted.)

For יחמל לא, comp. [Isa 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#014). (break
in pieces unsparingly). יחמל לא certainly appears as though it must be
referred to God (Ew., Hahn, Schlottm., and others), since חילה sounds
feminine; but one can either pronounce חילה = חיל as Milel (Hitz.), or
take יחמל לא adverbially, and not as an elliptical dependent clause (as
Ges. 147, rem. 1), but as virtually an adjective: in pain unsparing.

[Job 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 6:11</span></span>

11 What is my strength, that I should wait,

And my end, that I should be patient?

12 Is my strength like the strength of stones?

Or is my flesh brazen?

13 Or am I then not utterly helpless,

And continuance is driven from me?

The meaning of the question ([Job
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011)); is: Is not my strength already
so wasted away, and an unfortunate end so certain to me, that a long
calm waiting is as impossible as it is useless? נפשׁ האריך, to draw out
the soul, is to extend and distribute the intensity of the emotion, to
be forbearing, to be patient. The question ([Job
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011)) is followed by אם, usual in
double questions: or is my strength stone, etc. האם, which is so
differently explained by commentators, is after all to be explained best
from Num. 17:28, the only other passage in which it occurs. Here it is
the same as ה אם, and in Num. הלא אם: or is it not so: we shall perish
quickly altogether? Thus we explain the passage before us. The
interrogative ה is also sometimes used elsewhere for הלא, [Job
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004); [Job
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001) (Ges. 153, 3); the additional אם
stands per inversionem in the second instead of the first place: nonne
an = an nonne, annon: or is it not so: is not my help in me = or am I
not utterly helpless? Ewald explains differently (356, a), according to
which אם, from the formula of an oath, is equivalent to לא. The meaning
is the same. Continuance, תּוּשׁיּה, i.e., power of endurance,
reasonable prospect is driven away, frightened away from him, is lost
for him.

[Job 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 6:14</span></span>

14 To him who is consumed gentleness is due from his friend,

Otherwise he might forsake the fear of the Almighty.

15 My brothers are become false as a torrent,

As the bed of torrents which vanish away -

16 They were blackish from ice,

Snow is hidden in them -

17 In the time, when warmth cometh to them, they are destroyed.

It becometh hot, they are extinguished from their place.

Ewald supplies between [Job 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014) and
[Job 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014) two lines which have
professedly fallen out ("from a brother sympathy is due to the oppressed
of God, in order he may not succumb to excessive grief"). Hitzig
strongly characterizes this interpolation as a "pure swindle." There is
really nothing wanting; but we need not even take חסד, with Hitz., in
the signification reproach (like [Pro
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#034)): if reproach cometh to the
sufferer from his friend, he forsaketh the fear of God. מס (from מסס,
liquefieri) is one who is inwardly melted, the disheartened. Such an one
should receive חסד from his friend, i.e., that he should restore him ἐν
πνεύματι πραΰ́τητος ([Gal 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)). The waw
([Job 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014)) is equivalent to alioqui
with the future subjunctive (vid., Ges. 127, 5). Harshness might
precipitate him into the abyss from which love will keep him back. So
Schnurrer: Afflicto exhibenda est ab amico ipsius humanitas, alioqui hic
reverentiam Dei exuit. Such harshness instead of charity meets him from
his brothers, i.e., friends beloved as brothers. In vain he has looked
to them for reviving consolation. Theirs is no comfort; it is like the
dried-up water of a wady. נחל is a mountain or forest brook, which comes
down from the height, and in spring is swollen by melting ice and the
snow that thaws on the mountain-tops; χειμάῤῥους, i.e., a torrent
swollen by winter water. The melting blocks of ice darken the water of
such a wady, and the snow falling together is quickly hidden in its
bosom (התעלּם). If they begin to be warmed (Pual זרב, cognate to צרב,
[Eze 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#003), aduri, and שׂרף,
comburere), suddenly they are reduced to nothing (נצמת, exstingui); they
vanish away בּחמּו, when it becomes hot. The suffix is, with Ew., Olsh.,
and others, to be taken as neuter; not with Hirz., to be referred to a
suppressed את: when the season grows hot. job bewails the disappointment
he has experienced, the "decline" of charity

(Note: Oetinger says that [Job 6:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015)
describe those who get "consumption" when they are obliged to extend
"the breasts of compassion" to their neighbour.)

still further, by keeping to the figure of the mountain torrent.

[Job 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 6:18</span></span>

18 The paths of their course are turned about,

They go up in the waste and perish.

19 The travelling bands of Tma looked for them,

The caravans of Saba hoped for them;

20 They were disappointed on account of their trust,

They came thus far, and were red with shame.

As the text is pointed, ארחות, [Job
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#018), are the paths of the torrents.
Hitz., Ew., and Schlottm., however, correct ארחות, caravans, which Hahn
even thinks may be understood without correction, since he translates:
the caravans of their way are turned about (which is intended to mean:
aside from the way that they are pursuing), march into the desert and
perish (i.e., because the streams on which they reckoned are dried up).
So, in reality, all modern commentators understand it; but is it likely
that the poet would let the caravans perish in [Job
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#018), and in [Job
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019). still live? With this
explanation, [Job 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019). drag along
tautologically, and the feebler figure follows the stronger. Therefore
we explain as follows: the mountain streams, נחלים, flow off in shallow
serpentine brooks, and the shallow waters completely evaporate by the
heat of the sun. בתּהוּ עלה signifies to go up into nothing (comp. [Isa
40:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#023)), after the analogy of בעשׁן
כּלה, to pass away in smoke. Thus e.g., also Mercier: in auras abeunt,
in nihilum rediguntur. What next happens is related as a history, [Job
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019)., hence the praett. Job compares
his friends to the wady swollen by ice and snow water, and even to the
travelling bands themselves languishing for water. He thirsts for
friendly solace, but the seeming comfort which his friends utter is only
as the scattered meandering waters in which the mountain brook leaks
out. The sing. בּטח individualizes; it is unnecessary with Olsh. to read
בּטחוּ.

[Job 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 6:21</span></span>

21 For now ye are become nothing;

You see misfortune, and are affrighted.

22 Have I then said, Give unto me,

And give a present for me from your substance,

23 And deliver me from the enemy's hand,

And redeem me from the hand of the tyrant?

In [Job 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021), the reading wavers
between לו and לא, with the Keri לו; but לו, which is consequently the
lectio recepta, gives no suitable meaning, only in a slight degree
appropriate, as this: ye are become it, i.e., such a mountain brook; for
הייתם is not to be translated, with Stickel and others, estis, but facti
estis. The Targum, however, translates after the Chethib: ye are become
as though ye had never been, i.e., nothingness. Now, since לא, Aramaic
לה, can (as [Dan 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032) shows) be used
as a substantive (a not = a null), and the thought: ye are become
nothing, your friendship proves itself equal to null, suits the imagery
just used, we decide in favour of the Chethib; then in the figure the
בתּהוּ עלה corresponds most to this, and is also, therefore, not to be
explained away. The lxx, Syr., Vulg., translate לי instead of לו: ye are
become it (such deceitful brooks) to me. Ewald proposes to read לי הייתם
עתה כן (comp. the explanation, Ges. 137, rem. 3), - a conjecture which
puts aside all difficulty; but the sentence with לא commends itself as
being bolder and more expressive. All the rest explains itself. It is
remarkable that in [Job 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021) the
reading תּירוּ is also found, instead of תּראוּ: ye dreaded misfortune,
and ye were then affrighted. הבוּ is here, as an exception,
properispomenon, according to Ges. 29, 3. כּח, as [Pro
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#010); [Lev
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#020), what one has obtained by
putting forth one's strength, syn. חיל, outward strength.

[Job 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 6:24</span></span>

24 Teach me, and I will be silent,

And cause me to understand wherein I have failed.

25 How forcible are words in accordance with truth!

But what doth reproof from you reprove?

26 Do you think to reprove words?

The words of one in despair belong to the wind.

27 Ye would even cast lots for the orphan,

And traffic about your friend.

נמרצוּ, [Job 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025), in the
signification of נמלצוּ ([Psa
119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)), would suit very well: how
smooth, delicate, sweet, are, etc. (Hirz., Ew., Schlottm.); but this
meaning does not suit [Job 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#003).
Hupfeld, by comparison with mar, bitter, translates: quantumvis acerba;
but מה may signify quidquid, though not quantumvis. Hahn compares the
Arabic verb to be sick, and translates: in what respect are right words
bad; but physical disease and ethical badness are not such nearly
related ideas. Ebrard: honest words are not taken amiss; but with an
inadmissible application of [Job 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#003).
Von Gerl. is best: how strong or forcible are, etc. מרץ is taken as
related to פּרץ, in the signification to penetrate; Hiph. to goad; Niph.
to be furnished with the property of penetrating, - used here of
penetrating speech; [Kg1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#008), of a
curse inevitably carried out; [Mic
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#010), of unsparing destruction. Words
which keep the straight way to truth, go to the heart; on the contrary,
what avails the reproving from you, i.e., which proceeds from you? הוכח,
inf. absol. as [Pro 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#027), and in but
a few other passages as subject; מכּם, as [Job
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015), the sword going forth out of
their mouth. In [Job 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#026) the waw
introduces a subordinate adverbial clause: while, however, the words of
one in despair belong to the wind, that they may be carried away by it,
not to the judgment which retains and analyzes them, without considering
the mood of which they are the hasty expression. The futt. express the
extent to which their want of feeling would go, if the circumstances for
it only existed; they are subjunctive, as [Job
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013), [Job
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#016). גּורל, the lot, is to be
supplied to תּפּילוּ, as [Sa1 14:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#042).
The verb כּרה, however, does not here signify to dig, so that שׁחת, a
pit, should be supplied (Heiligst.), still less: dig out earth, and cast
it on any one (Ebrard); but has the signification of buying and selling
with על of the object, exactly like [Job
39:27](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#027).

[Job 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 6:28</span></span>

28 And now be pleased to observe me keenly,

I will not indeed deceive you to your face.

29 Try it again, then: let there be no injustice;

Try it again, my righteousness still stands.

30 Is there wrong on my tongue?

Or shall not my palate discern iniquity?

He begs them to observe him more closely; בּ פּנה, as [Ecc
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#011), to observe scrutinizingly. אם is
the sign of negative asseveration (Ges. 155, 2, f). He will not indeed
shamelessly give them the lie, viz., in respect to the greatness and
inexplicableness of his suffering. The challenging שׁוּבוּ we do not
translate: retrace your steps, but: begin afresh, to which both the
following clauses are better suited. So Schlottm. and von Gerlach. Hahn
retains the Chethib שׁובי, in the signification: my answer; but that is
impossible: to answer is השׁיב, not שׁוּב. The עוד drawn to שׁובו by
Rebia mugrasch is more suitably joined with צדקי־בה, in which בּהּ
refers neutrally to the matter of which it treats. They are to try from
the beginning to find that comfort which will meet the case. Their
accusations are עולה; his complaints, on the contrary, are fully
justified. He does not grant that the outburst of his feeling of pain
(Job 3) is עולה: he has not so completely lost his power against
temptation, that he would not restrain himself, if he should fall into
הוּות. Thus wickedness, which completely contaminates feeling and
utterance, is called ([Psa 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 7](job007)

</div>
