<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos001)  [Next](jos003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

[Joshua 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 2:1</span></span>

Two Spies Sent Over to Jericho. - [Jos
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001). Although Joshua had received a
promise from the Lord of His almighty help in the conquest of Canaan, he
still thought it necessary to do what was requisite on his part to
secure the success of the work committed to him, as the help of God does
not preclude human action, but rather presupposes it. He therefore sent
two men out secretly as spies from Shittim the place of encampment at
that time (see at [Num 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)), to view,
i.e., explore, the land, especially Jericho, the strongly fortified
frontier town of Canaan ([Jos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)).
The word "secretly" is connected by the accents with "saying," giving
them their instructions secretly; but this implies that they were also
sent out secretly. This was done partly in order that the Canaanites
might not hear of it, and partly in order that, if the report should
prove unfavourable, the people might not be thrown into despair, as they
had been before in the time of Moses. The spies proceeded to Jericho,
and towards evening they entered the house of a harlot named Rahab, and
lodged there, lit. laid themselves down, intended to remain or sleep
there. Jericho was two hours' journey to the west of the Jordan,
situated in a plain that was formerly very fertile, and celebrated for
its palm trees and balsam shrubs, but which is now quite desolate and
barren. This plain is encircled on the western side by a naked and
barren range of mountains, which stretches as far as Beisan towards the
north and to the Dead Sea on the south. Every trace of the town has long
since passed away, though it evidently stood somewhere near, and
probably on the northern side of, the miserable and dirty village of
Rha, by the Wady Kelt (see Robinson, Pal. ii. pp. 279ff., 289ff.; v.
Raumer, Pal. pp. 206ff.). Rahab is called a zonah, i.e., a harlot, not
an innkeeper, as Josephus, the Chaldee version, and the Rabbins render
the word. Their entering the house of such a person would not excite so
much suspicion. Moreover, the situation of her house against or upon the
town wall was one which facilitated escape. But the Lord so guided the
course of the spies, that they found in this sinner the very person who
was the most suitable for their purpose, and upon whose heart the
tidings of the miracles wrought by the living God on behalf of Israel
had made such an impression, that she not only informed the spies of the
despondency of the Canaanites, but, with believing trust in the power of
the God of Israel, concealed the spies from all the inquiries of her
countrymen, though at the greatest risk to herself.

[Joshua 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 2:2</span></span>

When the king of Jericho was informed of the fact that these strange men
had entered the house of Rahab, and suspecting their reason for coming,
summoned Rahab to give them up, she hid them (lit., hid him, i.e., each
one of the spies: for this change from the plural to the singular see
Ewald, 219), and said to the king's messengers: כּן, recte, "It is quite
correct, the men came to me, but I do not know where they were from; and
when in the darkness the gate was at the shutting (i.e., ought to be
shut: for this construction, see [Gen
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#012)), they went out again, I know
not whither. Pursue them quickly, you will certainly overtake them." The
writer then adds this explanation in [Jos
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#006) : she had hidden them upon the
roof of her house among stalks of flax. The expression "to-night" (lit.,
the night) in [Jos 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#002) is more
precisely defined in [Jos 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#005), viz.,
as night was coming on, before the town-gate was shut, after which it
would have been in vain for them to attempt to leave the town. "Stalks
of flax," not "cotton pods" (Arab., J. D. Mich. ), or "tree-flax, i.e.,
cotton," as Thenius explains it, but flax stalks or stalk-flax, as
distinguished from carded flax, in which there is no wood left,
λινοκαλάμη, stipula lini (lxx, Vulg.). Flax stalks, which grow to the
height of three or four feet in Egypt, and attain the thickness of a
reed, and would probably be quite as large in the plain of Jericho, the
climate of which resembles that of Egypt, would form a very good
hiding-place for the spies if they were piled up upon the roof to dry in
the sun. The falsehood by which Rahab sought not only to avert all
suspicion from herself of any conspiracy with the Israelitish men who
had entered her house, but to prevent any further search for them in her
house, and to frustrate the attempt to arrest them, is not to be
justified as a lie of necessity told for a good purpose, nor, as Grotius
maintains, by the unfounded assertion that, "before the preaching of the
gospel, a salutary lie was not regarded as a fault even by good men."
Nor can it be shown that it was thought "allowable," or even
"praiseworthy," simply because the writer mentions the fact without
expressing any subjective opinion, or because, as we learn from what
follows ([Jos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009).), Rahab was
convinced of the truth of the miracles which God had wrought for His
people, and acted in firm faith that the true God would give the land of
Canaan to the Israelites, and that all opposition made to them would be
vain, and would be, in fact, rebellion against the Almighty God himself.
For a lie is always a sin. Therefore even if Rahab was not actuated at
all by the desire to save herself and her family from destruction, and
the motive from which she acted had its roots in her faith in the living
God ([Heb 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031)), so that what she did
for the spies, and thereby for the cause of the Lord, was counted to her
for righteousness ("justified by works," [Jam
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)), yet the course which she
adopted was a sin of weakness, which was forgiven her in mercy because
of her faith.

(Note: Calvin's estimate is also a correct one: "It has often happened,
that even when good men have endeavoured to keep a straight course, they
have turned aside into circuitous paths. Rahab acted wrongly when she
told a lie and said that the spies had gone; and the action was
acceptable to God only because the evil that was mixed with the good was
not imputed to her. Yet, although God wished the spies to be delivered,
He did not sanction their being protected by a lie." Augustine also
pronounces the same opinion concerning Rahab as that which he expressed
concerning the Hebrew midwives (see the comm. on [Exo
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#021)).)

[Joshua 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 2:7</span></span>

Upon this declaration on the part of the woman, the king's messengers
("the men") pursued the spies by the road to the Jordan which leads
across the fords. Both the circumstances themselves and the usage of the
language require that we should interpret the words in this way; for
המּעבּרות על cannot mean "as far as the fords," and it is very
improbable that the officers should have gone across the fords. If they
did not succeed in overtaking the spies and apprehending them before
they reached the fords, they certainly could not hope to do this on the
other side of the river in the neighbourhood of the Israelitish camp. By
"the fords" with the article we are to understand the ford near to
Jericho which was generally used at that time ([Jdg
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#022); [Sa2
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#016).); but whether this was the one
which is commonly used now at the mouth of Wady Shaib, almost in a
straight line to the east of Jericho, or the more southerly one, el
Helu, above the mouth of Wady Hesban (Rob. Pal. ii. p. 254), to the
south of the bathing-place of Christian pilgrims, or el Meshra (Lynch,
p. 155), or el Mocktaa (Seetzen, ii. p. 320), it is impossible to
determine. (On these and other fords near Beisan, and as far up as the
Sea of Galilee, see Rob. ii. p. 259, and Ritter Erdk. xv. pp. 549ff.)
After the king's messengers had left the town, they shut the gate to
prevent the spies from escaping, in case they should be still in the
town. כּאשׁר אהרי for אשׁר אהרי is uncommon, but it is analogous to
אחרי־כן אשׁר in [Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004).

[Jos 2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#008)

Notwithstanding these precautions, the men escaped. As soon as the
officers had left Rahab's house, she went to the spies, who were
concealed upon the roof, before they had lain down to sleep, which they
were probably about to do upon the roof, - a thing of frequent
occurrence in the East in summer time, - and confessed to them all that
she believed and knew, namely, that God had given the land to the
Israelites, and that the dread of them had fallen upon the Canaanites
("us," in contrast with "you," the Israelites, signifies the Canaanites
generally, and not merely the inhabitants of Jericho), and despair had
seized upon all the inhabitants of the land. The description of the
despair of the Canaanites ([Jos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009))
is connected, so far as the expressions are concerned, with [Exo
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#015) and [Exo
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016), to show that what Moses and the
Israelites had sung after crossing the Red Sea was now fulfilled, that
the Lord had fulfilled His promise ([Exo
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027) compared with [Deu
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025) and [Deu
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#025)), and had put fear and dread
upon the Canaanites.

[Jos 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#010)

The report of the drying up of the Red Sea ([Exo
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015).), of the defeat of the mighty
kings of the Amorites, and of the conquest of their kingdoms, had
produced this effect upon the Canaanites. Even in the last of these
occurrences the omnipotence of God had been visibly displayed, so that
what the Lord foretold to Moses ([Deu
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025)) had now taken place; it had
filled all the surrounding nations with fear and dread of Israel, and
the heart and courage of the Canaanites sank in consequence.

[Jos 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#011)

"When we heard this" - Rahab proceeded to tell them, transferring the
feelings of her own heart to her countrymen - "our heart did melt" (it
was thus that the Hebrew depicted utter despair; "the hearts of the
people melted, and became as water," [Jos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005)), "and there did not remain any
more spirit in any one:" i.e., they lost all strength of mind for
acting, in consequence of their fear and dread (vid., [Jos
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001), though in [Kg1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#005) this phrase is used to signify
being out of one's-self from mere astonishment). "For Jehovah your God
is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath." To this confession
of faith, to which the Israelites were to be brought through the
miraculous help of the Lord ([Deu
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#039)), Rahab also attained; although
her confession of faith remained so far behind the faith which Moses at
that time demanded of Israel, that she only discerned in Jehovah a Deity
(Elohim) in heaven and upon earth, and therefore had not yet got rid of
her polytheism altogether, however close she had come to a true and full
confession of the Lord. But these miracles of divine omnipotence which
led the heart of this sinner with its susceptibility for religious truth
to true faith, and thus became to her a savour of life unto life,
produced nothing but hardness in the unbelieving hearts of the rest of
the Canaanites, so that they could not escape the judgment of death.

[Jos 2:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#012)

After this confession Rahab entreated the spies to spare her family
(father's house), and made them promise her on oath as a sign of their
fidelity, that on the capture of Jericho, which is tacitly assumed as
self-evident after what had gone before, they would save alive her
parents, and brothers and sisters, and all that belonged to them (i.e.,
according to [Jos 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#023), the children
and families of her brothers and sisters), and not put them to death;
all of which they promised her on oath. "A true token," lit. a sign of
truth, i.e., a sign by which they guaranteed the truth of the kindness
for which she asked. This sign consisted in nothing but the solemn oath
with which they were to confirm their assurance, and, according to [Jos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#014), actually did confirm it. The
oath itself was taken in these words, "our soul shall die for you," by
which they pledged their life for the life of Rahab and her family in
this sense: God shall punish us with death if we are faithless, and do
not spare thy life and the lives of thy relations. Though the name of
God is not really expressed, it was implied in the fact that the words
are described as swearing by Jehovah. But the spies couple their
assurance with this condition, "if ye utter not this our business," do
not betray us, sc., so that we should be pursued, and our life
endangered; "then will we show thee mercy and truth" (cf. [Gen
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#027)).

[Joshua 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 2:15</span></span>

Rahab then let them down by a rope through the window, namely, into the
open country; for her house stood against or upon the town wall, so that
she lived upon the wall, and advised them to get to the mountains, that
they might not meet the men who had been sent out in pursuit of them,
and to hide themselves there for three days, when the pursuers would
have returned.

[Joshua 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 2:17</span></span>

In conclusion, the spies guarded against any arbitrary interpretation
and application of their oath, by imposing three conditions, on the
non-fulfilment of which they would be released from their oath. הזּה for
הזּאת is to be explained in [Jos 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#017)
from the fact that the gender is often disregarded in the use of the
pronoun (see Ewald, 183, a.), and in [Jos
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#018) from the fact that there the
gender is determined by the nomen rectum (see Ewald, 317, d.).

[Jos 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#018)

The first condition was, that when the town was taken Rahab should make
her house known to the Israelites, by binding "the cord of this crimson
thread," i.e., this cord made of crimson thread, in the window from
which she had let them down. The demonstrative "this" leads to the
conclusion adopted by Luther and others, that "this cord" is the rope
(חבל) mentioned in [Jos 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015), as no
other word had been mentioned to which they could refer; and the fact
that nothing has been said about the sign in question being either given
or received, precludes the idea that the spies gave the cord to Rahab
for a sign. The crimson or scarlet colour of the cord (שׁני = שׁני
תּולעת; see at [Exo 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#004)), as the
colour of vigorous life, made this cord an expressive sign of the
preservation of Rahab's life and the lives of her relations. The second
condition was, that when the town was taken, Rahab should collect
together her parents, and her brothers and her sisters, into her own
house.

[Jos 2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#019)

Whoever went outside the door, his blood should be upon his own head;
i.e., if he was slain outside by the Israelitish soldiers, he should
bear his death as his own fault. But every one who was with her in the
house, his blood should fall upon their (the spies') head, if any hand
was against them, i.e., touched them or did them harm (vid., [Exo
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#003)). The formula, "his blood be upon
his head," is synonymous with the legal formula, "his blood be upon him"
([Lev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009)). The third condition ([Jos
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#020)) is simply a repetition of the
principal condition laid down at the very outset ([Jos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#014)).

[Joshua 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 2:21</span></span>

When Rahab had accepted all these conditions, she let the men go, and
bound the red cord in the window. It is not to be supposed that she did
this at once, but merely as soon as it was necessary. It is mentioned
here for the purpose of bringing the subject to a close.

[Joshua 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 2:22</span></span>

The spies remained three days in the mountains, till the officers
returned to the town, after searching for them the whole way in vain.
The mountains referred to are probably the range on the northern side of
Jericho, which afterwards received the name of Quarantana (Arab.
Kuruntul), a wall of rock rising almost precipitously from the plain to
the height of 1200 or 1500 feet, and full of grottoes and caves on the
eastern side. These mountains were well adapted for a place of
concealment; moreover, they were the nearest to Jericho, as the western
range recedes considerably to the south of Wady Kelt (vid., Rob. ii. p.
289).

[Joshua 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 2:23</span></span>

After this they returned to the camp across the Jordan, and informed
Joshua of all that had befallen them, and all that they had heard. On
[Jos 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#024), see [Jos
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 3](jos003)

</div>
