<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos023)  [Next](jdg000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)

[Joshua 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 24:1</span></span>

Renewal of the Covenant at the National Assembly in Shechem. - [Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001). Joshua brought his public
ministry to a close, as Moses had done before him, with a solemn renewal
of the covenant with the Lord. For this solemn act he did not choose
Shiloh, the site of the national sanctuary, as some MSS of the lxx read,
but Shechem, a place which was sanctified as no other was for such a
purpose as this by the most sacred reminiscences from the times of the
patriarchs. He therefore summoned all the tribes of Israel, in their
representatives (their elders, etc., as in [Jos
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#002)), to Shechem, not merely because
it was at Shechem, i.e., on Gerizim and Ebal, that the solemn
establishment of the law in the land of Canaan, to which the renewal of
the covenant, as a repetition of the essential kernel of that solemn
ceremony, was now to be appended, had first taken place, but still more
because it was here that Abraham received the first promise from God
after his migration into Canaan, and built an altar at the time ([Gen
12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006)); and most of all, as
Hengstenberg has pointed out (Diss. ii. p. 12), because Jacob settled
here on his return from Mesopotamia, and it was here that he purified
his house from the strange gods, burying all their idols under the oak
([Gen 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019); [Gen
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002), [Gen
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004)). As Jacob selected Shechem for
the sanctification of his house, because this place was already
consecrated by Abraham as a sanctuary of God, so Joshua chose the same
place for the renewal of the covenant, because this act involved a
practical renunciation on the part of Israel of all idolatry. Joshua
expressly states this in [Jos 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#023),
and reference is also made to it in the account in [Jos
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026). "The exhortation to be faithful
to the Lord, and to purify themselves from all idolatry, could not fail
to make a deep impression, in the place where the honoured patriarch had
done the very same things to which his descendants were exhorted here.
The example preached more loudly in this spot than in any other"
(Hengstenberg). "And they placed themselves before God." From the
expression "before God," it by no means follows that the ark had been
brought to Shechem, or, as Knobel supposes, that an altar was erected
there, any more than from the statement in [Jos
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026) that it was "by the sanctuary of
the Lord." For, in the first place, "before God" (Elohim) is not to be
identified with "before Jehovah," which is used in [Jos
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#006) and [Jos
19:51](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#051) to denote the presence of the
Lord above the ark of the covenant; and secondly, even "before Jehovah"
does not always presuppose the presence of the ark of the covenant, as
Hengstenberg has clearly shown. "Before God" simply denotes in a general
sense the religious character of an act, or shows that the act was
undertaken with a distinct reference to the omnipresent God; and in the
case before us it may be attributed to the fact that Joshua delivered
his exhortation to the people in the name of Jehovah, and commenced his
address with the words, "Thus saith Jehovah."

(Note: "It is stated that they all stood before God, in order that the
sanctity and religious character of the assembly may be the more
distinctly shown. And there can be no doubt that the name of God was
solemnly invoked by Joshua, and that he addressed the people as in the
sight of God, so that each one might feel for himself that God was
presiding over all that was transacted there, and that they were not
engaged in any merely private affair, but were entering into a sacred
and inviolable compact with God himself." - Calvin.)

[Jos 24:2-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)

Joshua's address contains an expansion of two thoughts. He first of all
recalls to the recollection of the whole nation, whom he is addressing
in the persons of its representatives, all the proofs of His mercy which
the Lord had given, from the calling of Abraham to that day ([Jos
24:2-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)); and then because of these
divine acts he calls upon the people to renounce all idolatry, and to
serve God the Lord alone ([Jos 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014),
[Jos 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015)). Jehovah is described as
the "God of Israel" both at the commencement ([Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)) and also at the close of the
whole transaction, in perfect accordance with the substance and object
of the address, which is occupied throughout with the goodness conferred
by God upon the race of Israel. The first practical proof of the grace
of God towards Israel, was the calling of Abraham from his idolatrous
associations, and his introduction to the land of Canaan, where the Lord
so multiplied his seed, that Esau received the mountains of Seir for his
family, whilst Jacob went into Egypt with his sons.

(Note: "He commences with their gratuitous training, by which God had
precluded them from the possibility of boasting of any pre-eminence or
merit. For God had bound them to himself by a closer bond, because when
they were on an equality with others, He drew them to himself to be His
own peculiar people, for no other reason than His own good pleasure.
Moreover, in order that it may be clearly seen that they have nothing
whereof to glory, he leads them back to their earliest origin, and
relates how their fathers had dwelt in Chaldaea, worshipping idols in
common with the rest, and with nothing to distinguish them from the
crowd." - Calvin.)

The ancestors of Israel dwelt "from eternity," i.e., from time
immemorial, on the other side of the stream (the Euphrates), viz., in Ur
of the Chaldees, and then at Haran in Mesopotamia ([Gen
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028), [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)), namely Terah, the father of
Abraham and Nahor. Of Terah's three sons ([Gen
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#027)), Nahor is mentioned as well as
Abraham, because Rebekah, and her nieces Leah and Rachel, the
tribe-mothers of Israel, were descended from him ([Gen
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#023); [Gen
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#010), [Gen
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#016).). And they (your fathers, Terah
and his family) served other gods than Jehovah, who revealed himself to
Abraham, and brought him from his father's house to Canaan. Nothing
definite can be gathered from the expression "other gods," with
reference to the gods worshipped by Terah and his family; nor is there
anything further to be found respecting them throughout the whole of the
Old Testament. We simply learn from [Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019), [Gen
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#034), that Laban had teraphim, i.e.,
penates, or household and oracular gods.

(Note: According to one tradition, Abraham was brought up in Sabaeism in
his father's house (see Hottinger, Histor. Orient. p. 246, and Philo, in
several passages of his works); and according to another, in the Targum
Jonathan on [Gen 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#023), and in the
later Rabbins, Abraham had to suffer persecution on account of his
dislike to idolatry, and was obliged to leave his native land in
consequence. But these traditions are both of them nothing more than
conjectures by the later Rabbins.)

The question also, whether Abraham was an idolater before his call,
which has been answered in different ways, cannot be determined with
certainty. We may conjecture, however, that he was not deeply sunk in
idolatry, though he had not remained entirely free from it in his
father's house; and therefore that his call is not to be regarded as a
reward for his righteousness before God, but as an act of free unmerited
grace.

[Jos 24:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#003)

After his call, God conducted Abraham through all the land of Canaan
(see Gen 12), protecting and shielding him, and multiplied his seed,
giving him Isaac, and giving to Isaac Jacob and Esau, the ancestors of
two nations. To the latter He gave the mountains of Seir for a
possession ([Gen 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006).), that Jacob
might receive Canaan for his descendants as a sole possession. But
instead of mentioning this, Joshua took for granted that his hearers
were well acquainted with the history of the patriarchs, and satisfied
himself with mentioning the migration of Jacob and his sons to Egypt,
that he might pass at once to the second great practical proof of the
mercy of God in the guidance of Israel, the miraculous deliverance of
Israel out of the bondage and oppression of Egypt.

[Jos 24:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#005)

Of this also he merely mentions the leading points, viz., first of all,
the sending of Moses and Aaron ([Exo
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#010)., [Jos
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#014).), and then the plagues inflicted
upon Egypt. "I smote Egypt," i.e., both land and people. נגף is used in
[Exo 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#002) and [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023), [Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027), in connection with the plague
of frogs and the slaying of the first-born in Egypt. The words which
follow, "according to that which I did among them, and afterward I
brought you out," point back to [Exo
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#020), and show that the Lord had
fulfilled the promise given to Moses at his call. He then refers ([Jos
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#006), [Jos
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#007)) to the miraculous deliverance of
the Israelites, as they came out of Egypt, from Pharaoh who pursued them
with his army, giving especial prominence to the crying of the
Israelites to the Lord in their distress ([Exo
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)), and the relief of that
distress by the angel of the Lord ([Exo
14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)). And lastly, he notices
their dwelling in the wilderness "many days," i.e., forty years ([Num
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#033)).

[Jos 24:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#008)

The third great act of God for Israel was his giving up the Amorites
into the hands of the Israelites, so that they were able to conquer
their land ([Num 21:21-35](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021)), and the
frustration of the attack made by Balak king of the Moabites, through
the instrumentality of Balaam, when the Lord did not allow him to curse
Israel, but compelled him to bless (Num 22-24). Balak "warred against
Israel," not with the sword, but with the weapons of the curse, or animo
et voluntate (Vatabl.). "I would not hearken unto Balaam," i.e., would
not comply with his wish, but compelled him to submit to my will, and to
bless you; "and delivered you out of his (Balak's) hand," when he sought
to destroy Israel through the medium of Balaam ([Num
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#006), [Num
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#011)).

[Jos 24:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011)

The last and greatest benefit which the Lord conferred upon the
Israelites, was His leading them by miracles of His omnipotence across
the Jordan into Canaan, delivering the Lords (or possessors) of
Jericho," not "the rulers, i.e., the king and his heroes," as Knobel
maintains (see [Sa2 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#012); [Sa1
23:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#011); and the commentary on [Jdg
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#006)), "and all the tribes of Canaan
into their hand," and sending hornets before them, so that they were
able to drive out the Canaanites, particularly the two kings of the
Amorites, Sihon and Og, though "not with their sword and their bow"
(vid., [Psa 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)); i.e., it was not
with the weapons at their command that they were able to take the lands
of these two kings. On the sending of hornets, as a figure used to
represent peculiarly effective terrors, see at [Exo
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#028); [Deu
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#020). In this way the Lord gave the
land to the Israelites, with its towns and its rich productions
(vineyards and olive trees), without any trouble on their part of
wearisome cultivation or planting, as Moses himself had promised them
([Deu 6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010)).

[Jos 24:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014)

These overwhelming manifestations of grace on the part of the Lord laid
Israel under obligations to serve the Lord with gratitude and sincerity.
"Now therefore fear the Lord (יראוּ for יראוּ, pointed like a verb הל,
as in [Sa1 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#024); [Psa
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010)), and serve Him in sincerity and
in truth," i.e., without hypocrisy, or the show of piety, in simplicity
and truth of heart (vid., [Jdg 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#016),
[Jdg 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#019)). "Put away the gods (Elohim
= the strange gods in [Jos 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#023))
which your fathers served on the other side of the Euphrates and in
Egypt." This appeal does not presuppose any gross idolatry on the part
of the existing generation, which would have been at variance with the
rest of the book, in which Israel is represented as only serving Jehovah
during the lifetime of Joshua. If the people had been in possession of
idols, they would have given them up to Joshua to be destroyed, as they
promised to comply with his demand ([Jos
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#016).). But even if the Israelites
were not addicted to gross idolatry in the worship of idols, they were
not altogether free from idolatry either in Egypt or in the desert. As
their fathers were possessed of teraphim in Mesopotamia (see at [Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)), so the Israelites had not kept
themselves entirely free from heathen and idolatrous ways, more
especially the demon-worship of Egypt (comp. [Lev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007) with [Eze
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007)., [Jos
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#003), [Jos
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#008), and [Amo
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#026)); and even in the time of Joshua
their worship of Jehovah may have been corrupted by idolatrous elements.
This admixture of the pure and genuine worship of Jehovah with
idolatrous or heathen elements, which is condemned in [Lev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007) as the worship of Seirim, and by
Ezekiel (l. c.) as the idolatrous worship of the people in Egypt, had
its roots in the corruption of the natural heart, through which it is at
all times led to make to itself idols of mammon, worldly lusts, and
other impure thoughts and desires, to which it cleaves, without being
able to tear itself entirely away from them. This more refined idolatry
might degenerate in the case of many persons into the grosser worship of
idols, so that Joshua had ample ground for admonishing the people to put
away the strange gods, and serve the Lord.

[Jos 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015)

But as the true worship of the living God must have its roots in the
heart, and spring from the heart, and therefore cannot be forced by
prohibitions and commands, Joshua concluded by calling upon the
representatives of the nation, in case they were not inclined ("if it
seem evil unto you") to serve Jehovah, to choose now this day the gods
whom they would serve, whether the gods of their fathers in Mesopotamia,
or the gods of the Amorites in whose land they were now dwelling, though
he and his house would serve the Lord. There is no necessity to adduce
any special proofs that this appeal was not intended to release them
from the obligation to serve Jehovah, but rather contained the strongest
admonition to remain faithful to the Lord.

[Jos 24:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#016)

The people responded to this appeal by declaring, with an expression of
horror at idolatry, their hearty resolution to serve the Lord, who was
their God, and had shown them such great mercies. The words, "that
brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of bondage," call to mind the words appended to the first commandment
([Exo 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002); [Deu
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006)), which they hereby promise to
observe. With the clause which follows, "who did those great signs in
our sight," etc., they declare their assent to all that Joshua had
called to their mind in [Jos 24:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#003).
"We also" ([Jos 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#018)), as well as
thou and thy house ([Jos 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015)).

[Joshua 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 24:19</span></span>

But in order to place most vividly before the minds of the people to
what it was that they bound themselves by this declaration, that they
might not inconsiderately vow what they would not afterwards observe,
Joshua adds, "Ye cannot serve Jehovah," sc., in the state of mind in
which ye are at present, or "by your own resolution only, and without
the assistance of divine grace, without solid and serious conversion
from all idols, and without true repentance and faith" (J. H.
Michaelis). For Jehovah is "a holy God," etc. Elohim, used to denote the
Supreme Being (see at [Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)), is
construed with the predicate in the plural. On the holiness of God, see
the exposition of [Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006). On the
expression "a jealous God," see [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); and on לפשׁע נשׂא, [Exo
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021). The only other place in which
the form קנּוא is used for קנּא is [Nah
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002). "If ye forsake the Lord and serve
strange gods, He will turn (i.e., assume a different attitude towards
you) and do you hurt, after He has done you good," i.e., He will not
spare you, in spite of the blessings which He has conferred upon you.
חרע is used to denote the judgments threatened in the law against
transgressors.

[Joshua 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 24:21</span></span>

The people adhered to their resolution. לא, minime, as in [Jos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014), i.e., we will not serve other
gods, but Jehovah.

[Joshua 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 24:22</span></span>

Upon this repeated declaration Joshua says to them, "ye are witnesses
against yourselves," i.e., ye will condemn yourselves by this your own
testimony if ye should now forsake the Lord, "for ye yourselves have
chosen you Jehovah to serve Him;" whereupon they answer עדים, "witnesses
are we against ourselves," signifying thereby, "we profess and ratify
once more all that we have said" (Rosenmller). Joshua then repeated his
demand that they should put away the strange gods from within them, and
incline their hearts (entirely) to Jehovah the God of Israel. בּקבּכם
אשׁר הנּכר אלהי might mean the foreign gods which are in the midst of
you, i.e., among you, and imply the existence of idols, and the grosser
forms of idolatrous worship in the nation; but בּקרב also signifies
"within," or "in the heart," in which case the words refer to idols of
the heart. That the latter is the sense in which the words are to be
understood is evident from the fact, that although the people expressed
their willingness to renounce all idolatry, they did not bring any idols
to Joshua to be destroyed, as was done in other similar cases, viz.,
[Gen 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004), and [Sa1
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004). Even if the people had carried
idols about with them in the desert, as the prophet Amos stated to his
contemporaries ([Amo 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#026); cf. [Act
7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043)), the grosser forms of idolatry
had disappeared from Israel with the dying out of the generation that
was condemned at Kadesh. The new generation, which had been received
afresh into covenant with the Lord by the circumcision at Gilgal, and
had set up this covenant at Ebal, and was now assembled around Joshua,
the dying servant of God, to renew the covenant once more, had no idols
of wood, stone, or metal, but only the "figments of false gods," as
Calvin calls them, the idols of the heart, which it was to put away,
that it might give its heart entirely to the Lord, who is not content
with divided affections, but requires the whole heart ([Deu
6:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)).

[Joshua 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 24:24</span></span>

On the repeated and decided declaration of the people, "the Lord our God
will we serve, and to His voice will we hearken," Joshua completed the
covenant with them that day. This conclusion of a covenant was really a
solemn renewal of the covenant made at Sinai, like that which took place
under Moses in the steppes of Moab ([Deu
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)). "And set them a statute and
right at Shechem," sc., through the renewal of the covenant. These words
recall [Exo 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#025), where the guidance
of Israel to bitter water, and the sweetening of that water by the means
which the Lord pointed out to Moses, are described as setting a statute
and right for Israel, and then explained by the promise, that if they
would hearken to the voice of Jehovah, He would keep them from all the
diseases of Egypt. And in accordance with this, by the renewal of the
covenant at Shechem, there were set for Israel, a חק, i.e., a statute,
which bound the people to a renewed and conscientious maintenance of the
covenant, and a משׁפּט, or right, by virtue of which they might expect
on this condition the fulfilment of all the covenant mercies of the
Lord.

[Joshua 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 24:26</span></span>

All these things (האלּה הדּברים are not merely the words spoken on both
sides, but the whole ceremony of renewing the covenant) Joshua wrote in
the law-book of God, i.e., he wrote them in a document which he placed
in the law-book of Moses, and then set up a large stone, as a permanent
memorial of what had taken place, on the spot where the meeting had been
held, "under the oak that was in the sanctuary of Jehovah." As בּמקדּשׁ
neither means "at the sanctuary," nor near the sanctuary, nor "in the
place where the sanctuary was set up;' the "sanctuary of Jehovah" cannot
signify "the ark of the covenant, which had been brought from the
tabernacle to Shechem, for the ceremony of renewing the covenant." Still
less can we understand it as signifying the tabernacle itself, since
this was not removed from place to place for particular sacred
ceremonies; nor can it mean an altar, in which an oak could not possibly
be said to stand; nor some other illegal sanctuary of Jehovah, since
there were none in Israel at that time. The sanctuary of Jehovah under
the oak at Shechem was nothing else than the holy place under the oak,
where Abraham had formerly built an altar and worshipped the Lord, and
where Jacob had purified his house from the strange gods, which he
buried under this oak, or rather terebinth tree ([Gen
12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006); [Gen
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002), [Gen
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004)). This is the explanation adopted
by Masius, J. D. Michaelis, and Hengstenberg (Diss. ii. p. 12). In [Jos
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#027) Joshua explains to the people
the meaning of the stone which he had set up. The stone would be a
witness against the people if they should deny their God. As a memorial
of what had taken place, the stone had heard all the words which the
Lord had addressed to Israel, and could bear witness against the people,
that they might not deny their God. "Deny your God," viz., in feeling,
word, or deed.

[Joshua 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 24:28</span></span>

Joshua then dismissed the people, each one to his inheritance. He had
done all that was in his power to establish the people in fidelity to
the Lord.

[Joshua 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 24:29</span></span>

Death and Burial of Joshua and Eleazar. - With the renewal of the
covenant Joshua had ended his vocation. He did not formally lay down his
office, because there was no immediate successor who had been appointed
by God. The ordinary rulers of the congregation were enough, when once
they were settled in Canaan, viz., the elders as heads and judges of the
nation, together with the high priest, who represented the nation in its
relation to God, and could obtain for it the revelation of the will of
God through the right of the Urim and Thummim. In order therefore to
bring the history of Joshua and his times to a close, nothing further
remained than to give an account of his death, with a short reference to
the fruit of his labours, and to add certain other notices for which no
suitable place had hitherto presented itself.

[Jos 24:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029)

Soon after these events (vv. 1-28) Joshua died, at the age of 110, like
his ancestor Joseph ([Gen 50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026)), and
was buried in his hereditary possessions at Timnath-serah, upon the
mountains of Ephraim, to the north of Mount Gaash. Timnath-serah is
still in existence see at [Jos 19:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#050)).
Mount Gaash, however, has not been discovered.

[Jos 24:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#031)

Joshua's labours had not remained without effect. During his own
lifetime, and that of the elders who outlived him, and who had seen all
that the Lord did for Israel, all Israel served the Lord. "The elders"
are the rulers and leaders of the nation. The account of the burial of
Joseph's bones, which the Israelites had brought with them from Egypt to
Canaan ([Exo 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019)), is placed after
the account of Joshua's death, because it could not have been introduced
before without interrupting the connected account of the labours of
Joshua; and it would not do to pass it over without notice altogether,
not only because the fact of their bringing the bones with them had been
mentioned in the book of Exodus, but also because the Israelites thereby
fulfilled the promise given by their fathers to Joseph when he died. The
burial of Joseph in the piece of field which Jacob had purchased at
Shechem (vid., [Gen 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019)) had no
doubt taken place immediately after the division of the land, when
Joseph's descendants received Shechem and the field there for an
inheritance. This piece of field, however, they chose for a burial-place
for Joseph's bones, not only because Jacob had purchased it, but in all
probability chiefly because Jacob had sanctified it for his descendants
by building an altar there ([Gen
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020)). The death and burial of
Eleazar, who stood by Joshua's side in the guidance of the nation, are
mentioned last of all ([Jos 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#033)).
When Eleazar died, whether shortly before or shortly after Joshua,
cannot be determined. He was buried at Gibeah of Phinehas, the place
which was given to him upon the mountains of Ephraim, i.e., as his
inheritance. Gibeath Phinehas, i.e., hill of Phinehas, is apparently a
proper name, like Gibeah of Saul ([Sa1
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#034), etc.). The situation, however,
is uncertain. According to Eusebius (Onom. s. v. Γαβαάς), it was upon
the mountains of Ephraim, in the tribe of Benjamin, and was at that time
a place named Gabatha, the name also given to it by Josephus (Ant. v. 1,
29), about twelve Roman miles from Eleutheropolis. This statement is
certainly founded upon an error, at least so far as the number twelve is
concerned. It is a much more probable supposition, that it is the
Levitical town Geba of Benjamin, on the north-east of Ramah ([Jos
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024)), and the name Gibeah of
Phinehas might be explained on the ground that this place had become the
hereditary property of Phinehas, which would be perfectly reconcilable
with its selection as one of the priests' cities. As the priests, for
example, were not the sole possessors of the towns ceded to them in the
possessions of the different tribes, the Israelites might have presented
Phinehas with that portion of the city which was not occupied by the
priests, and also with the field, as a reward for the services he had
rendered to the congregation ([Num
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007).), just as Caleb and Joshua had
been specially considered; in which case Phinehas might dwell in his own
hereditary possessions in a priests' city. The situation, "upon the
mountains of Ephraim," is not at variance with this view, as these
mountains extended, according to [Jdg
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#005), etc., far into the territory of
Benjamin (see at [Jos 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021)). The
majority of commentators, down to Knobel, have thought the place
intended to be a Gibeah in the tribe of Ephraim, namely the present Jeeb
or Jibia, by the Wady Jib, on the north of Guphna, towards Neapolis
(Sichem: see Rob. Pal. iii. p. 80), though there is nothing whatever to
favour this except the name.

With the death of Eleazar the high priest, the contemporary of Joshua,
the times of Joshua came to a close, so that the account of Eleazar's
death formed a very fitting termination to the book. In some MSS and
editions of the Septuagint, there is an additional clause relating to
the high priest Phinehas and the apostasy of the Israelites after
Joshua's death; but this is merely taken from [Jdg
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006), [Jdg
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011). and [Jos
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007), [Jos
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#012)., and arbitrarily appended to the
book of Joshua.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Introduction](jdg000)

</div>
