<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos008)  [Next](jos010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 9:0</span></span>

Stratagem of the Gibeonites, and Their Consequent Preservation - Joshua
9

The victorious advance of the Israelites in the land induced the kings
of Canaan to form a common league for the purpose of resisting them.
But, as frequently happens, the many kings and lords of the towns and
provinces of Canaan were not all united, so as to make a common and
vigorous attack. Before the league had been entered into, the
inhabitants of Gibeon, one of the largest towns in the central part of
Canaan, together with the smaller neighbouring towns that were dependent
upon it, attempted to anticipate the danger which threatened them by
means of a stratagem, and to enter into a friendly alliance with the
Israelites. And they succeeded, inasmuch as Joshua and the elders of the
congregation of Israel fell into the snare that was laid for them by the
ambassadors of the Gibeonites, who came to the camp at Gilgal, and made
the desired treaty with them, without inquiring of the Lord. "This
account," as O. v. Gerlach says, "is a warning to the Church of God of
all ages against the cunning and dissimulation of the world, which often
seeks for a peaceable recognition on the part of the kingdom of God, and
even for a reception into it, whenever it may be its advantage to do
so."

[Joshua 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 9:1</span></span>

[Jos 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001), [Jos
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#002) form the introduction to chs.
9-11, and correspond to the introduction in [Jos
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001). The news of the miraculous
passage of the Israelites through the Jordan had thrown all the kings of
Canaan into such despair, that they did not venture to make any attack
upon Israel. But they gradually recovered from their first panic,
partly, no doubt, in consequence of the failure of the first attack of
the Israelites upon Ai, and resolved to join together in making war upon
the foreign invaders. The kings of Canaan did this when they heard, sc.,
what Israel had hitherto undertaken and accomplished, not merely "what
Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai" (Knobel): that is to say, all the
kings across the Jordan, i.e., in the country to the west of the Jordan
(היּרדּן עבר, as in [Jos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)), viz.,
"upon the mountains" (not only the mountains of Judah, as in [Jos
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040); [Jos
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016), etc., but all the mountains
which run throughout the whole length of Canaan, as in [Deu
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007) and [Num
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017) : see the explanation of the
latter passage); "in the lowlands" (shephelah, the low-lying country
between the mountains and the sea-coast, which is simply intersected by
small ranges of hills; see at [Deu
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007)); "and on all the coast of the
Great Sea towards Lebanon," i.e., the narrow coast of the Mediterranean
Sea from Joppa up to the Ladder of Tyre (see at [Deu
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007)). The different tribes of the
Canaanites are also mentioned by name, as in [Jos
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010), except that the Girgashites are
omitted. These gathered themselves together to fight with Joshua and
Israel with one mouth, or with one accord ([Kg1
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#013)).

[Joshua 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 9:3</span></span>

But the inhabitants of a republic, which included not only Gibeon the
capital, but the towns of Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim also,
acted differently from the rest. Gibeon (Γαβάων, Gabaon, lxx Vulg.) was
larger than Ai, being one of the royal cities ([Jos
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#002)), and was inhabited by Hivites,
who were a brave people ([Jos 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#007);
[Jos 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019)). It was afterwards
allotted to the tribe of Benjamin, and set apart as a Levitical town
([Jos 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025); [Jos
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#017)). After the destruction of Nob
by Saul, the tabernacle was removed thither, and there it remained till
the building of Solomon's temple ([Ch1
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#039); [Ch1
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#029); [Kg1
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#004); [Ch2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#003).). According to Josephus, it was
forty or fifty stadia from Jerusalem, and judging from its name was
built upon a hill. It is to be found in the modern Jib, two good hours'
journey to the north-west of Jerusalem, a village of moderate size, on a
long chalk hill which overlooks a very fertile, well cultivated plain,
or rather a basin, consisting of broad valleys and plains, and rises
like a vineyard, in the form of separate terraces (Strauss, Sinai, p.
332). The remains of large massive buildings of great antiquity are
still to be seen there, also some fountains, and two large subterraneous
reservoirs (vid., Rob. Pal. ii. p. 136). When the Gibeonites heard of
the fate of Jericho and Ai, they also did (something) with stratagem. In
the expression המּה גּם ("they also") there is a reference implied to
what Joshua had done at Jericho and Ai; not, however, to the stratagem
resorted to in the case of Ai, as such an allusion would not apply to
Jericho. They set out as ambassadors: יצטיּרוּ, from צרר, which occurs
in every other instance in the form of a noun, signifying a messenger
([Pro 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#017), etc.). In the Hithpael it
means to make themselves ambassadors, to travel as ambassadors. The
translators of the ancient versions, however, adopted the reading
יצטיּדוּ, they provided themselves with food; but this was nothing more
than a conjecture founded upon [Jos
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#012), and without the slightest
critical value. They also took "old sacks upon their asses, and old
mended wineskins." מצררים, from צרר, lit. bound together, is very
characteristic. There are two modes adopted in the East of repairing
skins when torn, viz., inserting a patch, or tying up the piece that is
torn in the form of a bag. Here the reference is to the latter, which
was most in harmony with their statement, that the skins had got injured
upon their long journey. Also "old mended sandals upon their feet, and
old clothes upon them (upon their bodies); and all the bread of their
provisions had become dry and quite mouldy." נקּדים, lit. furnished with
points; נקוד, pointed, speckled ([Gen
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032).). Hence the rendering of the
lxx, εὐρωτιῶν; Theod., βεβρωμένοι; Luther, schimmlicht, mouldy; whereas
the rendering adopted by Aquila is ἐψαθυρωμένος; by Symmachus, κάπορος,
i.e., adustus, torridus; and by the Vulgate, in frusta comminuti, i.e.,
crumbled.

[Joshua 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 9:6</span></span>

Having made these preparations, they went to the Israelitish camp at
Gilgal (Jiljilia), introduced themselves to the men of Israel (אישׁ, in
a collective sense, the plural being but little used, and only occurring
in [Pro 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#004); [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003), and [Psa
141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004)) as having come from a distant
land, and asked them to make a league with them. But the Israelites
hesitated, and said to the Hivites, i.e., the Gibeonites who were
Hivites, that they might perhaps be living in the midst of them (the
Israelites), i.e., in the land of Canaan, which the Israelites already
looked upon as their own; and if so, how could they make a league with
them? This hesitation on their part was founded upon the express command
of God, that they were not to make any league with the tribes of Canaan
([Exo 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032); [Exo
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#012); [Num
33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055); [Deu
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002), etc.). In reply to this the
Gibeonites simply said, "We are thy servants" ([Jos
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#008)), i.e., we are at thy service,
which, according to the obsequious language common in the East, was
nothing more than a phrase intended to secure the favour of Joshua, and
by no means implied a readiness on their part to submit to the
Israelites and pay them tribute, as Rosenmller, Knobel, and others
suppose; for, as Grotius correctly observes, what they wished for was "a
friendly alliance, by which both their territory and also full liberty
would be secured to themselves." The Keri ויּאמר ([Jos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007)) is nothing more than a critical
conjecture, occasioned not so much by the singular אישׁ, which is
frequently construed in the historical writings as a collective noun
with a plural verb, as by the singular suffix attached to בּקרבּי, which
is to be explained on the ground that only one of the Israelites (viz.,
Joshua) was speaking as the mouthpiece of all the rest. The plural
ויּאמרוּ is used, because Joshua spoke in the name of the people.

[Joshua 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 9:8</span></span>

To the further question put by Joshua, where they had come from, the
Gibeonites replied, "From a very distant land have thy servants come,
because of the name of Jehovah thy God," or as they themselves proceed
at once to explain: "for we have heard the fame (fama) of Him, and all
that He did in Egypt, and to Sihon and Og, the two kings of the
Amorites." They very wisely say nothing about the miracles connected
with the crossing of the Jordan and the taking of Jericho, since, "as
the inhabitants of a very far distant region, they could not have heard
anything about things that had occurred so lately, even by report"
(Masius).

[Joshua 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 9:11</span></span>

When these tidings reached them, they were sent off by the elders (the
leaders of the republic) and the inhabitants of the land to meet the
Israelites, that they might offer them their service, and form an
alliance with them. In confirmation of this, they point to their dried
provisions, and their torn and mended skins and clothes.

[Joshua 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 9:14</span></span>

The Israelites suffered themselves to be taken in by this pretence. "The
men (the elders of Israel) took of their provisions; but they did not
ask the mouth of the Lord." Instead of inquiring the will of the Lord in
this matter through the Urim and Thummim of the high priest ([Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021)), they contented themselves with
taking some of the bread that was shown them, and tasting it; as if the
dry mouldy bread furnished a safe guarantee of the truth of the words of
these foreign ambassadors. Some commentators regard their taking of
their provisions as a sign of mutual friendship, or of the league which
they made; but in that case their eating with them would at any rate
have been mentioned. Among the Arabs, simply eating bread and salt with
a guest is considered a sign of peace and friendship.

[Jos 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#015)

So Joshua made (granted) them peace (vid., [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005)), and concluded a covenant with
them (להם, in their favour), to let them live; and the princes of the
congregation sware unto them. Letting them live is the only article of
the league that is mentioned, both because this was the main point, and
also with special reference to the fact that the Gibeonites, being
Canaanites, ought properly to have been destroyed. It is true that
Joshua and the princes of the congregation had not violated any express
command of God by doing this; for the only thing prohibited in the law
was making treaties with the Canaanites, which they did not suppose the
Gibeonites to be, whilst in [Deu
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#011), where wars with foreign nations
(not Canaanites) are referred to, permission is given to make peace with
them, so that all treaties with foreign nations are not forbidden. But
they had failed in this respect, that, trusting to the crafty words of
the Gibeonites, and to outward appearances only, they had forgotten
their attitude to the Lord their God who had promised to His
congregation, in all important matters, a direct revelation of His own
will.

[Joshua 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 9:16</span></span>

Three days after the treaty had been concluded, the Israelites
discovered that they had been deceived, and that their allies dwelt
among them (see [Jos 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007)). They set
out therefore to deal with the deceivers, and reached their towns
Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim on the third day.
"Chephirah, which was afterwards allotted to the tribe of Benjamin along
with Gibeon and Beeroth, and was still inhabited after the captivity
([Jos 18:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025); [Ezr
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#025); [Neh
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#029)), is to be seen in the ruins of
Kefir, an hour's journey to the east of Yalo, in the mountains, and
three hours to the west of Gibeon (see Rob. Bibl. Res. p. 146, and Van
de Velde, Memoir, pp. 303-4). Beeroth, Βηρώθ, according to Eusebius
(Onom. s. v.) a hamlet near Jerusalem, and seven miles on the road to
Nicopolis (it should read Neapolis), was in the tribe of Benjamin ([Sa2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#002)), and still exists in the large
village of Bireh, which is situated upon a mountain nine Roman miles to
the north of Jerusalem in a stony and barren district, and has still
several springs and a good well, besides the remains of a fine old
church of the time of the Crusades (see Rob. Pal. ii. pp. 130ff.;
Seetzen, R. ii. pp. 195-6). Kirjath-jearim, also called Kirjath-baal
([Jos 15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060)), Baalah ([Jos
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009)), and Baal-Jehuda ([Sa2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002)), was allotted to the tribe of
Judah. It stood upon the boundary between Judah and Benjamin ([Jos
15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060); [Jos
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#015)); and the ark remained there,
after it had been sent back by the Philistines, until the time of David
([Sa1 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002); [Sa2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002); [Ch1
13:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#005)). According to the Onom., s. v.
Καριαθιαρείμ and Βαάλ, it was nine or ten Roman miles from Jerusalem, on
the road to Diospolis (Lydda), and is probably to be seen in the present
Kuryet el Enab, a considerable village with a large number of olive
trees, figs, pomegranates, and vineyards, from the last of which the old
"town of the forests" has received the more modern name of "town of the
vine" (see Rob. Pal. ii. p. 335, and Bibl. Res. pp. 156-7; and Seetzen,
ii. p. 65). These towns, which formed one republic with Gibeon, and were
governed by elders, were at so short a distance from Gilgal (Jiljilia),
that the Israelites could reach it in one or two days. The expression
"on the third day" is not at variance with this; for it is not stated
that Israel took three days to march there, but simply that they arrived
there on the third day after receiving the intelligence of the arrival
of the ambassadors.

[Joshua 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 9:18</span></span>

"The Israelites smote them not," sc., with the edge of the sword,
"because the princes of the congregation had sworn to them," sc., to let
them live ([Jos 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#015)); but,
notwithstanding the murmuring of the congregation, they declared that
they might not touch them because of their oath. "This (sc., what we
have sworn) we will do to them, and let them live (החיה, inf. abs. with
special emphasis instead of the finite verb), lest wrath come upon us
because of the oath." Wrath (sc., of God), a judgment such as fell upon
Israel in the time of David, because Saul disregarded this oath and
sought to destroy the Gibeonites ([Sa2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001).).

But how could the elders of Israel consider themselves bound by their
oath to grant to the Gibeonites the preservation of life which had been
secured to them by the treaty they had made, when the very supposition
upon which the treaty was made, viz., that the Gibeonites did not belong
to the tribes of Canaan, was proved to be false, and the Gibeonites had
studiously deceived them by pretending that they had come from a very
distant land? As they had been absolutely forbidden to make any treaties
with the Canaanites, it might be supposed that, after the discovery of
the deception which had been practised upon them, the Israelitish rulers
would be under no obligation to observe the treaty which they had made
with the Gibeonites in full faith in the truth of their word. And no
doubt from the stand-point of strict justice this view appears to be a
right one. But the princes of Israel shrank back from breaking the oath
which, as is emphatically stated in [Jos
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#019), they had sworn by Jehovah the
God of Israel, not because they assumed, as Hauff supposes, "that an
oath simply regarded as an outward and holy transaction had an
absolutely binding force," but because they were afraid of bringing the
name of the God of Israel into contempt among the Canaanites, which they
would have done if they had broken the oath which they had sworn by this
God, and had destroyed the Gibeonites. They were bound to observe the
oath which they had once sworn, if only to prevent the sincerity of the
God by whom they had sworn from being rendered doubtful in the eyes of
the Gibeonites; but they were not justified in taking the oath. They had
done this without asking the mouth of Jehovah ([Jos
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#014)), and thus had sinned against the
Lord their God. But they could not repair this fault by breaking the
oath which they had thus imprudently taken, i.e., by committing a fresh
sin; for the violation of an oath is always sin, even when the oath has
been taken inconsiderately, and it is afterwards discovered that what
was sworn to was not in accordance with the will of God, and that an
observance of the oath will certainly be hurtful (vid., [Psa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004)).

(Note: "The binding power of an oath ought to be held so sacred among
us, that we should not swerve from our bond under any pretence of error,
even though we had been deceived: since the sacred name of God is of
greater worth than all the riches of the world. Even though a person
should have sworn therefore without sufficient consideration, no injury
or loss will release him from his oath." This is the opinion expressed
by Calvin with reference to [Psa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004);
yet for all that he regards the observance of their oath on the part of
the princes of Israel as a sin, because he limits this golden rule in
the most arbitrary manner to private affairs alone, and therefore
concludes that the Israelites were not bound to observe this "wily
treaty.")

By taking an oath to the ambassadors that they would let the Gibeonites
live, the princes of Israel had acted unconsciously in violation of the
command of God that they were to destroy the Canaanites. As soon
therefore as they discovered their error or their oversight, they were
bound to do all in their power to ward off from the congregation the
danger which might arise of their being drawn away to idolatry-the very
thing which the Lord had intended to avert by giving that command. If
this could by any possibility be done without violating their oath, they
were bound to do it for the sake of the name of the Lord by which they
swore; that is to say, while letting the Gibeonites live, it was their
duty to put them in such a position, that they could not possibly seduce
the Israelites to idolatry. And this the princes of Israel proposed to
do, by granting to the Gibeonites on the one hand the preservation of
their lives according to the oath they had taken, and on the other hand
by making them slaves of the sanctuary. That they acted rightly in this
respect, is evident from the fact that their conduct is never blamed
either by the historian or by the history, inasmuch as it is not stated
anywhere that the Gibeonites, after being made into temple slaves, held
out any inducement to the Israelites to join in idolatrous worship, and
still more from the fact, that at a future period God himself reckoned
the attempt of Saul to destroy the Gibeonites, in his false zeal for the
children of Israel, as an act of blood-guiltiness on the part of the
nation of Israel for which expiation must be made ([Sa2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001).), and consequently approved of
the observance of the oath which had been sworn to them, though without
thereby sanctioning the treaty itself.

[Joshua 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 9:21</span></span>

The princes declared again most emphatically, "They shall live." Thus
the Gibeonites became hewers of wood and drawers of water to the
congregation, as the princes had said to them, i.e., had resolved
concerning them. This resolution they communicated to the congregation
at the time, using the expression יחיוּ (let them live); but the
historian has passed this over at [Jos
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#021), and instead of mentioning the
resolution proceeds at once to describe its execution.

[Joshua 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 9:22</span></span>

Joshua then summoned the Gibeonites, charged them with their deceit, and
pronounced upon them the curse of eternal servitude: "There shall not be
cut off from you a servant," i.e., ye shall never cease to be servants,
ye shall remain servants for ever (vid., [Sa2
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029); [Kg1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#004)), "and that as hewers of wood and
drawers of waters for our God's house." This is a fuller definition of
the expression "for all the congregation" in [Jos
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#021). The Gibeonites were to perform
for the congregation the slaves' labour of hewing wood and drawing water
for the worship of the sanctuary-a duty which was performed, according
to [Deu 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010), by the lowest classes
of people. In this way the curse of Noah upon Canaan ([Gen
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025)) was literally fulfilled upon the
Hivites of the Gibeonitish republic.

[Joshua 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 9:24</span></span>

The Gibeonites offered this excuse for their conduct, that having heard
of the command of God which had been issued through Moses, that all the
Canaanites were to be destroyed ([Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001); [Deu
20:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016)), they had feared greatly for
their lives, and readily submitted to the resolution which Joshua made
known to them.

[Joshua 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 9:26</span></span>

"And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the
children of Israel, that they slew them not. He made them hewers of wood
and drawers of water for the congregation, and indeed for the altar of
the Lord," (assigning them) "to the place which God would choose," viz.,
for the altar. אלהמּקום (to the place) is grammatically dependent upon
ויּתּנם (he "gave them"). It by no means follows, however, that Joshua
sent them there at that very time, but simply that he sentenced them to
service at the altar in the place which would be chosen for the
sanctuary. From the words "unto this day," it no doubt follows, on the
one hand, that the account was written after the fact had taken place;
but, on the other hand, it also follows from the future יבחר (should, or
shall choose), that it was written before the place was definitely
fixed, and therefore before the building of Solomon's temple.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 10](jos010)

</div>
