<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos021)  [Next](jos023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

[Joshua 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 22:1</span></span>

After the conquest and division of the land, Joshua sent the auxiliaries
of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh back to their homes,
with a laudatory acknowledgment of the help they had given to their
brethren, and a paternal admonition to adhere faithfully to the Lord and
His law, and with a parting blessing ([Jos
22:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)). By the expression "then
Joshua called," etc., the occurrence described in this chapter is placed
in a general manner after the conquest and subjugation of Canaan, though
not of necessity at the close of the distribution of the land. As the
summons to these tribes to go with their brethren into Canaan, to assist
them in the war, formed the commencement of Joshua's plans for the
conquest of Canaan ([Jos 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#012).), their
dismission to their home very properly forms the conclusion to the
history of the conquest of this land by the Israelites. We might
therefore assume, without in any way contradicting the words of the
text, that these auxiliaries had been dismissed immediately after the
war was ended. Even in that case, the account of their dismission would
stand in its proper place, "since it was only right that the history
itself, which relates to the conquest and possession of the land, should
be fully completed before any other narratives, or any casual
occurrences which took place, were introduced to break the thread"
(Lightfoot, App. i. p. 42). On the other hand, however, the circumstance
that the two tribes and a half were dismissed from Shiloh, where the
tribes assembled for the first time during the casting of the lots,
favours the conclusion that the dismission did not take place till after
the lots had been cast; that is to say, contemporaneously with the
advance of the other tribes into their possessions.

[Jos 22:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#002)

Joshua acknowledged that they had done all that they were under any
obligation to do towards Moses and himself ([Num
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020).; [Jos
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016)). "Kept the charge of the
commandment," i.e., observed what had to be observed in relation to the
commandment of the Lord (see at [Lev
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035) and [Gen
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005)).

[Jos 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#004)

[Jos 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#004) points back to [Jos
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#015). "Unto your tents," for to your
homes, - an antiquated form of expression, as in [Deu
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#007); [Jdg
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#008), etc.

[Jos 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#005)

Remembering, however, the changeableness of the human heart, Joshua
appends to the acknowledgment of their fidelity in the performance of
their duty the pressing admonition, to continue still to observe the law
of Moses faithfully, to walk in the ways of the Lord and serve Him with
the whole heart, which was simply a repetition of what Moses had
impressed in a fatherly way upon the hearts of the people (see [Deu
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#004), [Deu
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029); [Deu
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005); [Deu
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012); [Deu
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013), etc.).

[Jos 22:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#006)

Thus Joshua dismissed them with blessings. - In [Jos
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#007), the writer, for the sake of
clearness, refers again to the fact that only half of Manasseh had
received its inheritance from Moses in Bashan, whereas the other had
received its inheritance through Joshua on the west of the Jordan (cf.
[Jos 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#003), and [Jos
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#007)). To us such repetitions appear
superfluous; but they are closely connected with the copious breadth of
the early historical style of the Hebrews, which abounded in
repetitions. The verb נתן (gave) wants its object, אחזּתו or נחלתו,
which may easily be supplied from the context. This interpolation
involved a further repetition of the fact, that Joshua also dismissed
them (the Manassites of the other side) with a blessing, in order that
the words might be appended with which Joshua dismissed the two tribes
and a half to their homes, namely, the admonition to share the rich
booty which they had accumulated with their brethren at home, in
accordance with the instructions which Moses had given them with
reference to the war with the Midianites ([Num
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#025).).

[Joshua 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 22:9</span></span>

On the way home, when the two tribes and a half had reached the border
of Canaan, they built a large conspicuous altar in the district of the
Jordan, in the land of Canaan, i.e., on this side of the Jordan: "a
great altar to see to," i.e., one which caught the eye on account of its
size, since it was to serve for a memorial ([Jos
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024).). The definition appended to
Shiloh, "in the land of Canaan" ([Jos
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009)), serves to bring out the
antithesis "into the land of Gilead," by which we are to understand the
whole of the country to the east of the Jordan, as in [Num
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029); [Deu
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001); [Jdg
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017), etc. נאחז, both in the form and
meaning the same as in [Num 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#030),
made possessors, i.e., settled down. היּרדּן גּלילות, the circles of the
Jordan, is synonymous with היּרדּן כּכּר in [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010), and signifies that portion of
the Ghor which was upon the western side of the Jordan.

[Joshua 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 22:11</span></span>

The Israelites (on this side) heard that the tribes in question had
built the altar "opposite to the land of Canaan" (lit. in the face or in
front of the land of Canaan), אל־אבר, "at the opposite region of the
children of Israel" (two descriptions which may be explained on the
supposition that the name of Canaan is used in a restricted sense, the
valley of the Jordan being expressly excepted, and Canaan considered as
only extending to the valley of the Jordan). When they heard this, the
whole congregation (in its heads and representatives) assembled at
Shiloh, to go up, i.e., with the intention of going, to make war against
them. The congregation supposed that the altar had been built as a place
for sacrifice, and therefore regarded it as a wicked violation of the
commandment of God with regard to the unity of the sacrificial altar
([Lev 17:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008); [Deu
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#004).), which they ought to punish
according to the law in [Deu 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013).
This zeal was perfectly justifiable, and even praiseworthy, as the
altar, even if not erected as a place for sacrifice, might easily be
abused to that purpose, and thus become an occasion of sin to the whole
nation. In any case, the two tribes and a half ought not to have erected
such a building without the consent of Joshua or of the high priest.

(Note: "We know how sternly the law prohibited the use of two altars:
because it was the will of God that His worship should be restricted to
one place. When, therefore, from the very appearance it could not fail
to occur to the mind of any one that they were establishing a second
altar, who would not have condemned them as guilty of sacrilege, for
introducing rites and ceremonies at variance with the law of God? And
since it might so naturally be regarded as a wicked deed, they ought
certainly to have consulted their brethren in so grave and important a
matter; and it was especially wrong to pass by the high priest, when the
will of God might have been learned from his lips. They were deserving
of blame, therefore, because they acted as if they had been alone in the
world, and did not consider what offence might easily arise from the
novelty of their proceedings." - Calvin.)

[Joshua 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 22:13</span></span>

The congregation therefore sent Phinehas, the son of the high priest and
his presumptive successor in this office, with ten princes, one from
each tribe (not the tribe-princes, but a head of the fathers' houses of
the families of Israel), to Gilead, to the two tribes and a half, to
call them to account for building the altar.

[Joshua 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 22:16</span></span>

Assuming at the outset that the altar was intended for a second place of
sacrifice in opposition to the command of God, the delegates, with
Phinehas no doubt as their speaker, began by reproaching them for
falling away from the Lord. "What faithlessness is this (מעל: see at
[Lev 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015)) that ye have committed
against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from Jehovah, in that
ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against
Jehovah?" מרד (to rebel) is stronger than מעל.

[Joshua 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 22:17</span></span>

To show the greatness of the sin through apostasy from the Lord, the
speaker reminds them of two previous acts of sin on the part of the
nation, which had brought severe judgments upon the congregation. "Is
there too little for us in the iniquity of Peor (i.e., with Peor, or
through the worship of Peor, [Num
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003)), from which we have not cleansed
ourselves till this day, and there came the plague upon the congregation
of Jehovah?" את־עון is an accusative: see Ges. 117, 2; Ewald, 277, d.
That plague, of which 24,000 Israelites died, was stayed through the
zeal of Phinehas for the honour of the Lord ([Num
25:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004), [Num
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011)). The guilt connected with the
worship of Peor had thereby been avenged upon the congregation, and the
congregation itself had been saved from any further punishment in
consequence of the sin. When Phinehas, therefore, affirmed that the
congregation had not yet been cleansed from the crime, he did not mean
that they were still bearing or suffering from the punishment of that
crime, but that they were not yet cleansed from that sin, inasmuch as
many of them were still attached to idolatry in their hearts, even if
they had hitherto desisted from it outwardly from fear of the infliction
of fresh judgment.

[Joshua 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 22:18</span></span>

"And to-day ye turn away from the Lord again," and are about to bring
His wrath upon the whole congregation again through a fresh rebellion.

[Joshua 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 22:19</span></span>

"And truly," the speaker continued, "if the land of your possession
should be unclean," sc., so that you think it necessary to have an altar
in the neighbourhood to expiate your sins and wipe away your
uncleanness, "pass over into the land of Jehovah's possession, where His
dwelling-place stands, and settle in the midst of us ('settle,' as in
[Gen 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#010)); but do not rebel against
Jehovah nor against us, by building an altar beside the (one) altar of
Jehovah our God." מרד is construed first of all with בּ, and then with
the accusative; the only other place in which the latter occurs is Job.
[Jos 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#013).

[Joshua 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 22:20</span></span>

He finally reminded them of the sin of Achan, how that had brought the
wrath of God upon the whole congregation (Josh 7); and, moreover, Achan
was not the only man who had perished on account of the sin, but
thirty-six men had fallen on account of it at the first attack upon Ai
([Jos 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005)). The allusion to this fact
is to be understood as an argument a minori ad majus, as Masius has
shown. "If Achan did not perish alone when he committed sacrilege, but
God was angry with the whole congregation, what think ye will be the
consequence if ye, so great a number, commit so grievous a sin against
God?"

[Joshua 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 22:21</span></span>

In utter amazement at the suspicion expressed by the delegates of the
congregation, the two tribes and a half affirm with a solemn oath, that
it never entered into their minds to build an altar as a place of
sacrifice, to fall away from Jehovah. The combination of the three names
of God-El, the strong one; Elohim, the Supreme Being to be feared; and
Jehovah, the truly existing One, the covenant God ([Jos
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#022)), - serves to strengthen the
invocation of God, as in [Psa 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001);
and this is strengthened still further by the repetition of these three
names. God knows, and let Israel also know, sc., what they intended, and
what they have done. The אם which follows is the usual particle used in
an oath. "Verily (it was) not in rebellion, nor in apostasy from
Jehovah," sc., that this was done, or that we built the altar. "Mayst
Thou not help us to-day," sc., if we did it in rebellion against God. An
appeal addressed immediately to God in the heat of the statement, and
introduced in the midst of the asseveration, which was meant to remove
all doubt as to the truth of their declaration. The words which follow
in [Jos 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#023), "that we have built,"
etc., continue the oath: "If we have done this, to build us an altar, to
turn away from the Lord, or to offer thereon burnt-offering,
meat-offering, or peace-offering, may Jehovah himself require it (דּרשׁ,
as in [Deu 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019); cf. [Sa1
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#016)). Another earnest parenthetical
adjuration, as the substance of the oath, is continued in [Jos
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024). "But truly (לא ואם, with an
affirmative signification) from anxiety, for a reason (lit. on account
of a thing) have we done this, thinking (לאמר, since we thought) in time
to come your sons might say to our sons, What have ye to do with
Jehovah, the God of Israel?" i.e., He does not concern you; He is our
God. "Jehovah has made the Jordan a boundary between us and your sons;
ye have no part in Jehovah. Thus your sons might make our sons cease to
fear Jehovah," i.e., might make them desist from the worship of Jehovah
(for the infinitive form ירא instead of the abbreviated form לרא used in
[Sa1 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#029), there are analogies in יצק
in [Eze 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#003), and לישׁון, [Ecc
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011), whereas יראה is the only form
used in the Pentateuch). There was some reason for this anxiety. For,
inasmuch as in all the promises and laws Canaan alone (the land on this
side of the Jordan, [Num 34:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#001)) is
always mentioned as the land which Jehovah would give to His people for
their inheritance, it was quite a possible thing that at some future
time the false conclusion might be drawn from this, that only the tribes
who dwelt in Canaan proper were the true people of Jehovah.

[Joshua 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 22:26</span></span>

"So we thought, we will make ourselves to build an altar (an expression
derived from the language of ordinary life, for 'we will build ourselves
an altar'), not for burnt-offerings and slain-offerings; but it shall be
a witness between us and you, and between our generations after us, that
we may perform the service of Jehovah before His face (i.e., before the
tabernacle in which Jehovah was enthroned), with our burnt-offerings,
slain-offerings, and peace-offerings," - in order, as they repeat in
[Jos 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#027) from [Jos
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024), [Jos
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#025), that they might not be denied a
part in Jehovah in time to come. For if it should so happen in time to
come, that this should be said to them and to their descendants, they
would say (or reply), "Behold the copy of the altar of Jehovah, which
our fathers made, not for burnt-offerings," etc. ([Jos
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#028), as in [Jos
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#026), [Jos
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#027)). For this reason they had built
the altar according to the pattern of the altar before the tabernacle,
and that not in their own land, but on the western side of the Jordan,
where the dwelling-place of Jehovah was standing, as a witness that they
worshipped one and the same God with the tribes on this side.

[Joshua 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 22:29</span></span>

The speakers conclude with an expression of horror at the thought of
rebelling against Jehovah. ממּנּוּ לנוּ חלילה, "far be it from us away
from Him (ממּנּוּ = מיהוה, [Sa1 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007);
[Sa1 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#011); [Kg1
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#003)), to rebel against Jehovah," etc.

[Joshua 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 22:30</span></span>

This explanation pleased the delegates of the congregation, so that
Phinehas bore this testimony to the tribes on the east of the Jordan:
"Now (to-day) we perceive that Jehovah is in the midst of us; because
(אשׁר, quod, as in [Gen 31:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#049), etc.)
ye have not committed this unfaithfulness towards Jehovah, since (אז,
then, if ye had only this intention) ye have saved the children of
Israel out of the hand of Jehovah," i.e., preserved them from His
judgments.

[Joshua 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 22:32</span></span>

They then returned to Canaan and informed the congregation. And the
thing pleased them, so that they praised the Lord, sc., for having kept
their brethren on the other side from rebellion, and they thought no
more of going to war against them, or laying waste the land of the
tribes on the east of the Jordan.

[Joshua 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jos 22:34</span></span>

The Reubenites and Gadites (half Manasseh is omitted in [Jos
22:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#033), [Jos
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#034), for the sake of brevity) called
the altar "witness is it between us that Jehovah is God" (כּי introduces
the words). This is at once a name and an explanation, namely in this
sense: they gave the altar the name of "witness between us," because it
was to be a witness that they also acknowledged and worshipped Jehovah
as the true God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 23](jos023)

</div>
