<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos004)  [Next](jos006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 5:0</span></span>

Circumcision of the People, and Celebration of the Passover at Gilgal -
[Jos 5:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

When the Israelites had trodden the soil of Canaan, Joshua began
immediately to make arrangements for conquering the land, and destroying
its inhabitants. As the Lord had only promised his His assistance on
condition that the law given by Moses was faithfully observed ([Jos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007).), it was necessary that he should
proceed first of all to impose it as an inviolable obligation, not only
upon himself, but also upon all the people entrusted to his charge, to
fulfil all the precepts of the law, many of which could not be carried
out during the journey through the wilderness, whilst many others had
only been given with special reference to the time when the people
should be dwelling in Canaan. The first duty which devolved upon him in
this respect, was to perform the rite of circumcision upon the
generation that had been born in the wilderness, and had grown up
without circumcision, so that the whole congregation might be included
in the covenant of the Lord, and be able to keep the passover, which was
to be celebrated in a few days in the manner prescribed by the law.

[Joshua 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 5:1</span></span>

Circumcision of the People. - [Jos
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001). Whilst, on the one hand, the
approach of the passover rendered it desirable that the circumcision of
those who had remained uncircumcised should be carried out without
delay, on the other hand the existing circumstances were most favourable
for the performance of this covenant duty, inasmuch as the miracle
wrought in connection with the passage through the Jordan had thrown the
Canaanites into such alarm that there was no fear of their attacking the
Israelitish camp. To indicate this, the impression produced by this
miracle is described, namely, that all the kings of Canaan had been
thrown into despair in consequence. All the tribes of Canaan are grouped
together here under the names of Amorites and Canaanites, the tribes in
possession of the mountains being all called Amorites, and those who
lived by the sea, i.e., by the shore of the Mediterranean, Canaanites
(vid., [Jos 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004)): for the Amorites
upon the mountains were the strongest of all the Canaanitish tribes at
that time (see at [Gen 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#016)); whilst
the name Canaanites, i.e., the bent one (see at [Gen
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025)), was peculiarly appropriate to
the inhabitants of the lowlands, who relied upon trade more than upon
warfare, and were probably dependent upon the strong and mighty
Amorites. The application of the expression "beyond Jordan" (Eng. Ver.
"on the side of") to the country on this side, may be explained on the
ground that the historian was still writing from the stand-point of the
crossing. But in order to prevent any misunderstanding, he adds "towards
the west," as he had previously added "towards the sunrise," in [Jos
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#015), when speaking of the land on the
eastern side. That we have the report of an eye-witness here is evident
from the words, "until we were passed over:" the reading of the Keri,
עברם (till they were passed over), is nothing but an arbitrary and
needless conjecture, and ought not to have been preferred by Bleek and
others, notwithstanding the fact that the ancient versions and some MSS
also adopt it.

[Jos 5:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#002)

At that time (sc., the time of their encampment at Gilgal, and when the
Canaanites were in despair) Joshua had the people "circumcised again,
the second time." The word שׁנית (a second time) is only added to give
emphasis to שׁוּב, or as an explanation of it, and is not to be pressed,
either here or in [Isa 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011), as
though it denoted the repetition of the same act in every respect, i.e.,
of an act of circumcision which had once before been performed upon the
whole nation. It merely expresses this meaning, "circumcise the people
again, or the second time, as it was formerly circumcised" (i.e., a
circumcised people, not in the same manner in which it once before had
circumcision performed upon it). When the people came out of Egypt they
were none of them uncircumcised, as distinctly affirmed in [Jos
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#005); but during their journey through
the wilderness circumcision had been neglected, so that now the nation
was no longer circumcised, and therefore it was necessary that
circumcision should be performed upon the nation as a whole, by
circumcising all who were uncircumcised. The opinion of Masius and O. v.
Gerlach, that the expression "the second time" refers to the
introduction of circumcision, when Abraham was circumcised with all his
house, is very far-fetched. צרים חרבות are not "sharp knives," but
"stone knives," which were used according to ancient custom (see at [Exo
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)), literally knives of rocks (the
plural zurim is occasioned by charboth, as in [Num
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#032), etc.; the singular might have
been used: see Ewald, 270, c.).

[Jos 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#003)

Joshua had the circumcision performed "at the hill of the foreskins," as
the place was afterwards called from the fact that the foreskins were
buried there.

[Jos 5:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#004)

The reason for the circumcision of the whole nation was the following:
all the fighting men who came out of Egypt had died in the wilderness by
the way; for all the people that came out were circumcised; but all that
were born in the wilderness during the journey had not been circumcised
(ממּצרים בּצאתם, on their coming out of Egypt, which only came to an end
on their arrival in Canaan). They walked forty years in the wilderness;
till all the people - that is to say, all the fighting men - who came
out of Egypt were consumed, because they had not hearkened to the voice
of the Lord, and had been sentenced by the Lord to die in the wilderness
([Jos 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#006); cf. [Num
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#026)., [Num
26:64-65](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#064), and [Deu
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#014)). But He (Jehovah) set up
their sons in their place, i.e., He caused them to take their place; and
these Joshua circumcised (i.e., had them circumcised), for they were
uncircumcised, because they had not been circumcised by the way. This
explains the necessity for a general circumcision of all the people, but
does not state the reason why those who were born in the wilderness had
not been circumcised. All that is affirmed in [Jos
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#005) and [Jos
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#007) is, that this had not taken place
"by the way." The true reason may be gathered from [Jos
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#006), if we compare the statement made
in this verse, "for the children of Israel walked forty years in the
wilderness, till all the men that were capable of bearing arms were
consumed ... unto whom the Lord sware that He would not show them the
land promised to the fathers," with the sentence pronounced by God to
which these words refer, viz., [Num
14:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029). The Lord is then said to
have sworn that all the men of twenty years old and upwards, who had
murmured against Him, should perish in the wilderness; and though their
sons should enter the promised land, they too should pasture, i.e., lead
a nomad life, for forty years in the wilderness, and bear the apostasy
of their fathers, till their bodies had fallen in the desert. This
clearly means, that not only was the generation that came out of Egypt
sentenced to die in the wilderness because of its rebellion against the
Lord, and therefore rejected by God, but the sons of this generation had
to bear the whoredom, i.e., the apostasy of their fathers from the Lord,
for the period of forty years, until the latter had been utterly
consumed; that is to say, during all this time they were to endure the
punishment of rejection along with their fathers: with this difference
alone, that the sons were not to die in the wilderness, but were to be
brought into the promised land after their fathers were dead. The
sentence upon the fathers, that their bodies should fall in the desert,
was unquestionably a rejection of them on the part of God, an abrogation
of the covenant with them. This punishment was also to be borne by their
sons; and hence the reason why those who were born in the desert by the
way were not circumcised. As the covenant of the Lord with the fathers
was abrogated, the sons of the rejected generation were not to receive
the covenant sign of circumcision. Nevertheless this abrogation of the
covenant with the generation that had been condemned, was not a complete
dissolution of the covenant relation, so far as the nation as a whole
was concerned, since the whole nation had not been rejected, but only
the generation of men that were capable of bearing arms when they came
out of Egypt, whilst the younger generation which had grown up in the
desert was to be delivered from the ban, which rested upon it as well,
and brought into the land of Canaan when the time of punishment had
expired. For this reason the Lord did not withdraw from the nation every
sign of His grace; but in order that the consciousness might still be
sustained in the young and rising generation, that the covenant would be
set up again with them when the time of punishment had expired, He left
them not only the presence of the pillar of cloud and fire, but also the
manna and other tokens of His grace, the continuance of which therefore
cannot be adduced as an argument against our view of the time of
punishment as a temporary suspension of the covenant.

But if this was the reason for the omission of circumcision,

(Note: This reason was admitted even by Calvin, and has been well
supported by Hengstenberg (Diss. ii. pp. 13ff.). The arguments adduced
by Kurtz in opposition to this view are altogether unfounded. We have
already observed that the reason for the suspension is not given in [Jos
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#007); and the further remark, that in
[Jos 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#005) ("all the people that were
born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them
they had not circumcised") the book of Joshua dates the suspension not
from the sentence of rejection, but expressly and undoubtedly (?) from
the departure from Egypt, has no force whatever, unless we so press the
word all ("all the people that were born in the desert") as not to allow
of the slightest exception. But this is decidedly precluded by the fact,
that we cannot imagine it possible for God to have established His
covenant with the people at a time when they had neglected the
fundamental law of the covenant, the transgression of which was
threatened with destruction ([Gen
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014)), by neglecting to circumcise
all the children who had been born between the departure from Egypt and
the conclusion of the covenant at Sinai. We are also prevented from
pressing the little word "all" in this manner by the evident meaning of
the words before us. In [Jos 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#004) and
[Jos 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#005) the Israelites are divided
into two classes: (1) All the people that came out of Egypt and were
circumcised; and (2) All the people that were born in the desert and
were uncircumcised. The first of these died in the wilderness, the
second came to Canaan and were circumcised by Joshua at Gilgal. But if
we should press the word "all" in these clauses, it would follow that
all the male children who were under twenty years of age at the time of
the exodus, either died in the desert or were circumcised a second time
at Gilgal. Lastly, it does not follow from [Jos
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#006) that the circumcision was
suspended for exactly forty years; for the forty years during which
Israel journeyed in the desert until the murmuring generation was
consumed, are to be interpreted by [Num
14:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#033), and amounted,
chronologically considered, to no more than thirty-eight years and a few
months. On the other hand, the other very general view which Kurtz
adopts - namely, that the circumcision was omitted during the journey
through the desert on account of the hardships connected with
travelling, and because it was impossible to have regard to particular
families who might wish for longer rest on account of their children who
had just been circumcised, and were suffering from the wound, just at
the time when they had to decamp and journey onward, and they could not
well be left behind - throws but little light upon the subject, as the
assumption that the people were constantly wandering about for forty
years is altogether an unfounded one. The Israelites were not always
wandering about: not only did they stay at Sinai for eleven whole
months, but even after that they halted for weeks and months at the
different places of encampment, when they might have circumcised their
children without the slightest danger of their suffering from the
wound.)

it did not commence till the second year of their journey, viz., at the
time when the murmuring nation was rejected at Kadesh (Num 14); so that
by "all the people that were born in the wilderness" we are to
understand those who were born after that time, and during the last
thirty-eight years of their wanderings, just as "all the people that
came out of Egypt" are to be understood as signifying only those men who
were twenty years old and upwards when they came out. Consequently
circumcision was suspended as long as the nation was under the ban of
the divine sentence pronounced upon it at Kadesh. This sentence was
exhausted when they crossed the brook Zared and entered the country of
the Amorites (compare [Deu 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#014) with
[Num 21:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#012)). Why, then, was not the
circumcision performed during the encampment in the steppes of Moab
either before or after the numbering, since all those who had been
sentenced to die in the wilderness were already dead ([Num
26:65](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#065))? The different answers which
have been given to this question are some of them wrong, and others
incomplete. For example, the opinion held by some, that the actual
reason was that the forty years had not yet expired, is incorrect (see
[Deu 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#014)). And the uncertainty how
long they would remain in the steppes of Moab cannot be adduced as an
explanation, as there were no circumstances existing that were likely to
occasion a sudden and unexpected departure from Shittim. The reason why
Moses did not renew the circumcision before the end of his own life, is
to be sought for in the simple fact that he would not undertake an act
of such importance without an express command from the Lord, especially
as he was himself under sentence to die without entering the promised
land. But the Lord did not enjoin the renewal of the covenant sign
before Israel had been conducted into the promised land, because He saw
fit first of all to incline the hearts of the people to carry out His
commandment through this magnificent proof of His grace. It is the rule
of divine grace first to give and then to ask. As the Lord did not
enjoin circumcision as a covenant duty upon Abraham himself till He had
given him a practical proof of His grace by leading him to Canaan, and
by repeated promises of a numerous posterity, and of the eventual
possession of the land; and just as He did not give the law to the
children of Israel at Sinai till He had redeemed them with a mighty arm
from the bondage of Egypt, and borne them on eagles' wings, and brought
them to Himself, and had thereby made them willing to promise gladly to
fulfil all that He should say to them as His covenant nation; so now He
did not require the renewal of circumcision, which involved as the
covenant sign the observance of the whole law, till He had given His
people practical proofs, through the help afforded in the defeat of
Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, and in the miraculous division
of the waters of Jordan, that He was able to remove all the obstacles
that might lie in the way of the fulfilment of His promises, and give
them the promised land for their inheritance, as He had sworn to their
fathers.

[Jos 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#008)

When the rite of circumcision had been performed upon them all, the
people remained quietly in the camp till those who were circumcised had
recovered. "They abode in their places," i.e., sat still as they were,
without attempting anything. חיה, to revive ([Gen
45:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#027); [Job
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014)), or recover ([Kg2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002); [Kg2
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#008), etc.). The circumcision of the
people could not be performed earlier than the day after the crossing of
the Jordan, i.e., according to [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019), not earlier than the 11th day of
the first month. Now, as the passover was to be kept, and actually was
kept, on the 14th ([Jos 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010)), the two
accounts are said to be irreconcilable, and the account of the
circumcision has been set down as a later and unhistorical legend. But
the objections made to the historical credibility of this account -
viz., that the suffering consequent upon circumcision made a person ill
for several days, and according to [Gen
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025) was worst on the third day, so
that the people could not have kept the passover on that day, and also
that the people could not possibly have been all circumcised on one day
- are founded upon false assumptions. In the latter, for example, the
number of persons to be circumcised is estimated, most absurdly, at a
million; whereas, according to the general laws of population, the whole
of the male population of Israel, which contained only 601,730 of twenty
years of age and upwards, besides 23,000 Levites of a month old and
upwards, when the census was taken a short time before in the steppes of
Moab, could not amount to more than a million in all, and of these
between 280,000 and 330,000 were thirty-eight years old, and therefore,
having been born before the sentence was pronounced upon the nation at
Kadesh, and for the most part before the exodus from Egypt, had been
already circumcised, so that there were only 670,000, or at the most
720,000, to be circumcised now. Consequently the proportion between the
circumcised and uncircumcised was one to three or three and a half; and
the operation could therefore be completed without any difficulty in the
course of a single day. As regards the consequences of this operation,
[Gen 34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025) by no means proves that the
pain was most acute on the third day; and even it this really were the
case, it would not prevent the keeping of the passover, as the lambs
could have been killed and prepared by the 280,000 or 330,000
circumcised men; and even those who were still unwell could join in the
meal, since it was only Levitical uncleanness, and not disease or pain,
which formed a legal impediment to this ([Num
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010).).

(Note: For the basis upon which this computation rests, see Keil's
Commentary on Joshua, p. 139 (Eng. trans. 1857).)

But if there were about 300,000 men of the age of forty and upwards who
could not only perform the rite of circumcision upon their sons or
younger brother, but, if necessary, were able at any moment to draw the
sword, there was no reason whatever for their being afraid of an attack
on the part of the Canaanites, even if the latter had not been paralyzed
by the miraculous crossing of the Jordan.

[Jos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009)

When the circumcision was completed, the Lord said to Joshua, "This day
have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you." "The reproach of
Egypt" is the reproach proceeding from Egypt, as "the reproach of Moab,"
in [Zep 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008), is the reproach heaped
upon Israel by Moab (cf. [Isa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007);
[Eze 16:57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#057)). We are not to understand
by this the Egyptian bondage, or the misery which still cleaved to the
Israelites from Egypt, and the still further misery which they had
suffered during their journey, on account of the displeasure of Jehovah
(Knobel), but the reproach involved in the thoughts and sayings of the
Egyptians, that Jehovah had brought the Israelites out of Egypt to
destroy them in the desert ([Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012); [Num
14:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#013); [Deu
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#028)), which rested upon Israel as
long as it was condemned to wander restlessly about and to die in the
wilderness. This reproach was rolled away from Israel with the
circumcision of the people at Gilgal, inasmuch as this act was a
practical declaration of the perfect restoration of the covenant, and a
pledge that the Lord would now give them the land of Canaan for their
inheritance. From this occurrence the place where the Israelites were
encamped received the name of Gilgal, viz., "rolling away," from גּלל,
to roll. This explanation and derivation of the name is not to be
pronounced incorrect and unhistorical, simply because it merely
preserves the subordinate idea of rolling, instead of the fuller idea of
the rolling away of reproach. For the intention was not to form a word
which should comprehend the whole affair with exhaustive minuteness, but
simply to invent a striking name which should recall the occurrence,
like the name Tomi, of which Ovid gives the following explanation: Inde
Tomos dictus locus est quia fertur in illo membra soror fratris
consecuisse sui (Trist. iii. 9, 33). Knobel is wrong in maintaining that
the name should be explained in a different way, and that this Gilgal is
the same as Geliloth (circles) in [Jos
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#017) (see the explanation given at
[Jos 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007)). The word gilgal, formed
from גלל, to roll, signifies primarily rolling, then a wheel ([Isa
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#028)); and if by possibility it
signifies orbis also, like גּליל, this is neither the original nor the
only meaning of the word. According to Josephus (Ant. [Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001), [Jos
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004)), Israel encamped fifty stadia,
i.e., two hours and a half, from the Jordan, and ten stadia, or half an
hour, from Jericho-that is to say, in the plain or steppe between
Jericho and the Jordan, in an uninhabited and uncultivated spot, which
received the name of Gilgal for the first time, as the place where the
Israelites were encamped. No town or village ever existed there, either
at the period in question or at any later time. The only other places in
which this Gilgal can be shown to be evidently referred to, are [Mic
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005) and [Sa2
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#006), [Sa2
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#041); and the statement made by
Eusebius in the Onom. s. v. Galgala, δείκνυται ὁ τόπος ἔρημος ὡς ἱερὸς
θρησκευόμενος, which Jerome paraphrases thus, "Even to the present day a
deserted place is pointed out at the second mile from Jericho, which is
held in amazing reverence by the inhabitants of that region," by no
means proves the existence of a town or village there in the time of the
Israelites. Consequently it is not to be wondered at, that in spite of
repeated search, Robinson has not been able to discover any remains of
Gilgal to the east of Jericho, or to meet with any Arab who could tell
him of such a name in this locality (see Rob. Pal. ii. pp. 287-8 and
278). On the situation of the Gilgal mentioned in [Jos
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#006); [Jos
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#006), etc., see at [Jos
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#035).

[Joshua 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 5:10</span></span>

The Passover at Gilgal. - When the whole nation had been received again
into covenant with the Lord by circumcision, they kept the passover,
which had no doubt been suspended from the time that they left Sinai
([Num 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001).), on the 14th of the month
(Nisan), in the evening (according to the law in [Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006), [Exo
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018); [Lev
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); [Num
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#016); [Deu
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#006)). The next day, i.e., on the
16th, or the day after the first feast-day, they ate unleavened loaves
and parched corn ("roasted grains," see at [Lev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014)) of the produce of the land
(עבוּר,

(Note: Rendered "old corn" in the Eng. version.)

which only occurs in [Jos 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#011) and
[Jos 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012), is synonymous with תּבוּאה

(Note: Rendered fruit in our version.)

in [Jos 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012)), i.e., corn that had
grown in the land of Canaan, as the manna entirely ceased from this day
forwards. "The morrow after the passover" is used in [Num
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#003) for the 15th Nisan; but here it
must be understood as signifying the 16th, as the produce of the land,
of which they ate not only on that day, but, according to [Jos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012), throughout that year, cannot
mean the corn of the previous year, but the produce of this same year,
i.e., the new corn, and they were not allowed to eat any of that till it
had been sanctified to the Lord by the presentation of the wave sheaf on
the second day of the passover ([Lev
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#011)). According to [Lev
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#011), the presentation was to take
place on the day after the Sabbath, i.e., the first day of the feast of
Mazzoth, which was kept as a Sabbath, or the 16th of Nisan, as the seven
days' feast of Mazzoth commenced on the 15th ([Lev
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#006); [Num
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#017)). "On the morrow after the
passover" is the same as "on the morrow after the Sabbath" in [Lev
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#011), the term passover being used
here not in its original and more restricted sense, in which it applies
exclusively to the observance of the paschal meal, which took place on
the evening of the 14th, and is expressly distinguished from the seven
days' feast of Mazzoth ([Exo 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023),
[Exo 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027); [Lev
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); [Num
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#016)), but in the broader sense,
which we have already met with in [Deu
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002), in which the name was gradually
extended to the whole of the seven days' feast. The writer assumed that
the facts themselves were already well known from the Mosaic law, and
therefore did not think it necessary to give any fuller explanation.
Moreover, the words, "they did eat of the fruit of the land," etc., are
not to be understood as signifying that they began to eat unleavened
bread for the first time on the 16th Nisan (they had already eaten is as
an accompaniment to the paschal lamb); but unleavened bread of the
produce of the land, the green corn of that year, was what they ate for
the first time on that day. Especial prominence is given to this by the
words, "in the self-same day," because not only did the eating of the
new corn commence on that day, but from that day forward "the children
of Israel had manna no more." This statement is evidently related to
[Exo 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035), and must be understood,
according to that passage, as merely signifying, that on that day the
gift of the manna entirely ceased (see Pentateuch, pp. 366ff.).

[Joshua 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 5:13</span></span>

Appearance and Message of the Angel of the Lord. - [Jos
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013). When Joshua was by Jericho,
בּיריחו, lit., in Jericho (בּ expressing immediate proximity, the
entrance as it were into some other object, vid., Ewald, 217), - that is
to say, inside it in thought, meditating upon the conquest of it-he saw,
on lifting up his eyes, a man standing before him with a drawn sword in
his hand; and on going up to him, and asking, "Dost thou belong to us or
to our enemies?" he received this reply: "Nay (לא is not to be altered
into לו, which is the reading adopted in the Sept., Syr., and a few
MSS), but I am the prince of the army of Jehovah; now I am come." The
person who had appeared neither belonged to the Israelites nor to their
enemies, but was the prince of the army of Jehovah, i.e., of the angels.
"The Lord's host" does not mean "the people of Israel, who were just at
the commencement of their warlike enterprise," as v. Hofmann supposes;
for although the host of Israel who came out of Egypt are called "the
hosts of the Lord" in [Exo 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041), the
Israelites are never called the host or army of Jehovah (in the
singular). "The host of Jehovah" is synonymous with "the host of heaven"
([Kg1 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019)), and signifies the
angels, as in [Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002) and [Psa
103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021). With the words "now I am
come," the prince of the angels is about to enter upon an explanation of
the object of his coming; but he is interrupted in his address by
Joshua, who falls down before him, and says, "What saith my lord to his
servant?" so that now he first of all commands Joshua to take off his
shoes, as the place on which he stands is holy. It by no means follows
that because Joshua fell down upon the ground and ישׁתּחוּ (Eng. Ver.
"did worship"), he must have recognised him at once as the angel of the
Lord who was equal with God; for the word השׁתּחוה, which is connected
with the falling down, does not always mean divine worship, but very
frequently means nothing more than the deep Oriental reverence paid by a
dependant to his superior or king (e.g., [Sa2
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#006); [Sa2
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#033)), and Joshua did not address the
person who appeared to him by the name of God, אדני, but simply as אדני,
"My lord." In any case, however, Joshua regarded him at once as a
superior being, i.e., an angel. And he must have recognised him as
something more than a created angel of superior rank, that is to say, as
the angel of Jehovah who is essentially equal with God, the visible
revealer of the invisible God, as soon as he gave him the command to
take off his shoes, etc. - a command which would remind him of the
appearance of God to Moses in the burning bush, and which implied that
the person who now appeared was the very person who had revealed himself
to Moses as the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (On the meaning of the
command to take off the shoes, see the exposition of [Exo
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005).) The object of the divine
appearance was indicated by the drawn sword in the hand (cf. [Num
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#031)), by which he manifested himself
as a heavenly warrior, or, as he describes himself to Joshua, as prince
of the army of Jehovah. The drawn sword contained in itself this
practical explanation: "I am now come with my heavenly army, to make war
upon the Canaanites, and to assist thee and thy people" (Seb. Schmidt).
It was not in a vision that this appearance took place, but it was an
actual occurrence belonging to the external world; for Joshua saw the
man with the drawn sword at a certain distance from himself, and went up
to him to address him, - a fact which would be perfectly incompatible
with an inward vision.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 6](jos006)

</div>
