<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1017)  [Next](kg1019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 18:1</span></span>

As the judgment of drought and famine did not bring king Ahab to his
senses and lead him to turn from his ungodly ways, but only filled him
with exasperation towards the prophet who had announced to him the
coming judgment; there was no other course left than to lay before the
people with mighty and convincing force the proof that Jehovah was the
only true God, and to execute judgment upon the priests of Baal as the
seducers of the nation.

[Kg1 18:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)

Elijah's meeting with Ahab. - [Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001), [Kg1
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#002). In the third year of his sojourn
at Zarephath the word of the Lord came to Elijah to show himself to
Ahab; since God was about to send rain upon the land again. The time
given, "the third year," is not to be reckoned, as the Rabbins,
Clericus, Thenius, and others assume, from the commencement of the
drought, but from the event last mentioned, namely, the sojourn of
Elijah at Zarephath. This view merits the preference as the simplest and
most natural one, and is shown to be the oldest by [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025) and [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017), where Christ and James both say,
that in the time of Ahab it did not rain for three years and six months.
And this length of time can only be obtained by allowing more than two
years for Elijah's stay at Zarephath. - From [Kg1
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#002) to [Kg1
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#006) we have parenthetical remarks
introduced, to explain the circumstances which led to Elijah's meeting
with Ahab. The verbs ויּקרא, ויהי, ויּאמר ,ויהי , and ויחלּקוּ ([Kg1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003), [Kg1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004), [Kg1
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#005), [Kg1
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#006)) carry on the circumstantial
clauses: "and the famine was..." ([Kg1
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#002)), and "Obadiah feared..." ([Kg1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003)), and are therefore to be
expressed by the pluperfect. When the famine had become very severe in
Samaria (the capital), Ahab, with Obadiah the governor of his castle
(הבּית על אשׁר, see at [Kg1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#006)), who
was a God-fearing man, and on the persecution of the prophets of Jehovah
by Jezebel had hidden a hundred prophets in caves and supplied them with
food, had arranged for an expedition through the whole land to seek for
hay for his horses and mules. And for this purpose they had divided the
land between them, so that the one explored one district and the other
another. We see from [Oba 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004) that
Jezebel had resolved upon exterminating the worship of Jehovah, and
sought to carry out this intention by destroying the prophets of the
true God. The hundred prophets whom Obadiah concealed were probably for
the most part pupils ("sons") of the prophets. אישׁ חמשּׁים must
signify, according to the context and also according to [Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013), "fifty each," so that חמשּׁים
must have fallen out through a copyist's error. מן נכרית ולוא, that we
may not be obliged to kill (a portion) of the cattle (מן partitive). The
Keri מהבּהמה is no doubt actually correct, but it is not absolutely
necessary, as the Chethb בּהמה מן may be taken as an indefinite phrase:
"any head of cattle."

[Kg1 18:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#007)

Elijah met Obadiah on this expedition, and told him to announce his
coming to the king.

[Kg1 18:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#009)

Obadiah was afraid that the execution of this command might cost him his
life, inasmuch as Ahab had sent in search of Elijah "to every kingdom
and every nation," - a hyperbole suggested by inward excitement and
fear. אין ואמרוּ is to be connected with what follows in spite of the
accents: "and if they said he is not here, he took an oath," etc.

[Kg1 18:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012)

"And if it comes to pass (that) I go away from thee, and the Spirit of
Jehovah carries thee away whither I know not, and I come to tell Ahab
(sc., that thou art here) and he findeth thee not, he will slay me, and
thy servant feareth the Lord from his youth," etc.; i.e., since I as a
God-fearing man and a protector of the prophets cannot boast of any
special favour from Ahab. מנּערי, from my youth up: "thy servant" being
equivalent to "I myself." From the fear expressed by Obadiah that the
Spirit of Jehovah might suddenly carry the prophet to some unknown
place, Seb. Schmidt and others have inferred that in the earlier history
of Elijah there had occurred some cases of this kind of sudden
transportation, though they have not been handed down; but the anxiety
expressed by Obadiah might very well have sprung from the fact, that
after Elijah had announced the coming drought to Ahab, he disappeared,
and, notwithstanding all the inquiries instituted by the king, was
nowhere to be found. And since he was not carried off miraculously then
(compare the לך and ויּלך, "get thee hence" and "he went," in [Kg1
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#003), [Kg1
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#005)), there is all the less ground
for imagining cases of this kind in the intermediate time, when he was
hidden from his enemies. The subsequent translation of Elijah to heaven
([Kg2 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)), and the miraculous
carrying away of Philip from the chamberlain of Mauritania ([Act
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039)), do not warrant any such
assumption; and still less the passage which Clericus quotes from
Ezekiel ([Eze 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012), [Eze
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014)), because the carrying of Ezekiel
through the air, which is mentioned here, only happened in vision and
not in external reality. If Obadiah had known of any actual occurrence
of this kind, he would certainly have stated it more clearly as a more
striking vindication of his fear.

[Kg1 18:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#015)

But when Elijah assured him with an oath (צבאות יהוה, see at [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003)) that he would show himself to
Ahab that day, Obadiah went to announce it to the king; whereupon Ahab
went to meet the prophet, and sought to overawe him with the imperious
words, "Art thou here, thou troubler of Israel." (עכר, see at [Gen
34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030)). But Elijah threw back this
charge: "It is not I who have brought Israel into trouble, but thou and
thy family, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of Jehovah, and
thou goest after Baalim." He then called upon the king to gather
together all Israel to him upon Carmel, together with the 450 prophets
of Baal and the 400 prophets of Asherah, who ate of Jezebel's table,
i.e., who were maintained by the queen.

Carmel, a mountain ridge "with many peaks, intersected by hundreds of
larger and smaller ravines," which stands out as a promontory running in
a north-westerly direction into the Mediterranean (see at [Jos
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#026)), and some of the loftiest peaks
of which rise to the height of 1800 feet above the level of the sea,
when seen from the northern or outer side shows only "bald, monotonous
rocky ridges, scantily covered with short and thorny bushes;" but in the
interior it still preserves its ancient glory, which has procured for it
the name of "fruit-field," the valleys being covered with the most
beautiful flowers of every description, and the heights adorned with
myrtles, laurels, oaks, and firs (cf. V. de Velde, R. i. p. 292ff.). At
the north-western extremity of the mountain there is a celebrated
Carmelite monastery, dedicated to Elijah, whom tradition represents as
having lived in a grotto under the monastery; but we are certainly not
to look there for the scene of the contest with the priests of Baal
described in the verses which follow. The scene of Elijah's sacrifice is
rather to be sought for on one of the south-eastern heights of Carmel;
and Van de Velde (i. p. 320ff.) has pointed it out with great
probability in the ruins of el Mohraka, i.e., "the burned place," "a
rocky level space of no great circumference, and covered with old
gnarled trees with a dense entangled undergrowth of bushes." For "one
can scarcely imagine a spot better adapted for the thousands of Israel
to have stood drawn up on than the gentle slopes. The rock shoots up in
an almost perpendicular wall of more than 200 feet in height on the side
of the vale of Esdraelon. On this side, therefore, there was no room for
the gazing multitude; but, on the other hand, this wall made it visible
over the whole plain, and from all the surrounding heights, so that even
those left behind, who had not ascended Carmel, would still have been
able to witness at no great distance the fire from heaven that descended
upon the altar." - "There is not a more conspicuous spot on all Carmel
than the abrupt rocky height of el Mohraka, shooting up so suddenly on
the east." Moreover, the soil was thoroughly adapted for the erection of
the altar described in [Kg1 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031),
[Kg1 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#032) : "it shows a rocky
surface, with a sufficiency of large fragments of rock lying all around,
and, besides, well fitted for the rapid digging of a trench." There is
also water in the neighbourhood, as is assumed in [Kg1
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#034). "Nowhere does the Kishon run so
close to Mount Carmel as just beneath el Mohraka," which is "1635 feet
above the sea, and perhaps 1000 feet above the Kishon. This height can
be gone up and down in the short time allowed by the Scripture ([Kg1
18:40-44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040))." But it was possible to
find water even nearer than this, to pour upon the burnt-offering in the
manner described in [Kg1 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#034), [Kg1
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#035). Close by the steep rocky wall
of the height, just where you can descend to the Kishon through a steep
ravine, you find, "250 feet it might be beneath the altar plateau, a
vaulted and very abundant fountain built in the form of a tank, with a
few steps leading down into it, just as one finds elsewhere in the old
wells or springs of the Jewish times." - "From such a fountain alone
could Elijah have procured so much water at that time. And as for the
distance between this spring and the supposed site of the altar, it was
every way possible for men to go thrice thither and back again to obtain
the necessary supply." Lastly, el Mohraka is so situated, that the
circumstances mentioned in [Kg1
18:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042) also perfectly coincide (Van
de Velde, pp. 322-325).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 18:20</span></span>

Elijah's contest with the prophets of Baal. - Ahab sent through all
Israel and gathered the prophets (of Baal) together upon Mount Carmel.
According to [Kg1 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021), [Kg1
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#022), and [Kg1
18:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#039), a number of the people ("all
the people") had also come with them. On the other hand, not only is
there no further reference in what follows to the 400 prophets of
Asherah (cf. [Kg1 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#025) and [Kg1
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)), but in [Kg1
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#022) it is very obvious that the
presence of the 450 prophets of Baal alone is supposed. We must
therefore assume that the Asherah prophets, foreboding nothing good, had
found a way of evading the command of Ahab and securing the protection
of Jezebel.

(Note: It is true that in [Kg1 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#022)
the lxx have this clause, καὶ οἱ προφῆται τοῦ ἄλσους (i.e., האשׁרה)
τετρακόσιοι, which Thenius regards as an original portion of the text,
though without observing the character of the lxx. If the Asherah
prophets had also been present, Elijah would not only have commanded the
prophets of Baal to be seized and slain ([Kg1
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)), but the Asherah prophets also.
From the principle a potiori fit, etc., it may be possible to explain
the omission of the Asherah prophets in [Kg1
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#025), but not in [Kg1
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040).)

King Ahab also appeared upon Carmel (cf. [Kg1
18:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041)), as he had no idea of Elijah's
intention, which was by no means "to prove to the king that he (Ahab)
and not Elijah had brought Israel into trouble" (Vat., Seb. Schm.), but
to put before the eyes of the whole nation a convincing practical proof
of the sole deity of Jehovah and of the nothingness of the Baals, that
were regarded as gods, and by slaying the priests of Baal to give a
death-blow to idolatry in Israel.

[Kg1 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)

Elijah addressed the assembled people as follows: "How long do ye limp
upon both sides? Is Jehovah God, then go after Him; but if Baal be God,
then go after him" - and the people answered him not a word. They wanted
to combine the worship of Jehovah and Baal, and not to assume a hostile
attitude towards Jehovah by the worship of Baal; and were therefore
obliged to keep silence under this charge of infatuated halving, since
they knew very well from the law itself that Jehovah demanded worship
with a whole and undivided heart ([Deu
6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)). This dividing of the heart
between Jehovah and Baal Elijah called limping הסּעפּים שׁתּי על, "upon
the two parties (of Jehovah and Baal)." For סעפּים the meaning "divided
opinions, parties," is well established by the use of סעפים in [Psa
119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113); and the rendering of the lxx
ιγνύαι, the hollow of the knee, is only a paraphrase of the sense and
not an interpretation of the word.

[Kg1 18:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#022)

As the people adhered to their undecided double-mindedness, Elijah
proposed to let the Deity Himself decide who was the true God, Jehovah
or Baal. The prophets of Baal were to offer a sacrifice to Baal, and he
(Elijah) would offer one to Jehovah. And the true God should make
Himself known by kindling the burnt-offering presented to Him with fire
from heaven, and in this way answering the invocation of His name. This
proposal was based upon the account in Lev 9. As Jehovah had there
manifested Himself as the God of Israel by causing fire to fall from
heaven upon the first sacrifice presented in front of the tabernacle and
to consume it, Elijah hoped that in like manner Jehovah would even now
reveal Himself as the living God. And the form of decision thus proposed
would necessarily appear all the fairer, because Elijah, the prophet of
Jehovah, stood alone in opposition to a whole crowd of Baal's prophets,
numbering no less than 450 men. And for that very reason the latter
could not draw back, without publicly renouncing their pretensions,
whether they believed that Baal would really do what was desired, or
hoped that they might be able to escape, through some accident or
stratagem, from the difficult situation that had been prepared for them,
or fancied that the God of Elijah would no more furnish the proof of His
deity that was desired of Him than Baal would. In order, however, to cut
off every subterfuge in the event of their attempt proving a failure,
Elijah not only yielded the precedence to them on the occasion of this
sacrifice, but gave them the choice of the two oxen brought to be
offered; which made the fairness of his proposal so much the more
conspicuous to every one, that the people willingly gave their consent.

[Kg1 18:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026)

The prophets of Baal then proceeded to the performance of the duty
required. They prepared (יעשׂוּ) the sacrifice, and called solemnly upon
Baal from morning to noon: "O Baal, hear us," limping round the altar;
"but there was no voice, and no one to hear (to answer), and no
attention." פּסּח is a contemptuous epithet applied to the pantomimic
sacrificial dance performed by these priests round about the altar,

(Note: The following is the description which Herodian (hist. v. 3),
among others, gives of Heliogabalus when dancing as chief priest of the
Emesinian sun-god: Ἱερουγοῦντα δὴ τοῦτον, περί τε τοῖς βωμοῖς χορεύοντα
νόμῳ Βαρβάρων, ὑπό τε αὐλοῖς καὶ σύριγξι παντοδαπῶν τε ὀργάνων ἤχῳ.)

עשׂה אשׁר ("which one had made").

[Kg1 18:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027)

As no answer had been received before noon, Elijah cried out to them in
derision: "Call to him with a loud voice, for he is God (sc., according
to your opinion), for he is meditating, or has gone aside (שׂי,
secessio), or is on the journey (בּדּרך, on the way); perhaps he is
sleeping, that he may wake up." The ridicule lies more especially in the
הוּא אלהים כּי (for he is a god), when contrasted with the enumeration
of the different possibilities which may have occasioned their obtaining
no answer, and is heightened by the earnest and threefold repetition of
the כּי. With regard to these possibilities we may quote the words of
Clericus: "Although these things when spoken of God are the most absurd
things possible, yet idolaters could believe such things, as we may see
from Homer." The priests of Baal did actually begin therefore to cry
louder than before, and scratched themselves with swords and lances,
till the blood poured out, "according to their custom" (כּמשׁפּטם).
Movers describes this as follows (Phnizier, i. pp. 682,683), from
statements made by ancient authors concerning the processions of the
strolling bands of the Syrian goddess: "A discordant howling opens the
scene. They then rush wildly about in perfect confusion, with their
heads bowed down to the ground, but always revolving in circles, so that
the loosened hair drags through the mire; they then begin to bite their
arms, and end with cutting themselves with the two-edged swords which
they are in the habit of carrying. A new scene then opens. One of them,
who surpasses all the rest in frenzy, begins to prophesy with signs and
groans; he openly accuses himself of the sins which he has committed,
and which he is now about to punish by chastising the flesh, takes the
knotted scourge, which the Galli generally carry, lashes his back, and
then cuts himself with swords till the blood trickles down from his
mangled body." The climax of the Bacchantic dance in the case of the
priests of Baal also was the prophesying (התנבּא), and it was for this
reason, probably, that they were called prophets (נביאים). This did not
begin till noon, and lasted till about the time of the evening sacrifice
(לעלות עד, not עלות עד, [Kg1 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#029)).
המּנחה עלות, "the laying on (offering) of the meat-offering," refers to
the daily evening sacrifice, which consisted of a burnt-offering and a
meat-offering ([Exo 29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038).; [Num
28:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#003)), and was then offered,
according to the Rabbinical observance (see at [Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006)), in the closing hours of the
afternoon, as is evident from the circumstances which are described in
[Kg1 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040). as having taken place on
the same day and subsequently to Elijah's offering, which was presented
at the time of the evening sacrifice ([Kg1
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036)).

[Kg1 18:30-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030)

Elijah's sacrifice. - As no answer came from Baal, Elijah began to
prepare for his own sacrifice. [Kg1
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030). He made the people come nearer,
that he might have both eye-witnesses and ear-witnesses present at his
sacrifice, and restored the altar of Jehovah which was broken down.
Consequently, there was already an altar of Jehovah upon Carmel, which
either dated from the times anterior to the building of the temple, when
altars of Jehovah were erected in different places throughout the land
(see at [Kg1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002)), or, what is more
probable, had been built by pious worshippers belonging to the ten
tribes since the division of the kingdom (Hengstenberg, Dissertations on
the Pentateuch, vol. i. p. 183, trans.), and judging from [Kg1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010), had been destroyed during the
reign of Ahab, when the worship of Baal gained the upper hand.

[Kg1 18:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031)

Elijah took twelve stones, "according to the number of the tribes of the
sons of Jacob, to whom the word of the Lord had come ([Gen
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#029); [Gen
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#010)), Israel shall be thy name," and
built these stones into an altar. The twelve stones were a practical
declaration on the part of the prophet that the division of the nation
into two kingdoms was at variance with the divine calling of Israel,
inasmuch as according to the will of God the twelve tribes were to form
one people of Jehovah, and to have a common sacrificial altar; whilst
the allusion to the fact that Jehovah had given to the forefather of the
nation the name of Israel, directs attention to the wrong which the
seceding ten tribes had done in claiming the name of Israel for
themselves, whereas it really belonged to the whole nation. יהוה בּשׁם
(in the name of Jehovah) belongs to יבנה (built), and signifies by the
authority and for the glory of Jehovah. "And made a trench as the space
of two seahs of seed (i.e., so large that you could sow two seahs

(Note: i.e., about two Dresden pecks (Metzen). - Thenius.)

of seed upon the ground which it covered) round about the altar." The
trench must therefore have been of considerable breadth and depth,
although it is impossible to determine the exact dimensions, as the kind
of seed-corn is not defined. He then arranged the sacrifice upon the
altar, and had four Kad (pails) of water poured three times in
succession upon the burnt-offering which was laid upon the pieces of
wood, so that the water flowed round about the altar, and then had the
trench filled with water.

(Note: Thenius throws suspicion upon the historical character of this
account, on the ground that "the author evidently forgot the terrible
drought, by which the numerous sources of the Carmel and the Nachal
Kishon must have been dried up;" but Van de Velde has already answered
this objection, which has been raised by others also, and has completely
overthrown it by pointing out the covered well of el Mohraka, in
relation to which he makes the following remark: "In such springs the
water remains always cool, under the shade of a vaulted roof, and with
no hot atmosphere to evaporate it. While all other fountains were dried
up, I can well understand that there might have been found here that
superabundance of water which Elijah poured so profusely over the altar"
(vol. i. p. 325, trans.). But the drying up of the Kishon is a mere
conjecture, which cannot be historically proved.)

Elijah adopted this course for the purpose of precluding all suspicion
of even the possibility of fraud in connection with the miraculous
burning of the sacrifice. For idolaters had carried their deceptions to
such a length, that they would set fire to the wood of the sacrifices
from hollow spaces concealed beneath the altars, in order to make the
credulous people believe that the sacrifice had been miraculously set on
fire by the deity. Ephraem Syrus and Joh. Chrysostom both affirm this;
the latter in his Oratio in Petrum Apost. et Eliam proph. t. ii. p. 737,
ed. Montf., the genuineness of which, however, is sometimes called in
question.

[Kg1 18:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036)

After these preparations at the time of the evening sacrifice, Elijah
drew near and prayed: "Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel (this name
is used with deliberate purpose instead of Jacob: see at [Kg1
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031)), let it be known this day that
Thou art God in Israel, and I am Thy servant, and do all these things
through Thy word. Hear me, Jehovah, hear me, that this people may know
that Thou Jehovah art God, and turnest back their hearts!" (i.e., back
from idols to Thyself.) This clearly expresses not only the object of
the miracle which follows, but that of miracles universally. The
perfects עשׂיתי and הסבּת are used to denote not only what has already
occurred, but what will still take place and is as certain as if it had
taken place already. עשׂיתי refers not merely to the predicted drought
and to what Elijah has just been doing (Thenius), but to the miracle
which was immediately about to be performed; and הסבּת to the conversion
of the people to the Lord their God, for which Elijah's coming had
already prepared the way, and which was still further advanced by the
following miracle.

[Kg1 18:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038)

Then fire of Jehovah fell and consumed the burnt-offering and the pieces
of wood, etc. יהוה אשׁ, the fire proceeding from Jehovah, was not a
natural flash of lightning, which could not produce any such effect, but
miraculous fire falling from heaven, as in [Ch1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026); [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)) see at [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024)), the supernatural origin of
which was manifested in the fact, that it not only consumed the
sacrifice with the pile of wood upon the altar, but also burned up (in
calcem redegit - Cler.) the stones of the altar and the earth that was
thrown up to form the trench, and licked up the water in the trench.
Through this miracle Jehovah not only accredited Elijah as His servant
and prophet, but proved Himself to be the living God, whom Israel was to
serve; so that all the people who were present fell down upon their
faces in worship, as they had done once before, viz., at the
consecration of the altar in [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024), and confessed "Jehovah is God:"
האלהים, the true or real God.

[Kg1 18:40-46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)

Elijah availed himself of this enthusiasm of the people for the Lord, to
deal a fatal blow at the prophets of Baal, who turned away the people
from the living God. He commanded the people to seize them, and had them
slain at the brook Kishon, and that not so much from revenge, i.e.,
because it was at their instigation that queen Jezebel had murdered the
prophets of the true God ([Kg1 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#013)),
as to carry out the fundamental law of the Old Testament kingdom of God,
which prohibited idolatry on pain of death, and commanded that false
prophets should be destroyed ([Deu
17:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002); [Deu
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013).).

(Note: It was necessary that idolatry and temptation to the worship of
idols should be punished with death, as a practical denial of Jehovah
the true God and Lord of His chosen people, if the object of the divine
institutions was to be secured. By putting the priests of Baal to death,
therefore, Elijah only did what the law required; and inasmuch as the
ordinary administrators of justice did not fulfil their obligations, he
did this as an extraordinary messenger of God, whom the Lord had
accredited as His prophet before all the people by the miraculous answer
given to his prayer. - To infer from this act of Elijah the right to
institute a bloody persecution of heretics, would not only indicate a
complete oversight of the difference between heathen idolaters and
Christian heretics, but the same reprehensible confounding of the
evangelical standpoint of the New Testament with the legal standpoint of
the Old, which Christ condemned in His own disciples in [Luk
9:55-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055).)

[Kg1 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041)

Elijah then called upon the king, who had eaten nothing from morning
till evening in his eagerness to see the result of the contest between
the prophet and the priests of Baal, to come up from the brook Kishon to
the place of sacrifice upon Carmel, where his wants were provided for,
and to partake of meat and drink, for he (Elijah) could already hear the
noise of a fall of rain. קול is without a verb, as is often the case
(e.g., [Isa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004); [Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008), etc.); literally, it is the
sound, the noise. After the occasion of the curse of drought, which had
fallen upon the land, had been removed by the destruction of the
idolatrous priest, the curse itself could also be removed. "But this was
not to take place without the prophet's saying it, and by means of this
gift proving himself afresh to be the representative of God" (O. v.
Gerlach).

[Kg1 18:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042)

While the king was refreshing himself with food and drink, Elijah went
up to the top of Carmel to pray that the Lord would complete His work by
fulfilling His promise ([Kg1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001)) in
sending rain; and continued in prayer till the visible commencement of
the fulfilment of his prayer was announced by his servant, who, after
looking out upon the sea seven times, saw at last a small cloud ascend
from the sea about the size of a man's hand.

(Note: V. de Velde has shown how admirably these circumstances ([Kg1
18:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#043), [Kg1
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044)) also apply to the situation of
el Mohraka: "on its west and north-west side the view of the sea is
quite intercepted by an adjacent height. That height may be ascended,
however, in a few minutes, and a full view of the sea obtained from the
top" (i. p. 326).

The peculiar attitude assumed by Elijah when praying ([Jam
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018)), viz., bowing down even to the
earth (יגהר) and putting his face between his knees, probably the
attitude of deep absorption in God, was witnessed by Shaw and Chardin in
the case of certain dervishes (vid., Harmar, Beobachtungen, iii. pp.
373-4).

[Kg1 18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044)

As soon as the small cloud ascended from the sea, Elijah sent his
servant to tell the king to set off home, that he might not be stopped
by the rain. רד, go down, sc. from Carmel to his chariot, which was
standing at the foot of the mountain.

(Note: "After three years' drought all herbage must have disappeared
from the plain of Jezreel, and the loose clay composing its soil must
have been changed into a deep layer of dust. Had time been allowed for
the rain to convert that dust into a bed of mud, the chariot-wheels
might have stuck fast in it." V. de Velde, i. pp. 326-7.)

[Kg1 18:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#045)

Before any provision had been made for it (עד־כּה ועד־כּה: hither and
thither, i.e., while the hand is being moved to and fro, "very
speedily;" cf. Ewald, 105, b.) the heaven turned black with clouds and
wind, i.e., with storm-clouds (Thenius), and there came a great fall of
rain, while Ahab drove along the road to Jezreel. It was quite possible
for the king to reach Jezreel the same evening from that point, namely,
from the foot of Carmel below el Mohraka: but only thence, for every
half-hour farther west would have taken him too far from his capital for
it to be possible to accomplish the distance before the rain overtook
him (V. de Velde, i. p. 326). Jezreel, the present Zerin (see at [Jos
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#018)), was probably the summer
residence of Ahab (see at [Jos 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001)).
The distance from el Mohraka thither is hardly 2 3/4 German geographical
miles (? 14 Engl. Miles - Tr.) in a straight line.

[Kg1 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046)

When Ahab drove off, the hand of the Lord came upon Elijah, so that he
ran before Ahab as far as Jezreel, - not so much for the purpose of
bringing the king to his residence unhurt (Seb. Schm.), as to give him a
proof of his humility, and thus deepen the impression already made upon
his heart, and fortify him all the more against the strong temptations
of his wife, who abused his weakness to support the cause of
ungodliness. This act of Elijah, whom Ahab had hitherto only known as a
stern, imperious, and powerful prophet, by which he now showed himself
to be his faithful subject and servant, was admirably adapted to touch
the heart of the king, and produce the conviction that it was not from
any personal dislike to him, but only in the service of the Lord, that
the prophet was angry at his idolatry, and that he was not trying to
effect his ruin, but rather his conversion and the salvation of his
soul. יהוה יד, the hand (i.e., the power) of the Lord, denotes the
supernatural strength with which the Lord endowed him, to accomplish
superhuman feats. This formula is generally applied to the divine
inspiration by which the prophets were prepared for their prophesying
(cf. [Kg2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015); [Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003); [Eze
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015), etc.).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](kg1019)

</div>
