<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1003)  [Next](kg1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 4:0</span></span>

Solomon's Ministers of State. His Regal Splendour and Wisdom - 1 Kings
4-5:14

1 Kings 4 contains a list of the chief ministers of state ([Kg1
4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#002)), and of the twelve officers
placed over the land ([Kg1 4:7-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#007)),
which is inserted here to give an idea of the might and glory of the
kingdom of Israel under Solomon's reign. So far as the contents are
concerned, this list belongs to the middle portion of the reign of
Solomon, as we may see from the fact that two of the officers named had
daughters of Solomon for their wives ([Kg1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#011), [Kg1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#015)), whom they could not possibly
have married till the later years of Solomon's life.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 4:1</span></span>

The Chief Ministers of State. - The list is introduced in [Kg1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#001) by the general remark, that "king
Solomon was king over all Israel."

[Kg1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#002)

The first of the שׂרים, princes, i.e., chief ministers of state or
dignitaries, mentioned here is not the commander-in-chief, as under the
warlike reign of David ([Sa2 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#016);
[Sa2 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023)), but, in accordance with
the peaceful rule of Solomon, the administrator of the kingdom (or prime
minister): "Azariah the son of Zadok was הכּהן," i.e., not the priest,
but the administrator of the kingdom, the representative of the king
before the people; like כּהן in v. 5, where this word is interpreted by
המּלך רעה, with this difference, however, arising from the article
before כּהן, that Azariah was the Kohen par excellence, that is to say,
held the first place among the confidential counsellors of the king, so
that his dignity was such as befitted the office of an administrator of
the kingdom. Compare the explanation of כּהן at [Sa2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018). The view of the Vulgate, Luther,
and others, which has been revived by Thenius, namely, that כּהן is to
be connected as a genitive with בּן־צדוק in opposition to the accents,
"Azariah the son of Zadok the priest," is incorrect, and does not even
yield any sense, since the connection of these words with the following
Elichoreph, etc., is precluded by the absence of the copula Vav, which
would be indispensable if Azariah had held the same office as the two
brothers Elichoreph and Achijah.

(Note: The objection by which Thenius tries to set aside this argument,
which has been already advanced by Houbigant, viz., that "if the first
(Azariah) was not also a state scribe, the copula would be inserted, as
it is everywhere else from v. 4 onwards when a new office is mentioned,"
proves nothing at all, because the copula is also omitted in v. 3, where
the new office of מזכּיר is introduced.)

Moreover, Azariah the son of Zadok cannot be a grandson of Zadok the
high priest, i.e., a son of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, as many infer from
1 Chr. 5:34-35 ([Ch1 6:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#008)); for,
apart from the fact that Zadok's grandson can hardly have been old
enough at the time for Solomon to invest him with the chief dignity in
the kingdom, which would surely be conferred upon none but men of mature
years, we can see no reason why the Azariah mentioned here should not be
called the son of Ahimaaz. If the Zadok referred to here was the high
priest of that name, Azariah can only have been a brother of Ahimaaz.
And there is no real difficulty in the way, since the name Azariah
occurs three times in the line of high priests (1 Chr. 5:36, 39), and
therefore was by no means rare.

[Kg1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#003)

Elichoreph and Achijah, sons of Shisha, who had held the same office
under David, were secretaries of state (ספרים: see at [Sa2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017) and [Sa2
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#025), where the different names שׁשׁא
= שׁיא and שׂריה are also discussed). - Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud
was the chancellor, as he had already been in the time of David ([Sa2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017) and [Sa2
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#024)). The rendering of Thenius,
"whilst Jehoshaphat was chancellor," is grammatically impossible.

[Kg1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#004)

On Benaiah, compare [Kg1 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#035) and the
Commentary on [Sa2 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020). On Zadok and
Abiathar, see at [Sa2 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017). It appears
strange that Abiathar should be named as priest, i.e., as high priest,
along with Zadok, since Solomon had deposed him from the priestly office
([Kg1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027), [Kg1
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#035)), and we cannot imagine any
subsequent pardon. The only possible explanation is that proposed by
Theodoret, namely, that Solomon had only deprived him of the ἀρχή, i.e.,
of the priest's office, but not of the ἱερωσύνη or priestly dignity,
because this was hereditary.

(Note: Τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀφείλατο, ου ̓ τῆς ἱερωσύνης ἐγύμνωσεν· τὴν γὰρ τῆς
ἱερωσύνης αξίαν οὐκ ἐκ χειροτονίας ἀλλ ̓ ἐκ γονικῆς εἶχον διαδοχῆς. -
Theodoret.)

[Kg1 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#005)

Azariah the son of Nathan was over the נצּבים, i.e., the twelve officers
named in vv. 7ff. Zabud the son of Nathan was כּהן (not the son of
"Nathan the priest," as Luther and many others render it). כּהן is
explained by the epithet appended, המּלך רעה: privy councillor, i.e.,
confidential adviser of the king. Nathan is not the prophet of that
name, as Thenius supposes, but the son of David mentioned in [Sa2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#014). Azariah and Zabud were therefore
nephews of Solomon.

[Kg1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#006)

Ahishar was הבּית על, over the palace, i.e., governor of the palace, or
minister of the king's household (compare [Kg1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#009); [Kg2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#018), and [Isa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#015)), an office met with for the
first time under Solomon. Adoniram, probably the same person as Adoram
in [Sa2 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#024), was chief overseer of
the tributary service. He was so in the time of David also.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 4:7</span></span>

Solomon's Official Persons and Their Districts. - [Kg1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#007). Solomon had (appointed) twelve
נצּבים over all Israel, who provided (כּלכּלוּ) for the king and his
house, i.e., supplied provisions for the necessities of the court. These
prefects are not to be regarded as "chamberlains," or administrators of
the royal domains (Michaelis and Ewald), for these are mentioned in [Ch1
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#025). under a different title. They
are "general receivers of taxes," or "chief tax-collectors," as
Rosenmller expresses it, who levied the king's duties or taxes, which
consisted in the East, as they still do to the present time, for the
most part of natural productions, or the produce of the land, and not of
money payments as in the West, and delivered them at the royal kitchen
(Rosenmller, A. und N. Morgenland, iii. p. 166). It cannot be inferred
from the explanation given by Josephus, ἡγεμόνες καὶ στρατηγοί, that
they exercised a kind of government, as Thenius supposes, since this
explanation is nothing but a subjective conjecture. "One month in the
year was it every one's duty (אחד על יהיה) to provide." The districts
assigned to the twelve prefects coincide only partially with the
territories of the tribes, because the land was probably divided among
them according to its greater or smaller productiveness. Moreover, the
order in which the districts are enumerated is not a geographical one,
but probably follows the order in which the different prefects had to
send the natural productions month by month for the maintenance of the
king's court. The description begins with Ephraim in [Ch1
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#008), then passes over in [Ch1
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#009) to the territory of Dan to the
west of it, in [Ch1 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#010) to the
territory of Judah and Simeon on the south, in [Ch1
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#011) and [Ch1
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#012) to the territory of Manasseh on
this side from the Mediterranean to the Jordan, then in vv. 13 and 14 to
the territory of Manasseh on the other side of the Jordan, thence back
again in vv. 15 and 16 to the northern parts of the land on this side,
viz., the territories of Naphtali and Asher, and thence farther south to
Issachar in v. 17, and Benjamin in v. 18, closing at last in v. 19 with
Gilead.

[Kg1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#008)

In the names of the prefects we are struck with the fact, that in the
case of five of them the names given are not their own but their
fathers' names. It is very improbable that the proper names should have
dropped out five times (as Clericus, Michaelis, and others suppose); and
consequently there is simply the assumption left, that the persons in
question bore their fathers' names with Ben prefixed as their own proper
names: Benhur, Bendeker, etc., after the analogy of Benchanan in [Ch1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#020) and others, although such a
proper name as Ben-Abinadab ([Ch1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#011)) appears very strange. Benhur was
stationed on the mountains of Ephraim. These mountains, here only the
mountainous district of the tribe of Ephraim, were among the most
fruitful portions of Palestine (see at [Jos
17:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014)).

[Kg1 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#009)

Bendeker was in Makaz, a city only mentioned here, the situation of
which is unknown, but which is at any rate to be sought for in the tribe
of Dan, to which the other cities of this district belong. Shaalbim has
probably been preserved in the present Selbit, to the north-west of Ylo
(see at [Jos 19:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#042)). Bethshemesh, the
present Ain-Shems (see at [Jos 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010)).
Elon (אילון), which is distinguished from Ajalon ([Jos
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#042) and [Jos
19:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#043)) by the epithet Bethchanan, and
belonged to the tribe of Dan, has not yet been discovered (see at [Jos
19:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#043)). The lxx have arbitrarily
interpolated ἕως before Bethchanan, and Thenius naturally takes this
under his protection, and consequently traces Bethchanan in the village
of Beit Hunn (Rob. Pal. ii. p. 371), but without considering that ἕως
yields no reasonable sense unless preceded by מן, ἐκ (from; cf. [Kg1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#012)).

[Kg1 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#010)

Benhesed was in Arubboth, which does not occur again, so that its
situation, even if it should be identical with Arab in [Jos
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#052), as Bttcher conjectures, can
only be approximatively inferred from the localities which follow. To
him (לו), i.e., to his district, belonged Sochoh and all the land of
Hepher. From Sochoh we may see that Benhesed's district was in the tribe
of Judah. Of the two Sochohs in Judah, that still exist under the name
of Shuweikeh, it is impossible to determine with certainty which is
intended here, whether the one upon the mountains ([Jos
15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)) or the one in the plain ([Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035)). The fact that it is associated
with the land of Hepher rather favours the latter. The land of Hepher,
which must not be confounded with the city of Gath-hepher in the tribe
of Zebulun ([Jos 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#013); [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025)), but was the territory of one
of the Canaanitish kings who were defeated by Joshua, was probably
situated in the plain (see at [Jos
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#017)).

[Kg1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#011)

Ben-Abinadab had the whole of the high range of Dor (דּאר נפת, [Jos
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#023)), i.e., the strip of coast on
the Mediterranean Sea below the promontory of Carmel, where the city of
Dor, which has been preserved in the village of Tantura or Tortura, nine
miles to the north of Caesarea, was situated (see at [Jos
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#002)). Whether this district embraced
the fruitful plain of Sharon is not so clearly made out as Thenius
supposes. בּן־אבינדב stands at the head absolutely, without any
grammatical connection with כּל־נפת: "Abinadab: the whole of the high
range of Dor," etc. The person named was probably a son of David's
eldest brother but one ([Sa1 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#008);
[Sa1 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#013)), and therefore Solomon's
cousin; and he had married Solomon's daughter.

[Kg1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#012)

Baana the son of Ahilud was most likely a brother of Jehoshaphat the
chancellor ([Kg1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#003)). This district
embraced the cities on the southern edge of the plain of Jezreel, and
extended to the Jordan. Taanach and Megiddo, which have been preserved
in the villages of Taanuk and Lejun, were situated on the south-western
border of this plain, and belonged to the Manassites (see at [Jos
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#021); [Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011)). "And all Bethshean," in other
words, the whole of the district of Bethshean, i.e., Beisan, at the
eastern end of the valley of Jezreel, where it opens into the Jordan
valley (Rob. Pal. ii. p. 740ff.), "which (district was situated) by the
side of Zarthan below Jezreel, from (the town of) Bethshean (see at [Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011)) to Abel-Mecholah, on the other
side of Jokmeam." Zarthan, also called Zereda (compare [Kg1
7:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#046) with [Ch2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#017)), has probably been preserved, so
far as the name is concerned, in Kurn Sartabeh, in the neighbourhood of
which the old city probably stood, about five miles to the south of
Beisan, at a point where the Jordan valley contracts (see at [Jos
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016)). The expression "below Jezreel"
refers to "all Bethshean," and may be explained from the elevated
situation of Jezreel, the present Zern (see at [Jos
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#018)). According to Rob. iii. p. 163,
this is "comparatively high, and commands a wide and noble view,
extending down the broad low valley on the east of Beisan and to the
mountains of Ajlun beyond the Jordan." The following words, "from
Bethshean to Abel-Mecholah," give a more precise definition of the
boundary. The lxx have erroneously inserted καὶ before מבּית־שׁאן, and
Thenius and Bttcher defend it on the strength of their erroneous
interpretations of the preceding statements. Abel-Mecholah was in the
Jordan valley, according to the Onomast., ten Roman miles to the south
of Beisan (see at [Jdg 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#022)). The last
clause is not quite intelligible to us, as the situation of the
Levitical city Jokmeam ([Ch1 6:53](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#053), or
Kibzaim, a different place from the Jokneam on Carmel, [Jos
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#022); [Jos
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#034)) has not yet been discovered
(see at [Jos 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#022)). According to
this, Baanah's district in the Jordan valley did not extend so far as
Kurn Sartabeh, but simply to the neighbourhood of Zarthan, and embraced
the whole of the tribe-territory of Manasseh on this side of the Jordan.

[Kg1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#013)

Bengeber was in Ramoth of Gilead in the tribe of Gad ([Jos
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008)), probably on the site of the
modern Szalt (see at [Deu 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043)). "To
him belonged the Havvoth Jair (Jair's-lives) in Gilead, to him the
region of Argob in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and brazen
bolts." If we look at this passage alone, the region of Argob in Bashan
appears to be distinct from the Havvoth Jair in Gilead. But if we
compare it with [Num 32:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#040); [Deu
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004), and [Deu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013), [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014), and [Jos
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#030), it is evident from these
passages that the Jair's-lives are identical with the sixty large and
fortified cities of the region of Argob. For, according to [Deu
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004), these sixty fortified cities,
with high walls, gates, and bars, were all fortified cities of the
kingdom of Og of Bashan, which the Israelites conquered under Moses, and
to which, according to [Num 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041),
Jair the Manassite, who had conquered them, gave the name of Havvoth
Jair. Hence it is stated in [Jos
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#030), that the sixty Jair-towns were
situated in Bashan. Consequently the אר חבל לו in our verse is to be
taken as a more precise definition of וגו יאיר חוּת לו, or a clearer
description of the district superintended by Bengeber, so that Gilead is
used, as is frequently the case, in the broader sense of Peraea. Compare
with this the Commentary on [Deu 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004),
[Deu 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013), [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014), where the names ארגּב and חוּת
are explained, and the imaginary discrepancy between the sixty
Jair's-towns in the passages cited, and the twenty-three and thirty
cities of Jair in [Ch1 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#022) and [Jdg
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004), is discussed and solved. And
when Thenius objects to this explanation on the ground that the villages
of Jair cannot be identical with the sixty fortified cities, because
villages of nomads and strongly fortified cities could not be one and
the same, this objection falls to the ground with the untenable
interpretation of חוּת as applying to nomad villages.

[Kg1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#014)

Ahinadab the son of Iddo received as his district Mahanaim, a fortified
and probably also a very important city to the north of the Jabbok, on
the border of the tribe of Gad, which may perhaps have been preserved in
the ruin of Mahneh (see at [Jos 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#026)
and [Gen 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#003)). מחנימה, to Mahanaim
(cf. Ewald, 216, a., note), with ה local, probably referring to the fact
that Ahinadab was sent away to Mahanaim.

[Kg1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#015)

Ahimaaz, possibly Zadok's son ([Sa2
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#027); [Sa2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#017).), in Naphtali. This does not
denote generally "the most northern portion of the land, say from the
northern end of the lake of Gennesaret into Coele-Syria," as Thenius
supposes; for the tribe-territory of Asher, which had a prefect of its
own, was not situated to the south-west of Naphtali, but ran along the
west of Naphtali to the northern boundary of Canaan (see at [Jos
19:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#024)). He also (like Ben-Abinadab,
[Kg1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#011)) had a daughter of Solomon,
Basmath, as his wife.

[Kg1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#016)

Baanah the son of Hushai, probably the faithful friend and wise
counsellor of David ([Sa2 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#032)., [Kg1
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#005).), was in Asher and בּעלות, a
name quite unknown. If בּ forms part of the word (Baaloth, according to
the lxx, Vulg., Syr., and Arab.), we must take it as a district, since
the preposition בּ would necessarily have been repeated if a district
(Asher) had been connected with a town (Baaloth). In any case, it is not
the city of Baaloth in the Negeb of Judah ([Jos
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#024)) that is intended.

[Kg1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#017)

Jehoshaphat the son of Paruach, in Issachar; i.e., over the whole of the
territory of that tribe in the plain of Jezreel, with the exception of
the cities of Taanach, Megiddo, and Bethshean, which were in the
southern portion of it, and were allotted to the Manassites, and,
according to [Kg1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#012), were put under
the care of Baanah; and not merely in the northern part of Issachar,
"with the exception of the plain of Jezreel," as Thenius erroneously
maintains. Zebulun may possibly have also formed part of his district,
if not entirely, yet in its southern portion, provided that the northern
portion was assigned to Ahimaaz in Naphtali, since Zebulun had no
prefect of its own.

[Kg1 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#018)

Shimei the son of Elah, possibly the one mentioned in [Kg1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#008), in Benjamin.

[Kg1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#019)

Geber the son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, i.e., as the apposition
"the land of Sihon ... and of Og..." clearly shows, the whole of the
Israelitish land on the east of the Jordan, as in [Deu
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001); [Jdg
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001), etc., with the simple exception
of the districts placed under Bengeber and Ahinadab ([Kg1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#013) and [Kg1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#014)). אחד נציב, "one president was it
who (was) in the land (of Gilead)." נציב cannot signify a military post
or a garrison here, as in [Sa1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005);
[Sa1 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003), etc., but is equivalent to
נצּב, the president ([Kg1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#007)). The
meaning is, that notwithstanding the great extent of this district, it
had only one prefect.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 4:20</span></span>

In [Kg1 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020) the account of Solomon's
officers is closed by a general remark as to the prosperous condition of
the whole nation; though we miss the copula Vav at the commencement. The
words, "Judah and Israel were numerous as the sand by the sea," indicate
that the promise given to the patriarchs ([Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017), cf. [Gen
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#013)) had been fulfilled. To this
there is appended in [Kg1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001) the
remark concerning the extent of Solomon's sway, which prepares the way
for what follows, and shows how the other portion of the promise, "thy
seed will possess the gates of its enemies," had been fulfilled. - The
first fourteen verses of 1 Kings 5 are therefore connected by the lxx,
Vulg., Luther, and others with 1 Kings 4. It is not till [Kg1
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#015) that a new section begins.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 4:21</span></span>

Solomon's Regal Splendour. - [Kg1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021). "Solomon was ruler over all the
kingdoms from the river (Euphrates) onwards, over the land of the
Philistines to the border of Egypt, who brought presents and were
subject to Solomon his whole life long." Most of the commentators supply
ועד before פלשׁתּים ארץ (even to the land of the Philistines) after the
parallel passage [Ch2 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#026), so that
the following גּבוּל ועד would give a more precise definition of the
terminus ad quem. But it is by no means probable that ועד, which appears
to be indispensable, should have dropped out through the oversight of a
copyist, and it is not absolutely necessary to supply it, inasmuch as בּ
may be repeated in thought before ארץ פ from the preceding clause. The
participle מגּשׁים is construed ad sensum with ממלכות. Bringing presents
is equivalent to paying tribute, as in [Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002), etc.

Vv. 22-28. The splendour of the court, the consumption in the royal
kitchen ([Kg1 4:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022)), and the
well-filled stables ([Kg1 4:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#026)),
were such as befitted the ruler of so large a kingdom.

[Kg1 4:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022)

The daily consumption of לחם (food or provisions) amounted to thirty
cors of fine meal (סלת = חטּים סלת, fine sifted meal, [Exo
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#002); for סלת see also [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002)), and sixty cors of קמח, ordinary
meal, ten fattened oxen, twenty pasture oxen, which were brought
directly from the pasture and slaughtered, and a hundred sheep, beside
different kinds of game. כּר, κορός, the later name for חמר, the largest
dry and also liquid ([Kg1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011)),
measure of capacity, contained ten ephahs or baths, i.e., according to
the calculation made by Thenius, 15,300 cubic inches (Dresden) = about 1
7/8 scheffel;

(Note: The scheffel is about an English sack (vid., Flgel's Dict.). -
Tr.)

so that ninety cors would amount to 171 scheffel, from which 28,000 lbs.
of bread could be baked (Theol. Stud. und Krit. 1846, pp. 132,133). And
"if we reckon 2 lbs. of bread to each person, there would be 14,000
persons in Solomon's court," The consumption of flesh would be quite in
proportion to that of bread; for ten fattened oxen, twenty oxen from the
pasture, and a hundred sheep, yield more than 21,000 lbs. of meat, that
is to say, a pound and a half for each person, "assuming, according to
the statements of those who are acquainted with the matter, that the
edible meat of a fat ox amounts to 600 lbs., that of an ox from the
pasture to 400 lbs., and that of a sheep to 70 lbs." (Thenius ut sup.).
This daily consumption of Solomon's court will not appear too great, if,
on the one hand, we compare it with the quantity consumed at other
oriental courts both of ancient and modern times,

(Note: According to Athen. Deipnos. iv. 10, the kings of Persia required
a thousand oxen a day; and according to Tavernier, in Rosenmller's A. u.
N. Morgenland, iii. pp. 166,167, five hundred sheep and lambs were
slaughtered daily for the Sultan's court.)

and if, on the other hand, we bear in mind that not only the numerous
attendants upon the king and his harem, but also the royal adjutants and
the large number of officers employed about the court, were supplied
from the king's table, and that their families had also to be fed,
inasmuch as the wages in oriental courts are all paid in kind. In
addition to this, game was also supplied to the king's table: viz., איּל
stags, צבי gazelles, יחמוּר fallow-deer, and אבוּסים בּרבּרים "fattened
fowl." The meaning of אבוּסים is doubtful. The earlier translators
render it birds or fowl. Kimchi adopts the rendering "capons;" Tanch.
Hieroz. "geese," so called from their pure (בּרר) white feathers; and
both Gesenius and Dietrich (Lex.) decide in favour of the latter. The
word must denote some special kind of fowl, since edible birds in
general were called צפּרים ([Neh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018)).

[Kg1 4:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#024)

Solomon was able to appropriate all this to his court, because (כּי) he
had dominion, etc.;...and ([Kg1 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#025))
Israel and Judah enjoyed the blessings of peace during the whole of his
reign. הנּהר בּכל־עבר, "over all the other side of the river
(Euphrates)," i.e., not the land on the east, but that on the west of
the river. This usage of speech is to be explained from the fact that
the author of our books, who was living in exile on the other side of
the Euphrates, describes the extent of Solomon's kingdom taking that as
his starting-point. Solomon's power only extended to the Euphrates, from
Tiphsach in the north-east to Gaza in the south-west. תּפסח (crossing,
from פּסח) is Thapsacus, a large and wealthy city on the western bank of
the Euphrates, at which the armies of the younger Cyrus and Alexander
crossed the river (Xen. Anab. i. 4; Arrian, Exped. Alex. iii. 7). Gaza,
the southernmost city of the Philistines, the present Guzzeh; see at
[Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003). The הנּהר עבר מלכי are the
kings of Syria who were subjugated by David ([Sa2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006) and [Sa2
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#019)), and of the Philistines ([Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)). "And he had peace on all sides
round about." This statement does not "most decidedly contradict [Kg1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023).," as Thenius maintains; for it
cannot be proved that according to this passage the revolt of Damascus
had taken place before Solomon's reign (Ewald and others; see at [Kg1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023).).

[Kg1 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#025)

"Judah and Israel sat in safety, every one under his vine and his
fig-tree." This expresses the undisturbed enjoyment of the costly
productions of the land ([Kg2 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#031)),
and is therefore used by the prophets as a figure denoting the happiness
of the Messianic age ([Mic 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004); [Zac
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#010)). "From Dan to Beersheba," as in
[Jdg 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001), etc.

[Kg1 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#026)

This verse is not to be regarded "as a parenthesis according to the
intention of the editor," but gives a further proof of the peace and
prosperity which the kingdom and people enjoyed under Solomon. Solomon
had a strong force of war chariots and cavalry, that he might be able to
suppress every attempt on the part of the tributary kings of Syria and
Philistia to revolt and disturb the peace. "Solomon had 4000 racks of
horses for his chariots, and 12,000 riding horses," which were kept
partly in Jerusalem and partly in cities specially built for the purpose
([Kg1 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#019); [Kg1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026); [Ch2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#014); [Ch2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#025)). ארבּעים (40) is an old
copyist's error for ארבּעה (4), which we find in the parallel passage
[Ch2 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#025), and as we may also infer
from [Kg1 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026) and [Ch2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#014), since according to these
passages Solomon had 1400 רכב or war chariots. For 4000 horses are a
very suitable number for 1400 chariots, though not 40,000, since two
draught horses were required for every war chariot, and one horse may
have been kept as a reserve. ארוה does not mean a team (Ges.), but a
rack or box in a stable, from ארה, carpere. According to Vegetius, i.
56, in Bochart (Hieroz. i. p. 112, ed. Ros.), even in ancient times
every horse had it own crib in the stable just as it has now. Bttcher
(n. ex. Krit. Aehrenl. ii. p. 27) is wrong in supposing that there were
several horses, say at least ten, to one rack. מרכּב is used
collectively for "chariots."

[Kg1 4:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#027)

"And" = a still further proof of the blessings of peace - "those
prefects ([Kg1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#007).) provided for king
Solomon, and all who came to the king's table, i.e., who were fed from
the royal table, every one his month (see at [Kg1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#007)), so that nothing was wanting
([Kg1 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#028)), and conveyed the barley
(the ordinary food of cattle in Palestine and the southern lands, where
oats are not cultivated) and the straw for the horses and coursers to
the place where it ought to be. To שׁם יהיה אשׁר the lxx, Vulg., and
others supply המּלך as the subject: wherever the king might stay. This
is certainly more in harmony with the imperfect יהיה than it would be to
supply הרכשׁ, as Bochart and others propose; still it is hardly correct.
For in that case ולרכשׁ לסּוּסים could only be understood as referring
to the chariot horses and riding horses, which Solomon kept for the
necessities of his court, and not to the whole of the cavalry; since we
cannot possibly assume that even if Solomon changed his residence
according to the season and to suit his pleasure, or on political
grounds, as Thenius supposes, though this cannot by any means be
inferred from [Kg1 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#018) and [Kg1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#019), he took 16,000 horses about with
him. But this limitation of the clause is evidently at variance with the
context, since ולרכב לסּוּסים too plainly refer back to [Kg1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#006). Moreover, "if the king were
intended, he would certainly have been mentioned by name, as so many
other subjects and objects have come between." For these reasons we
agree with Bttcher in taking יהיה indefinitely: "where it (barley and
straw) was wanted, according to the distribution of the horses." רכשׁ
probably denotes a very superior kind of horse, like the German Renner
(a courser or race-horse). כּמשׁפּטו אישׁ, every one according to his
right, i.e., whatever was appointed for him as right.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 4:29</span></span>

Solomon's Wisdom. - [Kg1 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#029).
According to His promise in [Kg1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#012),
God gave Solomon wisdom and very much insight and לב רחב, "breadth of
heart," i.e., a comprehensive understanding, as sand by the sea-shore, -
a proverbial expression for an innumerable multitude, or great abundance
(cf. [Kg1 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020); [Gen
41:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#049); [Jos
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#004), etc.). חכמה signifies rather
practical wisdom, ability to decide what is the judicious and useful
course to pursue; תּבוּנה, rather keenness of understanding to arrive at
the correct solution of difficult and complicated problems; לב רחב,
mental capacity to embrace the most diverse departments of knowledge.

[Kg1 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#030)

His wisdom was greater than the wisdom of all the sons of the East, and
all the wisdom of the Egyptians. קרם בּני (sons of the East) are
generally the Arabian tribes dwelling in the east of Canaan, who spread
as far as to the Euphrates (cf. [Jdg
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003), [Jdg
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#033); [Jdg
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#012); [Jdg
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#010); [Job
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003); [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014), etc.). Hence we find קרם ארץ
used in [Gen 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006) to denote Arabia in
the widest sense, on the east and south-east of Palestine; whereas in
[Gen 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001) קרם בּני ארץ signifies the
land beyond the Euphrates, viz., Mesopotamia, and in [Num
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007), קרם הררי, the mountains of
Mesopotamia. Consequently by "the sons of the East" we are to understand
here primarily the Arabians, who were celebrated for their gnomic
wisdom, more especially the Sabaeans (see at 1 Kings 10), including the
Idumaeans, particularly the Temanites ([Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007); [Oba
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008)); but also, as כּל requires, the
Chaldaeans, who were celebrated both for their astronomy and astrology.
"All the wisdom of the Egyptians," because the wisdom of the Egyptians,
which was so greatly renowned as almost to have become proverbial (cf.
[Isa 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011); [Isa
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002), and [Act
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022); Joseph. Ant. viii. 2, 5; Herod.
ii. 160), extended over the most diverse branches of knowledge, such as
geometry, arithmetic, astronomy, and astrology (Diod. Sic. i. 73 and
81), and as their skill in the preparation of ointments from vegetable
and animal sources, and their extensive acquaintance with medicine,
clearly prove, embraced natural science as well, in which Solomon,
according to [Kg1 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#033), was very
learned.

[Kg1 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#031)

"He was wiser than all men (of his time), than Ethan the Ezrachite and
Heman, Chalcol and Darda, the sons of Machol." These four persons are
most probably the same as the "sons of Zerach" (Ethan, Heman, Calcol,
and Dara) mentioned in [Ch1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006), since
the names perfectly agree, with the exception of דּרע for דּרדּע, where
the difference is no doubt attributable to a copyist's error; although,
as the name does not occur again, it cannot be decided whether Dara or
Darda is the correct form. Heman and Ethan are also called Ezrachites
(האזרחי) in [Psa 88:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001) and [Psa
89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001); and אזרחי is another form of
זרחי, the name of the family of Zerach the son of Judah ([Num
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#013), [Num
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#020)), lengthened by א prosthet. But
they were both Levites - Heman a Korahite of the line of Kohath and a
grandson of Samuel ([Ch1 6:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#018)), and
Ethan a Merarite ([Ch1 6:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#029); [Ch1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#017)) and the president of the
Levitical vocal choirs in the time of David ([Ch1
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#019)); and Heman was also "the king's
seer in the words of God" ([Ch1 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#005)).
Their Levitical descent is not at variance with the epithet Ezrachite.
For as the Levite in [Jdg 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007) is
spoken of as belonging to the family of Judah, because he dwelt in
Bethlehem of Judah, and as Samuel's father, Elkanah the Levite, is
called an Ephraimite in [Sa1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001),
because in his civil capacity he was incorporated into the tribe of
Ephraim, so Heman and Ethan are called Ezrachites because they were
incorporated into the Judaean family of Zerach. It by no means follows
from [Ch1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006) that they were lineal
descendants of Zerach. The whole character of the genealogical fragment
contained in [Ch1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006). shows very
clearly that it does not give the lineal posterity of Zerach with
genealogical exactness, but that certain persons and households of that
family who had gained historical renown are grouped together without any
more precise account of their lineal descent. Calcol and Darda (or Dara)
are never met with again. It is no doubt to these two that the
expression מחול בּני refers, though it cannot be determined whether מחול
is a proper name or an appellative noun. In support of the appellative
meaning, "sons of the dance," in the sense of sacras choreas ducendi
periti, Hiller (in the Onomast. p. 872) appeals to [Ecc
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#004), "daughters of song." - "And his
name was," i.e., he was celebrated, "among all the nations round about"
(cf. [Kg1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001), [Kg1
10:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#023)).

[Kg1 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#032)

"He spoke three thousand proverbs, and there were a thousand and five of
his songs." Of these proverbs we possess a comparatively small portion
in the book of Proverbs, probably a selection of the best of his
proverbs; but of the songs, besides the Song of Songs, we have only two
psalms, viz., Ps 72 and [Psa 127:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001),
which have his name, and justly bear it.

[Kg1 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#033)

"And he spoke of trees, from the cedar on Lebanon to the hyssop which
grows upon the wall." The cedar and hyssop are placed in antithesis, the
former as the largest and most glorious of trees, the latter as the
smallest and most insignificant of plants, to embrace the whole of the
vegetable kingdom. Thenius maintains that by אזוב we are not to
understand the true hyssop, nor the Wohlgemuth or Dosten (ὀρίγανον),
according to the ordinary view (see at [Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)), because they are neither of
them such small plants as we should expect in an antithesis to the
cedar, but "one of the wall-mosses growing in tufts, more especially the
orthotrichum saxatile (Oken), which forms a miniature hyssop with its
lancet-shaped leaves, and from its extreme minuteness furnishes a
perfect antithesis to the cedar." There is much to favour this view,
since we can easily imagine that the Hebrews may have reckoned a moss,
which resembled the hyssop in its leaves, as being itself a species of
hyssop. - "And of beasts and birds, of creeping things and fishes;" the
four principal classes into which the Hebrews divided the animal
kingdom. Speaking of plants and animals presupposes observations and
researches in natural science, or botanical and zoological studies.

[Kg1 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#034)

The widespread fame of his wisdom brought many strangers to Jerusalem,
and all the more because of its rarity at that time, especially among
princes. The coming of the queen of Sheba to Jerusalem (1 Kings 10)
furnishes a historical proof of this.

(Note: Greatly as the fame of Solomon's wisdom is extolled in these
verses, it was far outdone in subsequent times. Even Josephus has
considerably adorned the biblical accounts in his Antiqq. viii. 2, 5. He
makes Solomon the author not only of 1005 βιβλία περὶ ᾠδῶν καὶ μελῶν,
and 300 βίβλους παραβολῶν καὶ εἰκόνων, but also of magical books with
marvellous contents. Compare the extracts from Eupolemus in Eusebii
praep. Ev. ix. 31ff., the remnants of Solomon's apocryphal writings in
Fabricii Cod. apocr. V. T. i. pp. 914ff. and 1014f., the collection of
the Talmudical Sagas in Othonis Lex. rabb. philol. pp. 668f., and G.
Weil, bibl. Legenden der Mussulmnner, pp. 225-279. According to the
Koran (Sure xxvii. [Kg1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#017).),
Solomon understood the languages not only of men and demons, but also of
birds and ants. The Turkish literature contains a "Book of Solomon,"
Suleimanname, consisting of seventy volumes, from which v. Hammer
(Rosenl, i. p. 147ff.) has given extracts.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 5](kg1005)

</div>
