<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2004)  [Next](kg2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 5:1</span></span>

Curing of Naaman from Leprosy. - [Kg2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001). Naaman, the commander-in-chief of
the Syrian king, who was a very great man before his lord, i.e., who
held a high place in the service of his king and was greatly
distinguished (פּנים נשׂא, cf. [Isa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003); [Isa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014)), because God had given the
Syrians salvation (victory) through him, was as a warrior afflicted with
leprosy. The ו has not dropped out before מצרע, nor has the copula been
omitted for the purpose of sharpening the antithesis (Thenius), for the
appeal to Ewald, 354, a., proves nothing, since the passages quoted
there are of a totally different kind; but חיל גּבּור is a second
predicate: the man was as a brave warrior leprous. There is an allusion
here to the difference between the Syrians and the Israelites in their
views of leprosy. Whereas in Israel lepers were excluded from human
society (see at Lev 13 and 14), in Syria a man afflicted with leprosy
could hold a very high state-office in the closest association with the
king.

[Kg2 5:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#002)

And in Naaman's house before his wife, i.e., in her service, there was
an Israelitish maiden, whom the Syrians had carried off in a marauding
expedition (גדוּדים יצאוּ: they had gone out in (as) marauding bands).
She said to her mistress: "O that my lord were before the prophet at
Samaria! (where Elisha had a house, [Kg2
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#032)), he would free him from his
leprosy." מצּרעת אסף, to receive (again) from leprosy, in the sense of
"to heal," may be explained from [Num
12:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014), where אסף is applied to the
reception of Miriam into the camp again, from which she had been
excluded on account of her leprosy.

[Kg2 5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#004)

When Naaman related this to his lord (the king), he told him to go to
Samaria furnished with a letter to the king of Israel; and he took with
him rich presents as compensation for the cure he was to receive, viz.,
ten talents of silver, about 25,000 thalers (3750 - Tr.); 600 shekels (=
two talents) of gold, about 50,000 thalers (7500); and ten changes of
clothes, a present still highly valued in the East (see the Comm. on
[Gen 45:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#022)). This very large present
was quite in keeping with Naaman's position, and was not too great for
the object in view, namely, his deliverance from a malady which would be
certainly, even if slowly, fatal.

[Kg2 5:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#006)

When the king of Israel (Joram) received the letter of the Syrian king
on Naaman's arrival, and read therein that he was to cure Naaman of his
leprosy (ועתּה, and now, - showing in the letter the transition to the
main point, which is the only thing communicated here; cf. Ewald, 353,
b.), he rent his clothes in alarm, and exclaimed, "Am I God, to be able
to kill and make alive?" i.e., am I omnipotent like God? (cf. [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039); [Sa1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)); "for he sends to me to cure a
man of his leprosy." The words of the letter ואספתּו, "so cure him,"
were certainly not so insolent in their meaning as Joram supposed, but
simply meant: have him cured, as thou hast a wonder-working prophet; the
Syrian king imagining, according to his heathen notions of priests and
gotes, that Joram could do what he liked with his prophets and their
miraculous powers. There was no ground, therefore, for the suspicion
which Joram expressed: "for only observe and see, that he seeks occasion
against me." התאנּה to seek occasion, sc. for a quarrel (cf. [Jdg
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#004)).

[Kg2 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#008)

When Elisha heard of this, he reproved the king for his unbelieving
alarm, and told him to send the man to him, "that he may learn that
there is a prophet in Israel."

[Kg2 5:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009)

When Naaman stopped with his horses and chariot before the house of
Elisha, the prophet sent a messenger out to him to say, "Go and wash
thyself seven times in the Jordan, and thy flesh will return to thee,
i.e., become sound, and thou wilt be clean." ישׁב, return, inasmuch as
the flesh had been changed through the leprosy into festering matter and
putrefaction. The reason why Elisha did not go out to Naaman himself, is
not to be sought for in the legal prohibition of intercourse with
lepers, as Ephraem Syrus and many others suppose, nor in his fear of the
leper, as Thenius thinks, nor even in the wish to magnify the miracle in
the eyes of Naaman, as C. a Lapide imagines, but simply in Naaman's
state of mind. This is evident from his exclamation concerning the way
in which he was treated. Enraged at his treatment, he said to his
servant ([Kg2 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#011), [Kg2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012)): "I thought, he will come out to
me and stand and call upon the name of Jehovah his God, and go with his
hand over the place (i.e., move his hand to and fro over the diseased
places), and take away the leprosy." המּצורע, the leprous = the disease
of leprosy, the scabs and ulcers of leprosy. "Are not Abana and Pharpar,
the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? (for the
combination of טּוב with נהרות, see Ewald, 174f.) Should I not bathe in
them, and become clean?" With these words he turned back, going away in
a rage. Naaman had been greatly strengthened in the pride, which is
innate in every natural man, by the exalted position which he held in
the state, and in which every one bowed before him, and served him in
the most reverential manner, with the exception of his lord the king;
and he was therefore to receive a salutary lesson of humiliation, and at
the same time was also to learn that he owed his cure not to any magic
touch from the prophet, but solely to the power of God working through
him. - Of the two rivers of Damascus, Abana or Amana (the reading of the
Keri with the interchange of the labials ב and מ, see [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)) is no doubt the present Barada or
Barady (Arab. brd, i.e., the cold river), the Chrysorrhoas (Strabo, xvi.
p. 755; Plin. h. n. 18 or 16), which rises in the table-land to the
south of Zebedany, and flows through this city itself, and then dividing
into two arms, enters two small lakes about 4 3/4 hours to the east of
the city. The Pharpar is probably the only other independent river of
any importance in the district of Damascus, namely, the Avaj, which
arises from the union of several brooks around Sa'sa', and flows through
the plain to the south of Damascus into the lake Heijny (see Rob. Bibl.
Researches, p. 444). The water of the Barada is beautiful, clear and
transparent (Rob.), whereas the water of the Jordan is turbid, "of a
clayey colour" (Rob. Pal. ii. p. 256); and therefore Naaman might very
naturally think that his own native rivers were better than the Jordan.

[Kg2 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#013)

His servants then addressed him in a friendly manner, and said, "My
father, if the prophet had said to thee a great thing (i.e., a thing
difficult to carry out), shouldst thou not have done it? how much more
then, since he has said to thee, Wash, and thou wilt be clean?" אבי, my
father, is a confidential expression arising from childlike piety, as in
[Kg2 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#021) and [Sa1
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#012); and the etymological jugglery
which traces אבי from לבי = לוי = לוּ (Ewald, Gr. 358, Anm.), or from אם
(Thenius), is quite superfluous (see Delitzsch on Job, vol. ii. p. 265,
transl.). - דּבּר...גּדול דּבר is a conditional clause without אם (see
Ewald, 357, b.), and the object is placed first for the sake of emphasis
(according to Ewald, 309, a.). כּי אף, how much more (see Ewald, 354,
c.), sc. shouldst thou do what is required, since he has ordered thee so
small and easy a thing.

[Kg2 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#014)

Naaman then went down (from Samaria to the Jordan) and dipped in Jordan
seven times, and his flesh became sound (ישׁב as in [Kg2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010)) like the flesh of a little boy.
Seven times, to show that the healing was a work of God, for seven is
the stamp of the works of God.

[Kg2 5:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015)

After the cure had been effected, he returned with all his train to the
man of God with this acknowledgment: "Behold, I have found that there is
no God in all the earth except in Israel," and with the request that he
would accept a blessing (a present, בּרכה, as in [Gen
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#011); [Sa1
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#027), etc.) from him, which the
prophet, however, stedfastly refused, notwithstanding all his urging,
that he might avoid all appearance of selfishness, by which the false
prophets were actuated.

[Kg2 5:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#017)

Then Naaman said: ולא, "and not" = and if not, καὶ ει ̓ μή (lxx; not
"and O," according to Ewald, 358, b., Anm.), "let there be given to thy
servant (= to me) two mules' burden of earth (on the construction see
Ewald, 287, h.), for thy servant will no more make (offer)
burnt-offerings and slain-offerings to any other gods than Jehovah. May
Jehovah forgive thy servant in this thing, when my lord (the king of
Syria) goeth into the house of Rimmon, to fall down (worship) there, and
he supports himself upon my hand, that I fall down (with him) in the
house of Rimmon; if I (thus) fall down in the house of Rimmon, may,"
etc. It is very evident from Naaman's explanation, "for thy servant,"
etc., that he wanted to take a load of earth with him out of the land of
Israel, that he might be able to offer sacrifice upon it to the God of
Israel, because he was still a slave to the polytheistic superstition,
that no god could be worshipped in a proper and acceptable manner except
in his own land, or upon an altar built of the earth of his own land.
And because Naaman's knowledge of God was still adulterated with
superstition, he was not yet prepared to make an unreserved confession
before men of his faith in Jehovah as the only true God, but hoped that
Jehovah would forgive him if he still continued to join outwardly in the
worship of idols, so far as his official duty required. Rimmon (i.e.,
the pomegranate) is here, and probably also in the local name
Hadad-rimmon ([Zac 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#011)), the name of
the supreme deity of the Damascene Syrians, and probably only a
contracted form of Hadad-rimmon, since Hadad was the supreme deity or
sun-god of the Syrians (see at [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003)), signifying the sun-god with the
modification expressed by Rimmon, which has been differently interpreted
according to the supposed derivation of the word. Some derive the name
from רמם = רוּם, as the supreme god of heaven, like the Ἐλιοῦν of
Sanchun. (Cler., Seld., Ges. thes. p. 1292); others from רמּון, a
pomegranate, as a faecundantis, since the pomegranate with its abundance
of seeds is used in the symbolism of both Oriental and Greek mythology
along with the Phallus as a symbol of the generative power (vid., Bhr,
Symbolik, ii. pp. 122,123), and is also found upon Assyrian monuments
(vid., Layard, Nineveh and its Remains, p. 343); others again, with less
probability, from רמה, jaculari, as the sun-god who vivifies and
fertilizes the earth with his rays, like the ἑκηβόλος Ἀπόλλων; and
others from רמם = Arab. rmm, computruit, as the dying winter sun
(according to Movers and Hitzig; see Leyrer in Herzog's Cyclopaedia). -
The words "and he supports himself upon my hand" are not to be
understood literally, but are a general expressly denoting the service
which Naaman had to render as the aide-de-camp to his king (cf. [Kg2
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#002), [Kg2
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#017)). For the Chaldaic form
השׁתּחויתי, see Ewald, 156, a. - In the repetition of the words "if I
fall down in the temple of Rimmon," etc., he expresses the urgency of
his wish.

[Kg2 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#019)

Elisha answered, "Go in peace," wishing the departing Syrian the peace
of God upon the road, without thereby either approving or disapproving
the religious conviction which he had expressed. For as Naaman had not
asked permission to go with his king into the temple of Rimmon, but had
simply said, might Jehovah forgive him or be indulgent with him in this
matter, Elisha could do nothing more, without a special command from
God, than commend the heathen, who had been brought to belief in the God
of Israel as the true God by the miraculous cure of his leprosy, to the
further guidance of the Lord and of His grace.

(Note: Most of the earlier theologians found in Elisha's words a direct
approval of the religious conviction expressed by Naaman and his
attitude towards idolatry; and since they could not admit that a prophet
would have permitted a heathen alone to participate in idolatrous
ceremonies, endeavoured to get rid of the consequence resulting from it,
viz., licitam ergo esse Christianis συμφώνησιν πιστοῦ μετὰ ἀπιστοῦ, seu
symbolizationem et communicationem cum ceremonia idololatrica, either by
appealing to the use of השׁתּחות and to the distinction between
incurvatio regis voluntaria et religiosa (real worship) and incurvatio
servilis et coacta Naemani, quae erat politica et civilis (mere
prostration from civil connivance), or by the ungrammatical explanation
that Naaman merely spoke of what he had already done, not of what he
would do in future (vid., Pfeiffer, Dub. vex. p. 445ff., and J. Meyer,
ad Seder Olam, p. 904ff., Budd., and others). - Both are unsatisfactory.
The dreaded consequence falls of itself if we only distinguish between
the times of the old covenant and those of the new. Under the old
covenant the time had not yet come in which the heathen, who came to the
knowledge of the true deity of the God of Israel, could be required to
break off from all their heathen ways, unless they would formally enter
into fellowship with the covenant nation.)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 5:20</span></span>

Punishment of Gehazi. - [Kg2 5:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020).
When Naaman had gone a stretch of the way (ארץ כּברת, [Kg2
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#019); see at [Gen
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016)), there arose in Gehazi, the
servant of Elisha, the desire for a portion of the presents of the
Syrian which his master had refused (אם כּי יי חי, as truly as Jehovah
liveth, assuredly I run after him; אם כּי as in [Sa1
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#034)). He therefore hastened after
him; and as Naaman no sooner saw Gehazi running after him than he sprang
quickly down from his chariot in reverential gratitude to the prophet
(יפּל as in [Gen 24:64](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#064)), he asked in
the name of Elisha for a talent of silver and two changes of raiment,
professedly for two poor pupils of the prophets, who had come to the
prophet from Mount Ephraim.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 5:23</span></span>

But Naaman forced him to accept two talents (קח הואל, be pleased to
take; and כּכּרים, with the dual ending, ne pereat indicium numeri -
Winer) in two purses, and two changes of raiment, and out of politeness
had these presents carried by two of his servants before Gehazi.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 5:24</span></span>

When Gehazi came to the hill (העפל, the well-known hill before the city)
he took the presents from the bearers, and dismissing the men, laid them
up in the house. בּ פּקד, to bring into safe custody.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 5:25</span></span>

But when he entered his master's presence again, he asked him, "Whence
(comest thou), Gehazi?" and on his returning the lying answer that he
had not been anywhere, charged him with all that he had done. הלך לבּי
לא, "had not my heart gone, when the man turned from his chariot to meet
thee?" This is the simplest and the only correct interpretation of these
difficult words, which have been explained in very different ways.
Theodoret (οὐχὶ ἡ καρδία μου ἦ μετὰ σοῦ) and the Vulgate (nonne cor meum
in praesenti erat, quando, etc.) have already given the same
explanation, and so far as the sense is concerned it agrees with that
adopted by Thenius: was I not (in spirit) away (from here) and present
(there)? הלך stands in a distinct relation to the הלך לא of Gehazi. -
וגו האת: "is it time to take silver, and clothes, and olive-trees, and
vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and servants and maidens?" i.e., is this
the time, when so many hypocrites pretend to be prophets from
selfishness and avarice, and bring the prophetic office into contempt
with unbelievers, for a servant of the true God to take money and goods
from a non-Israelite for that which God has done through him, that he
may acquire property and luxury for himself?

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 5:27</span></span>

"And let the leprosy of Naaman cleave to thee and to thy seed for ever."
This punishment took effect immediately. Gehazi went out from Elisha
covered with leprosy as if with snow (cf. ex. [Kg2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#006); [Num
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#010)). It was not too harsh a
punishment that the leprosy taken from Naaman on account of his faith in
the living God, should pass to Gehazi on account of his departure from
the true God. For it was not his avarice only that was to be punished,
but the abuse of the prophet's name for the purpose of carrying out his
selfish purpose, and his misrepresentation of the prophet.

(Note: "This was not the punishment of his immoderate δωροδοκίας
(receiving of gifts) merely, but most of all of his lying. For he who
seeks to deceive the prophet in relation to the things which belong to
his office, is said to lie to the Holy Ghost, whose instruments the
prophets are" (vid., [Act 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003)). -
Grotius.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 6](kg2006)

</div>
