<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2001)  [Next](kg2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 2:1</span></span>

Elijah's Ascension to Heaven. - [Kg2
2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001). Journey from Gilgal to the
other side of the Jordan. - [Kg2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001),
[Kg2 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#002). When the time arrived that
Jehovah was about to take up His servant Elijah in a tempest to heaven,
Elijah went with his attendant Elisha from Gilgal down to Bethel.
בּסּערה, in the tempest or storm, i.e., in a tempestuous storm, which
was frequently the herald of the divine self-revelations in the
terrestrial world (vid., [Job 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001);
[Job 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#006); [Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004); [Zac
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014)). השּׁמים is the accusative of
direction. Gilgal and Bethel (Beitin, see at [Kg1
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#029)) were seats of schools of the
prophets, which Elijah had founded in the kingdom of the ten tribes. It
is now generally admitted that Gilgal, from which they went down to
Bethel, cannot be the place of that name which was situated in the
Jordan valley to the east of Jericho, but must be the Gilgal upon the
mountains, the elevated Jiljilia to the south-west of Silo (Seilun, see
at [Jos 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#035)). On the way Elijah said
to Elisha, "Stay here, I pray, for the Lord has sent me to Bethel;" but
Elisha declared with a solemn oath that he would not leave him. The Lord
had revealed to both that the seal of divine attestation was to be
impressed upon the work of Elijah by his being miraculously taken up
into heaven, to strengthen the faith not of Elisha only, but also of the
disciples of the prophets and of all the godly in Israel; but the
revelation had been made to them separately, so that Elijah had no
suspicion that Elisha had also been informed as to his being taken away.
He wanted, therefore, to get rid of his servant, not "to test his love
and attachment" (Vatabl.), but from humility (C. a Lap. and others),
because he did not wish to have any one present to witness his
glorification without being well assured that it was in accordance with
the will of God.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 2:3</span></span>

In Bethel the disciples of the prophets came to meet Elisha, and said to
him, "Knowest thou that Jehovah will take thy master from over thy head
to-day?" ראשׁ מעל לקח expresses in a pictorial manner the taking away of
Elijah from his side by raising him to heaven, like ἐπαίρειν and
ὑπολαμβάνειν in [Act 1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009). Elisha
replied, "I know it, be silent," because he knew Elijah's feeling. The
Lord had therefore revealed to the disciples of the prophets the taking
away of Elijah, to strengthen their faith.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 2:4</span></span>

In Bethel, and again in Jericho, to which they both proceeded from
Bethel, Elijah repeated the appeal to Elisha to stay there, but always
in vain. The taking away of Elijah had also been revealed to the
disciples of the prophets at Jericho. Thus they both came to the Jordan,
whilst fifty disciples of the prophets from Jericho followed them at a
distance, to be eye-witnesses of the miraculous translation of their
master. The course which Elijah took before his departure from this
earth, viz., from Gilgal past Bethel and Jericho, was not merely
occasioned by the fact that he was obliged to touch at these places on
the way to the Jordan, but had evidently also the same higher purpose,
for which his ascension to heaven had been revealed both to Elisha and
to the disciples of the prophets at Bethel and Jericho. Elijah himself
said that the Lord had sent him to Bethel, to Jericho, to the Jordan
([Kg2 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#002), [Kg2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#004), [Kg2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#006)). He therefore took this way from
an impulse received from the Spirit of God, that he might visit the
schools of the prophets, which he had founded, once more before his
departure, and strengthen and fortify the disciples of the prophets in
the consecration of their lives to the service of the Lord, though
without in the least surmising that they had been informed by the Spirit
of the Lord of his approaching departure from this life. But as his
ascension to heaven took place not so much for his own sake, as because
of those associates in his office who were left behind, God had revealed
it to so many, that they might be even more firmly established in their
calling by the miraculous glorification of their master than by his
words, his teaching, and his admonitions, so that they might carry it on
without fear or trembling, even if their great master should no longer
stand by their side with the might of his spiritual power to instruct,
advise, or defend. Btu above all, Elisha, whom the Lord had appointed as
his successor ([Kg1 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016)), was to be
prepared for carrying on his work by the last journey of his master. He
did not leave his side therefore, and resolved, certainly also from an
inward impulse of the Spirit of God, to be an eye-witness of his
glorification, that he might receive the spiritual inheritance of the
first-born from his departing spiritual father.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 2:8</span></span>

When they reached the Jordan, Elijah took his prophet's cloak, rolled it
up (גּלם, ἁπ. λεγ. convolvit), and smote the water with it; whereupon
the water divided hither and thither, so that they both passed through
on dry ground. The cloak, that outward sign of the prophet's office,
became the vehicle of the Spirit's power which works unseen, and with
which the prophet was inspired. The miracle itself is analogous to the
miraculous dividing of the Red Sea by the stretching out of Moses' rod
([Exo 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016), [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)); but at the same time it is
very peculiar, and quite in accordance with the prophetic character of
Elijah, Moses, the leader of the people, performed his miracles with his
shepherd's crook, Elijah the prophet divided the river with his
prophet's mantle.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 2:9</span></span>

After crossing the Jordan, Elijah allowed his servant and companion to
make one more request before he was taken away, in the full confidence
that the Lord would fulfil it in answer to his prayer; and Elisha asked,
"Let בּרוּחך פּי־שׁנים, διπλᾶ ἐν πνεύματί σου, i.e., a double portion in
(of) thy spirit be granted to me." This request has been misunderstood
by many translators, from Ephraem Syrus down to Kster and F. W.
Krummacher, who have supposed that Elisha wished to have a double
measure of Elijah's spirit ("that thy spirit may be twofold in me:"
Luther after the Vulgate, "ut fiat in me duplex spiritus tuus"); and
some have taken it as referring to the fact that Elisha performed many
more miracles and much greater ones than Elijah (Cler., Pfeiffer, dub.
vex. p. 442), others to the gift of prophecy and miracles (Kster, die
Proph. p. 82), whilst others, like Krummacher, have understood by it
that the spirit of Elisha, as an evangelical spirit, was twice as great
as the legal spirit of Elijah. But there is no such meaning implied in
the words, nor can it be inferred from the answer of Elijah; whilst it
is impossible to show that there was any such measure of the Spirit in
the life and works of Elisha in comparison with the spirit of Elisha,
although his request was fulfilled. The request of Elisha is evidently
based upon [Deu 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017), where בּ
פּי־שׁנים denotes the double portion which the first-born received in
(of) the father's inheritance, as R. Levi b. Gers., Seb. Mnst., Vatabl.,
Grot., and others have perceived, and as Hengstenberg (Beitrr. ii. p.
133f.) in our days has once more proved. Elisha, resting his foot upon
this law, requested of Elijah as a first-born son the double portion of
his spirit for his inheritance. Elisha looked upon himself as the
first-born son of Elijah in relation to the other "sons of the
prophets," inasmuch as Elijah by the command of God had called him to be
his successor and to carry on his work. The answer of Elijah agrees with
this: "Thou hast asked a hard thing," he said, because the granting of
this request was not in his power, but in the power of God. He therefore
made its fulfilment dependent upon a condition, which did not rest with
himself, but was under the control of God: "if thou shalt see me taken
from thee (לקּח, partic. Pual with the מ dropped, see Ges. 52, Anm. b;
Ewald, 169, d.), let it be so to thee; but if not, it will not be so."
From his own personal inclination Elijah did not wish to have Elisha,
who was so closely related to him, as an eye-witness of his translation
from the earth; but from his persistent refusal to leave him he could
already see that he would not be able to send him away. He therefore
left the matter to the Lord, and made the guidance of God the sign for
Elisha whether the Lord would fulfil his request or not. Moreover, the
request itself even on the part of the petitioner presupposes a certain
dependence, and for this reason Elisha could not possibly desire that
the double measure of Elijah's spirit should be bestowed upon him. A
dying man cannot leave to his heir more than he has himself. And,
lastly, even the ministry of Elisha, when compared with that of Elijah,
has all the appearance of being subordinate to it. He lives and labours
merely as the continuer of the work already begun by Elijah, both
outwardly in relation to the worshippers of idols, and inwardly in
relation to the disciples of the prophets. Elisha performs the anointing
of Jehu and Hazael, with which Elijah was charged, and thereby prepares
the way for the realization of that destruction of Ahab's house which
Elijah predicted to the king; and he merely receives and fosters those
schools of the prophets which Elijah had already founded. And again, it
is not Elisha but Elijah who appears as the Coryphaeus of prophecy along
with Moses, the representative of the law, upon the mount of
transfiguration ([Mat 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003)). - It is
only a thoroughly external mode of observation that can discover in the
fact that Elisha performed a greater number of miracles than Elijah, a
proof that the spirit of Elijah rested doubly upon him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 2:11</span></span>

Elijah's ascension. - [Kg2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011). While
they were walking on and talking to each other, "behold (there suddenly
appeared) a fiery chariot and fiery horses, and separated the two (by
driving between them), and Elijah went up in the tempest to heaven." As
God had formerly taken Enoch away, so that he did not taste of death
(see at [Gen 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)), so did He also
suddenly take Elijah away from Elisha, and carry him to heaven without
dying. It was בּסּערה, "in the tempest," that he was taken away. The
storm was accompanied by a fiery phenomenon, which appeared to the eyes
of Elisha as a chariot of fire with horses of fire, in which Elijah rode
to heaven. The tempest was an earthly substratum for the theophany, the
fiery chariots and fiery horses the symbolical form in which the
translation of his master to heaven presented itself to the eye of
Elisha, who was left behind.

(Note: All further questions, e.g., concerning the nature of the fiery
chariot, the place to which Elijah was carried, the day of his
ascension, which C. a Lap., according to the Romish martyrology, assigns
to the 20th of July in the 19th year of Jehoshaphat, and others of the
same kind, which have been discussed by the earlier commentators, are to
be set down as useless trifles, which go beyond the bounds of our
thought and comprehension.)

The ascension of Elijah has been compared to the death of Moses. "As God
Himself buried Moses, and his grave has not been found to this day, so
did He fetch Elias to heaven in a still more glorious manner in a fiery
chariot with fiery horses, so that fifty men, who searched for him, did
not find him on the earth" (Ziegler). This parallel has a real
foundation in the appearance of Moses and Elijah with Christ on the
mountain of transfiguration, only we must not overlook the difference in
the departure from this life of these two witnesses of God. For Moses
died and was to die in the wilderness because of his sin ([Deu
32:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049).), and was only buried by the
hand of the Lord, so that no one has seen his grave, not so much for the
purpose of concealing it from men as to withdraw his body from
corruption, and preserve and glorify it for the eternal life (see the
Comm. on [Deu 34:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005)). Elijah did not
die, but was received into heaven by being "changed" ([Co1
15:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051); [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015).). This difference is in perfect
harmony with the character and position of these two men in the earthly
kingdom of God. Moses the lawgiver departed from the earthly life by the
way of the law, which worketh death as the wages of sin ([Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023); [Rom
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)); Elijah the prophet, who was
appointed to admonish for future times (ὁ καταγραφεὶς ἐν ἐλεγμοῖς εἰς
καιρούς), to pacify the wrath before the judgment, to turn the heart of
the father to the son, and to restore the tribes of Jacob (Ecclus.
48:10), was taken to heaven as the forerunner of Christ ([Mal
4:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005); [Mat
11:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010)) without tasting of death, to
predict the ascension of our Lord, and to set it forth in Old Testament
mode; for as a servant, as the servant of the law, who with his fiery
zeal preached both by word and deed the fire of the wrath of divine
justice to the rebellious generation of his own time, Elijah was carried
by the Lord to heaven in a fiery storm, the symbol of the judicial
righteousness of God. "As he was an unparalleled champion for the honour
of the Lord, a fiery war-chariot was the symbol of his triumphal
procession into heaven" (O. v. Gerlach). But Christ, as the Son, to whom
all power is given in heaven and on earth, after having taken away from
death its sting and from hell its victory, by His resurrection from the
grave ([Co1 15:55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)), returned to the
Father in the power of His eternal deity, and ascended to heaven in His
glorified body before the eyes of His disciples as the victor over death
and hell, until a cloud received Him and concealed His figure from their
sight ([Luk 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051); [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)).

(Note: The actual truth of this miraculous departure of the prophet is
strongly confirmed by the appearance of Elijah, as recorded in [Mat
17:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003) and [Luk
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#030), upon which the seal of
attestation is impressed by the ascension of our Lord. His ascension was
in harmony with the great mission with which he, the mightiest of all
the prophets, was entrusted in that development of the divine plan of
salvation which continued through the centuries in the interval between
Moses and Christ. - Whoever is unable to do justice to the spirit and
nature of the divine revelation of mercy, will be unable to comprehend
this miracle also. This was the case with Josephus, and even with
Ephraem the Syrian father. Josephus, for example (Ant. ix. 2, 2), saying
nothing about the miracle, and simply states that Ἠελίας ἐξ ἀνθρώπων
ἠφανίσθη· καὶ οὐδεὶς ἔγνω μέχρις τῆς σήμερον αὐτοῦ τὴν τελευτήν, and
adds that it is written of Elijah and Enoch in the sacred books, ὅτι
γεγόνασιν ἀφανεῖς. θάνατον δὲ αὐτῶν οὐδεὶς οἶδεν. Ephraem, the Christian
father, passes over the last clause of [Kg2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011), "so Elijah went up in the
whirlwind to heaven," in his exposition of our chapter, and paraphrases
the rest of the words thus: "There came suddenly from on high a
fire-storm, and in the midst of the flame the form of a chariot and of
horses, and separated them from one another; one of the two it left on
the earth, the other, namely Elijah, it carried up on high (Syr. ‛alı̂
lȧmerawma'); but whither the wind (or Spirit? Syr. rôha') took him, or
in what place it left him, the Scriptures have not told us. They say,
however, that some years afterwards an alarming letter from him, full of
threats, was delivered to king Joram of Judah." Following the lead of
such predecessors as these, J. D. Michaelis, who boasts so much of his
orthodoxy, informed the "unlearned" (in the Anmerkungen to his
Bibel-bersetzung) that Elijah did not go to heaven, but was simply
carried away from Palestine, and lived at least twelve years more, that
he might be bale to write a letter to king Joram ([Ch2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012)), for "men do not receive
letters from people in heaven." This incident has been frequently
adduced since then as a disproof of the ascension of Elijah. but there
is not a word in the Chronicles about any letter (ספרים, ספר, or אגרת,
which would be the Hebrew for a letter); all that is said is that a
writing (מכתב) from the prophet Elijah was brought to Joram, in which he
was threatened with severe punishments on account of his apostasy. Now
such a writing as this might very well have been written by Elijah
before his ascension, and handed to Elisha to be sent by him to king
Joram at the proper time. Even Bertheau admits that, according to the
chronological data of the Old Testament, Elijah might have been still
living in the reign of Joram of Judah; and it is a priori probable that
he both spoke of Joram's sin and threatened him with punishment. It is
impossible to fix the year of Elijah's ascension. Neither the fact that
it is mentioned after the death of Ahaziah of Israel, which he himself
had personally foretold to that ungodly king, nor the circumstance that
in the war which Jehoshaphat and Joram of Israel waged with the Moabites
the prophet Elisha was consulted (1 Kings 3), warrants the conclusion
that Elijah was taken from the earth in the interval between these two
events. It is very obvious from [Kg2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011), that the two kings applied to
Elisha simply because he was in the neighbourhood, and not because
Elijah was no longer alive.)

[Kg2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#012)

When Elisha saw his master carried thus miraculously away, he exclaimed,
"My father, my father, the chariot of Israel and horsemen thereof!" and
as he saw him no more, he took hold of his clothes and rent them in two
pieces, i.e., from the top to the bottom, as a proof of the greatness of
his sorrow at his being taken away. He called Elijah אבי, "my father,"
as his spiritual father, who had begotten him as his son through the
word of God. "Chariot (war-chariot) and horsemen of Israel," on which
the Israelitish kings based the might and security of their kingdom, are
a symbolical representation of the strong defence which Elijah had been
through his ministry to the kingdom of Israel (cf. [Kg2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014)).

[Kg2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#013)

He then took up Elijah's prophet's mantle, which had fallen from him
when he was snatched away, and returned to the Jordan. The prophet's
mantle of the master fell to Elisha the disciple, as a pledge to himself
that his request was fulfilled, and as a visible sign to others that he
was his divinely appointed successor, and that the spirit of Elijah
rested upon him ([Kg2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 2:14</span></span>

Return of Elisha to Jericho and Bethel, and his First Miracles. - [Kg2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#014), [Kg2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015). Having returned to the banks of
the Jordan, Elisha smote the water with Elijah's mantle, saying, "Where
is Jehovah the God of Elijah, yea He?" and the water divided hither and
thither, so that he was able to go through. אף־הוּא, which the lxx did
not understand, and have simply reproduced in Greek characters, ἀφφώ, is
an emphatic apposition, "yea He," such as we find after suffixes, e.g.,
[Pro 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#019); and אף is only a
strengthened גּם, which is more usual when emphatic prominence is given
to the suffix (vid., Ges. 121, 3). The Masoretic accentuation, which
separates it from the preceding words, rests upon a false
interpretation. There is no need either for the alteration proposed by
Ewald, 362, a., of אף into אך, "he had scarcely smitten the water,"
especially as not a single analogous example can be adduced of the use
of הוּא אך followed by a Vav consec.; or for the conjecture that the
original reading in the text was אפוא (Houb., Bttch., Then.), "where is
now the God of Elijah?" which derives no critical support from the ἀφφώ
of the lxx, and is quite at variance with Hebrew usage, since אפוא
generally stands immediately after איּה, when it serves to strengthen
the interrogation (vid., [Jdg 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#038);
[Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015); [Isa
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#012); [Hos
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#010)). This miracle was intended
partly to confirm Elisha's conviction that his petition had been
fulfilled, and partly to accredit him in the eyes of the disciples of
the prophets and the people generally as the divinely appointed
successor of Elijah. All the disciples of the prophets from Jericho saw
also from this that the spirit of Elijah rested upon Elisha, and came to
meet him to do homage to him as being now their spiritual father and
lord.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 2:16</span></span>

But the disciples of the prophets at Jericho were so unable to realize
the fact of Elijah's translation, although it had been previously
revealed to them, that they begged permission of Elisha to send out
fifty brave men to seek for Elijah. פּן־נשׂאו: whether the Spirit of the
Lord has not taken him and cast him upon one of the mountains, or into
one of the valleys. פּן with the perfect is used "where there is fear of
a fact, which as is conjectured almost with certainty has already
happened," like μὴ in the sense of "whether not" (vid., Ewald, 337, b.).
יהוה רוּח is not a wind sent by Jehovah (Ges.), but the Spirit of
Jehovah, as in [Kg1 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012). The Chethb
גּיאות is the regular formation from גּיא or גּיא ([Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004)); the Keri with the transposition
of א and ,י the later form: גּאיות, [Eze
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016); [Eze
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#012), etc. The belief expressed by
the disciples of the prophets, that Elijah might have been miraculously
carried away, was a popular belief, according to [Kg1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012), which the disciples of the
prophets were probably led to share, more especially in the present
case, by the fact that they could not imagine a translation to heaven as
a possible thing, and with the indefiniteness of the expression ראשׁך
מעל לקח could only understand the divine revelation which they had
received as referring to removal by death. So that even if Elisha told
them how miraculously Elijah had been taken from him, which he no doubt
did, they might still believe that by the appearance in the storm the
Lord had taken away His servant from this life, that is to say, had
received his soul into heaven, and had left his earthly tabernacle
somewhere on the earth, for which they would like to go in search, that
they might pay the last honours to their departed master. Elisha yielded
to their continued urgency and granted their request; whereupon fifty
men sought for three days for Elijah's body, and after three days' vain
search returned to Jericho. עד־בּשׁ, to being ashamed, i.e., till he was
ashamed to refuse their request any longer (see at [Jdg
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#025)).

The two following miracles of Elisha ([Kg2
2:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#019)) were also intended to
accredit him in the eyes of the people as a man endowed with the Spirit
and power of God, as Elijah had been. [Kg2
2:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#019). Elisha makes the water at
Jericho wholesome. - During his stay at Jericho ([Kg2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#018)) the people of the city
complained, that whilst the situation of the place was good in other
respects, the water was bad and the land produced miscarriages. הארץ,
the land, i.e., the soil, on account of the badness of the water; not
"the inhabitants, both man and beast" (Thenius). Elisha then told them
to bring a new dish with salt, and poured the salt into the spring with
these words: "Thus saith the Lord, I have made this water sound; there
will not more be death and miscarriage thence" (משּׁם). משׁלּכת is a
substantive here (vid., Ewald, 160, e.). המּים מוצא is no doubt the
present spring Ain es Sultn, the only spring near to Jericho, the waters
of which spread over the plain of Jericho, thirty-five minutes' distance
from the present village and castle, taking its rise in a group of
elevations not far from the foot of the mount Quarantana (Kuruntul); a
large and beautiful spring, the water of which is neither cold nor warm,
and has an agreeable and sweet (according to Steph. Schultz, "somewhat
salt") taste. It was formerly enclosed by a kind of reservoir or
semicircular wall of hewn stones, from which the water was conducted in
different directions to the plain (vid., Rob. Pal. ii. p. 283ff.). With
regard to the miracle, a spring which supplied the whole of the city and
district with water could not be so greatly improved by pouring in a
dish of salt, that the water lost its injurious qualities for ever, even
if salt does possess the power of depriving bad water of its unpleasant
taste and injurious effects. The use of these natural means does not
remove the miracle. Salt, according to its power of preserving from
corruption and decomposition, is a symbol of incorruptibility and of the
power of life which destroys death (see Bhr, Symbolik, ii. pp. 325,326).
As such it formed the earthly substratum for the spiritual power of the
divine word, through which the spring was made for ever sound. A new
dish was taken for the purpose, not ob munditiem (Seb. Schm.), but as a
symbol of the renewing power of the word of God. - But if this miracle
was adapted to show to the people the beneficent character of the
prophet's ministry, the following occurrence was intended to prove to
the despisers of God that the Lord does not allow His servants to be
ridiculed with impunity.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 2:23</span></span>

The judgment of God upon the loose fellows at Bethel. Elisha proceeded
from Jericho to Bethel, the chief seat of the idolatrous calf-worship,
where there was also a school of the prophets ([Kg2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#003)). On the way thither there came
small boys out of the city to meet him, who ridiculed him by calling
out, "Come up, bald-head, come," etc. קרח, bald-head (with a bald place
at the back of the head), was used as a term of scorn (cf. [Isa
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#017), [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)); but hardly from a suspicion of
leprosy (Winer, Thenius). It was rather as a natural defect, for Elisha,
who lived for fifty years after this ([Kg2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014)), could not have been bald from
age at that time.

[Kg2 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#024)

The prophet then turned round and cursed the scoffers in the name of the
Lord, and there came two bears out of the wood, and tore forty-two boys
of them in pieces. The supposed "immorality of cursing," which Thenius
still adduces as a disproof of the historical truth of this miracle,
even if it were established, would not affect Elisha only, but would
fall back upon the Lord God, who executed the curse of His servant in
such a manner upon these worthless boys. And there is no need, in order
to justify the judicial miracle, to assume that there was a preconcerted
plan which had been devised by the chief rulers of the city out of
enmity to the prophet of the Lord, so that the children had merely been
put forward (O. v. Gerlach). All that is necessary is to admit that the
worthless spirit which prevailed in Bethel was openly manifested in the
ridicule of the children, and that these boys knew Elisha, and in his
person insulted the prophet of the Lord. If this was the case, then
Elisha cursed the boys for the purpose of avenging the honour of the
Lord, which had been injured in his person; and the Lord caused this
curse to be fulfilled, to punish in the children the sins of the
parents, and to inspire the whole city with a salutary dread of His holy
majesty.

(Note: Augustine, or the author of the Sermo 204 de Tempore (or Sermo 41
de Elisaeo in t. v. of the Opp. August., ed. J. P. Migne, p. 1826),
which is attributed to him, gives a similar explanation. "The insolent
boys," he says, "are to be supposed to have done this at the instigation
of their parents; for they would not have called out if it had
displeased their parents." And with regard to the object of the judicial
punishment, he says it was inflicted "that the elders might receive a
lesson through the smiting of the little ones, and the death of the sons
might be a lesson to the parents; and that they might learn to fear the
prophet, whom they would not love, notwithstanding the wonders which he
performed.")

[Kg2 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#025)

Elisha went from Bethel to Carmel (see at [Kg1
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019)), probably to strengthen himself
in solitude for the continuation of his master's work. He returned
thence to Samaria, where, according to [Kg2
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#032), he possessed a house.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 3](kg2003)

</div>
