<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2019)  [Next](kg2021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 20:1</span></span>

Hezekiah's Illness and Recovery. - Compare the parallel account in Isa
38 with Hezekiah's psalm of thanksgiving for his recovery ([Isa
38:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#009) of Isaiah).

[Kg2 20:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

"In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death." By the expression "in
those days" the illness of Hezekiah is merely assigned in a general
manner to the same time as the events previously described. That it did
not occur after the departure of the Assyrians, but at the commencement
of the invasion of Sennacherib, i.e., in the fourteenth year of
Hezekiah's reign, is evident from [Kg2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006), namely, both from the fact that
in answer to his prayer fifteen years more of life were promised him,
and that he nevertheless reigned only twenty-nine years ([Kg2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002)), and also from the fact that God
promised to deliver him out of the hand of the Assyrians and to defend
Jerusalem. The widespread notion that his sickness was an attack of
plague, and was connected with the pestilence which had broken out in
the Assyrian camp, is thereby deprived of its chief support, apart from
the fact that the epithet (שׁחין ([Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007)), which is applied to the
sickness, does not indicate pestilence. Isaiah then called upon him to
set his house in order. לביתך צו: set thy house in order, lit., command
or order with regard to thy house, not declare thy (last) will to thy
family (Ges., Knob.), for צוּה is construed with the accus. pers. in the
sense of commanding anything, whereas here ל is synonymous with אל ([Sa2
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023)). "For thou wilt die and not
live;" i.e., thy sickness is to death, namely, without the miraculous
help of God. Sickness to death in the very prime of life (Hezekiah was
then in the fortieth year of his age) appeared to the godly men of the
Old Testament a sign of divine displeasure. Hezekiah was therefore
greatly agitated by this announcement, and sought for consolation and
help in prayer. He turned his face to the wall, sc. of the room, not of
the temple (Chald.), i.e., away from those who were standing round, to
be able to pray more collectedly.

[Kg2 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#003)

In his prayer he appealed to his walking before the Lord in truth and
with a thoroughly devoted heart, and to his acting in a manner that was
well-pleasing to God, in perfect accordance with the legal standpoint of
the Old Testament, which demanded of the godly righteousness of life
according to the law. This did not imply by any means a self-righteous
trust in his own virtue; for walking before God with a thoroughly
devoted heart was impossible without faith. "And Hezekiah wept
violently," not merely at the fact that he was to die without having an
heir to the throne, since Manasseh was not born till three years
afterwards (Joseph., Ephr. Syr., etc.), but also because he was to die
in the very midst of his life, since God had promised long life to the
righteous.

[Kg2 20:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#004)

This prayer of the godly king was answered immediately. Isaiah had not
gone out of the midst of the city, when the word of the Lord came to him
to return to the king, and tell him that the Lord would cure him in
three days and add fifteen years to his life, and that He would also
deliver him from the power of the Assyrians and defend Jerusalem.
התּיּכנה העיר, the middle city, i.e., the central portion of the city,
namely, the Zion city, in which the royal citadel stood. The Keri הת
חצר, the central court, not of the temple, but of the royal citadel,
which is adopted in all the ancient versions, is nothing more than an
interpretation of the עיר as denoting the royal castle, after the
analogy of [Kg2 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#025). The distinct
assurance added to the promise "I will heal thee," viz., "on the third
day thou wilt go into the house of the Lord," was intended as a pledge
to the king of the promised cure. The announcement that God would add
fifteen years to his life is not put into the prophet's mouth ex eventu
(Knobel and others); for the opinion that distinct statements as to time
are at variance with the nature of prophecy is merely based upon an a
priori denial of the supernatural character of prophecy. The words, "and
I will deliver thee out of the hand of the Assyrians," imply most
distinctly that the Assyrian had only occupied the land and threatened
Jerusalem, and had not yet withdrawn. The explanation given by Vitringa
and others, that the words contain simply a promise of deliverance out
of the hand of the oppressor for the next fifteen years, puts a meaning
into them which they do not contain, as is clearly shown by [Isa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#020), where this thought is expressed
in a totally different manner. וגו על־העיר וגנּותי ע: as in [Kg2
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034), where the prophet repeated this
divine promise in consequence of the attempt of Sennacherib to get
Jerusalem into his power.

[Kg2 20:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007)

Isaiah ordered a lump of figs to be laid upon the boil, and Hezekiah
recovered (ויּחי: he revived again). It is of course assumed as
self-evident, that Isaiah returned to the king in consequence of a
divine revelation, and communicated to him the word of the Lord which he
had received.

(Note: The account is still more abridged in the text of Isaiah. In [Kg2
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#004) the precise time of the prayer is
omitted; in [Kg2 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#005) the words,
"behold, I will cure thee, on the third day thou shalt go into the house
of the Lord;" and in [Kg2 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006) the
words, "for mine own sake and my servant David's sake." The four [Kg2
20:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008), which treat of the miraculous
signs, are also very much contracted in Isaiah ([Isa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007) and [Isa
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008)); and [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007) and [Kg2
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008) of our text are only given at the
close of Hezekiah's psalm of praise in that of Isaiah ([Isa
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#021) and [Isa
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#022)).)

תּאנים דּבלת is a mass consisting of compressed figs, which the ancients
were in the habit of applying, according to many testimonies (see Celsii
Hierob. ii. p. 373), in the case of plague-boils and abscesses of other
kinds, because the fig διαφορεῖ σκληρίας (Dioscor.) and ulcera aperit
(Plin.), and which is still used for softening ulcers. שׁחין, an
abscess, is never used in connection with plague or plague-boils, but
only to denote the abscesses caused by leprosy ([Job
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007)), and other abscesses of an
inflammatory kind ([Exo 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009).). In the
case of Hezekiah it is probably a carbuncle that is intended.

After the allusion to the cure and recovery of Hezekiah, we have an
account in [Kg2 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008). of the sign by
which Isaiah confirmed the promise given to the king of the prolongation
of his life. In the order of time the contents of [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007) follow [Kg2
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#011), since the prophet in all
probability first of all disclosed the divine promise to the king, and
then gave him the sign, and after that appointed the remedy and had it
applied. At the same time, it is also quite possible that he first of
all directed the lump of figs to be laid upon the boil, and then made
known to him the divine promise, and guaranteed it by the sign. In this
case ויּחי merely anticipates the order of events. The sign which Isaiah
gave to the king, at his request, consisted in the miraculous movement
of the shadow backward upon the sundial of Ahaz.

[Kg2 20:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#009)

הצּל הלך: "the shadow is gone ten degrees, if it should go back ten
degrees?" The rendering, visne umbram solarii decem gradibus progredi an
... regredi, which Maurer still gives after the Vulgate, vis an ut
ascendat ... an ut revertatur, cannot be grammatically reconciled with
the perfect הלך, and is merely a conjecture founded upon the answer of
Hezekiah.

(Note: Hitzig and Knobel would therefore read הלך, though without
furnishing any proofs that the inf. abs. is used for the future in the
first clause of a double question, especially if the ה interrog. is
wanting, and there is no special emphasis upon the verbal idea.)

According to this answer, "it is easy for the shadow to decline (i.e.,
to go farther down) ten degrees; no (sc., that shall not be a sign to
me), but if the shadow turn ten degrees backwards," Isaiah seems to have
given the king a choice as to the sign, namely, whether the shadow
should go ten degrees forward or backward. But this does not necessarily
follow from the words quoted. Hezekiah may have understood the prophet's
words וגו הצּל הלך hypothetically: "has the shadow gone (advanced) ten
degrees, whether it should," etc.; and may have replied, the advance of
the shadow would not be a sure sign to him, but only its going back.

[Kg2 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#011)

Isaiah then prayed to the Lord, and the Lord "turned back the shadow
(caused it to go back) upon the sun-dial, where it had gone down, on the
sundial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward." אחז מעלות cannot be understood,
as it has been by the lxx, Joseph., Syr., as referring to a flight of
steps at the palace of Ahaz, which was so arranged that the shadow of an
object standing near indicated the hours, but is no doubt a gnomon, a
sun-dial which Ahaz may have received from Babylonia, where sun-dials
were discovered (Herod. ii. 109). Nothing further can be inferred from
the words with regard to its construction, since the ancients had
different kinds of sun-dials (cf. Martini Abhandlung von den Sonnenuhren
der Alten, Lpz. 1777). The word מעלות steps in the literal sense, is
transferred to the scala, which the shadow had to traverse both up and
down upon the disk of the sun-dial, and is used both to denote the
separate degrees of this scala, and also for the sum-total of these
scala, i.e., for the sun-dial itself, without there being any necessity
to assume that it was an obelisk-like pillar erected upon an elevated
place with steps running round it (Knobel), or a long portable scale of
twice ten steps with a gnomon (Gumpach, Alttestl. Studien, pp. 181ff.).
All that follows from the descent of the shadow is that the dial of the
gnomon was placed in a vertical direction; and the fact that the shadow
went ten degrees down or backward, simply presupposes that the gnomon
had at least twenty degrees, and therefore that the degrees indicated
smaller portions of time than hours. If, then, it is stated in [Kg2
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008) of Isaiah that the sun went back
ten degrees, whereas the going back of the shadow had been previously
mentioned in agreement with our text, it is self-evident that the sun
stands for the shining of the sun which was visible upon the dial-plate,
and which made the shadow recede. We are not, of course, to suppose that
the sun in the sky and the shadow on the sun-dial went back at the same
time, as Knobel assumes. So far as the miracle is concerned, the words
of the text do not require that we should assume that the sun receded,
or the rotation of the earth was reversed, as Eph. Syr. and others
supposed, but simply affirm that there was a miraculous movement
backward of the shadow upon the dial, which might be accounted for from
a miraculous refraction of the rays of the sun, effected by God at the
prophet's prayer, of which slight analoga are met with in the ordinary
course of nature.

(Note: As, for example, the phenomenon quoted by several commentators,
which was observed at Metz in Lothringen in the year 1703 by the prior
of the convent there, P. Romuald, and other persons, viz., that the
shadow of a sun-dial went back an hour and a half. - The natural
explanation of the miracle which is given by Thenius, who attributes it
to an eclipse of the sun, needs no refutation. - For the different
opinions of the earlier theologians, see Carpzov, Apparat. crit. p.
351ff.)

This miraculous sign was selected as a significant one in itself, to
confirm the promise of a fresh extension of life which had been given to
Hezekiah by the grace of God in opposition to the natural course of
things. The retrograde movement of the shadow upon the sun-dial
indicated that Hezekiah's life, which had already arrived at its close
by natural means, was to be put back by a miracle of divine omnipotence,
so that it might continue for another series of years.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 20:12</span></span>

The Babylonian embassy, and Hezekiah's imprudence (cf. [Isa
39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001)). - [Kg2
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012). "At that time Berodach Baladan,
king of Babel, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah, because he had
heard that Hezekiah was sick." By ההיא בּעת the arrival of these
ambassadors is merely assigned in the most general manner to the period
following Hezekiah's recovery. But from the object of their mission, it
is evident that they did not arrive in Jerusalem till after the
overthrow and departure of Sennacherib, and therefore at least half a
year after Hezekiah's recovery. The ostensible reason given is, that
Berodach Baladan had heard of Hezekiah's illness, and therefore sent to
congratulate him on his recovery; but in [Ch2
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031) the further reason is mentioned,
that he wished to inquire concerning the miracle upon the sun-dial. But,
as Josephus has shown, the true object, no doubt, was to make sure of
Hezekiah's friendship in anticipation of his intended revolt from the
Assyrian rule. Berodach Baladan, for Merodach Baladan (Isa.), with the
labial changed, is the same person as the Marodach Baladan who reigned
in Babylon for six months, according to Alex. Polyhistor, or rather
Berosus (Euseb. Chr. armen. i. pp. 42, 43), and was slain by Elibus, and
also the same as the Mardokempad who reigned, according to the Can.
Ptol., from 26 to 38 aer. Nab., i.e., from 721 to 709 b.c. The first
part of the name, מרדך, occurs in [Jer
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#002) in connection with Bel as the
name of a Babylonian idol; and the whole name is found on a cylinder (in
the British Museum) which contains the first expeditions of Sennacherib
against Babylon and Media, and upon the inscriptions at Khorsabad spelt
either Merodak-pal-dsana (according to Brandis, Ueber der Gewinn, pp. 44
and 53) or Marduk bal iddin (according to Oppert).

(Note: Compare M. v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Ass. p. 40; and with regard to the
chronological differences, on account of which many have called in
question the identity of Merodach Baladan either with the
Marudach-Baladan of Berosus or with the Mardokempad of the Can. Ptol.,
see the discussion of this point at pp. 75ff.)

Instead of שׁמע כּי we have ויּשׁמע in Isaiah, which is not so clear,
though it is probably more original; whereas the clause in Isaiah,
ויּחזק חלה כּי, "that he had been sick and had become strengthened,
i.e., well again," is simply an elucidation of the הזקיּהוּ חלה כּי of
our text, in which the recovery is implied in the pluperfect "had been
sick."

[Kg2 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#013)

In [Kg2 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#013) ויּשׁמע is apparently a
copyist's error for ויּשׂמח of Isaiah, which many of the codd. and
ancient versions have even in our text. At the same time, the
construction of שׁמע with על is also found in [Kg2
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#013). - עליהם, concerning them, i.e.,
the ambassadors who had brought the letter and the present. In his
delight at the honour paid to him by this embassy, Hezekiah showed the
ambassadors all his treasure-house, the silver, and the gold, and the
spices, and the costly oil, and all his arsenal, etc. The literal
meaning of נכת בּית is probably spice-house (Aquila, Symm., Vulg.), נכת
being a contraction of נכאת in [Gen
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025), whereas the derivation
suggested from the Arabic kayyata, farsit, implevit locum, is much more
wide of the mark. The house received its name from the spices for the
storing of which it was really intended, although it was also used for
the storing of silver and gold. הטּוב שׁמן is not fine olive oil, but,
according to the Rabbins and Movers (Phniz. iii. p. 227), the valuable
balsam oil which was obtained in the royal gardens; for olive oil, which
was obtained in all Judaea, was not stored in the treasure-chambers
along with gold, silver, and perfumes, but in special storehouses ([Ch1
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#028)). בּכל־ממשׁלתּו, in all his
dominion, i.e., in all the district which he was able to govern or
control. - The existence of such treasures, of which, according to [Kg2
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#017), the ancestors of Hezekiah had
collected a very large store, at so short a period after the departure
of the Assyrians, is not at variance with [Kg2
18:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#015), according to which Hezekiah
had sent to Sennacherib all the silver in his treasuries, and even the
gold plate upon the temple doors. For, in the first place, it is not
stated that there was much silver and gold in the treasure-house, but
the silver and gold are simply mentioned along with the spices; and,
secondly, Hezekiah may have kept back from Sennacherib many a valuable
piece of silver or gold, and have taken off the gold plate from the
temple doors, to show the ambassadors of Sennacherib, who came to
receive the money demanded as compensation, that he was not in a
condition to give anything more. Moreover a great deal may have flowed
into the treasuries since the payment of that tribute, partly from the
presents which Hezekiah received from many quarters after the overthrow
of Sennacherib ([Ch2 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#023)), and
partly from the booty that had been collected in the camp of the
Assyrians after their hurried departure. And again, the treasures which
the ancestors of Hezekiah had collected ([Kg2
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#017)) may not have consisted of gold
and silver exactly, but of different jewels and objects of art, which
could not be applied to the payment of the tribute demanded by
Sennacherib. And, lastly, "we must not overlook the fact, that it
answered the purpose of the reporter to crowd together as much as
possible, in order to show how anxious Hezekiah was to bring out and
exhibit everything whatever that could contribute to the folly"
(Drechsler). Hezekiah evidently wanted to show all his glory, because
the arrival of the Babylonian ambassadors had flattered his vanity.

[Kg2 20:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#014)

Isaiah therefore announced to him the word of the Lord, that all his
treasures would one day be carried to Babel, and some even of his sons
would serve as chamberlains in the palace of the king of Babel. The sin
of vanity was to be punished by the carrying away of that of which his
heart was proud. Isaiah did not go to Hezekiah by his own impulse, but
by the direction of God. His inquiries: "What have these men said, and
whence do they come to thee?" were simply intended to lead the king to
give expression to the thoughts of his heart. In the answer, "From a
distant land have they come, from Babel," his vanity at the great honour
that had been paid him comes clearly to light.

[Kg2 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#018)

The words, "of thy sons, which shall proceed from thee, which thou shalt
beget," do not necessarily refer to the actual sons, but only to lineal
descendants. The Chethb יקּח, "will one take," is to be preferred to the
יקּחוּ of Isaiah and the Keri, as being the more difficult reading.
סריסים, chamberlains, courtiers, not necessarily eunuchs, as in [Sa1
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#015), etc. - For the fulfilment of
this threat see [Dan 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002).

[Kg2 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#019)

The first part of Hezekiah's reply, "Good is the word of Jehovah, which
thou hast spoken," is an expression of submission to the will of the
Lord, like Eli's answer in [Sa1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#018)
(cf. [Kg1 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#038), [Kg1
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#042));

(Note: "He calls that good in which it is right to acquiesce, as having
proceeded from Him who does nothing but what is not only most just, but
tempered with the greatest goodness, even when He inflicts punishment."
- Clericus.)

the second part, which the repetition of ויּאמר shows to have been
spoken after a pause, and which was not addressed directly to Isaiah,
"Is it not so (i.e., is it not purely goodness), if there are to be
peace and truth in my days (during my life)?" is a candid acknowledgment
of the grace and truth of the Lord.

(Note: "He praises the moderation of the divine decree, because when
God, in accordance with His justice, might have brought this calamity
upon him in his own person, for His mercy's sake He was willing to spare
him and to put off the evil to a future day." - Vitringa.)

הלוא is used, as is frequently the case, in the sense of a lively
affirmation. Instead of אם הלוא we have in Isaiah כּי, "for there will
be peace and truth," by which this clause is attached more clearly to
the first declaration as a reason for it: the word of the Lord is good,
for the Lord proves His goodness and truth in the fact, that He will not
inflict the merited punishment in my lifetime. "Peace and truth" are
connected as in [Jer 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#006). אמת does
not mean continuance (Ges.), security (Knobel), but fides,
faithfulness-not human faithfulness, however, which preserves peace, and
observes a tacit treaty (Hitzig), but the faithfulness of God, which
preserves the promised grace to the humble.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 20:20</span></span>

Close of Hezekiah's reign. - On the basin (בּרכח) and the aqueduct
constructed by him, see at [Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 21](kg2021)

</div>
