<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2023)  [Next](kg2025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 24:1</span></span>

"In his days Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babel, came up; and Jehoiakim
became subject to him three years, then he revolted from him again."
נבכדנאצּר, Nebuchadnezzar, or נבוּכדראצּר, Nebuchadrezzar ([Jer
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002), [Jer
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007); [Jer
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#025), etc.), Ναβουχοδονόσορ (lxx),
Ναβουχοδονόσορος (Beros. in Jos. c. Ap. i. 20, 21), Ναβοκοδρόσορος
(Strabo, xv. 1, 6), upon the Persian arrow-headed inscriptions at
Bisutun Nabhukudracara (according to Oppert, composed of the name of
God, Nabhu (Nebo), the Arabic kadr, power, and zar or sar, prince), and
in still other forms (for the different forms of the name see M. v.
Niebuhr's Gesch. pp. 41, 42). He was the son of Nabopolassar, the
founder of the Chaldaean monarchy, and reigned, according to Berosus
(Jos. l.c.), Alex. Polyh. (Eusebii Chr. arm. i. pp. 44, 45), and the
Canon of Ptol., forty-three years, from 605 to 562 b.c. With regard to
his first campaign against Jerusalem, it is stated in [Ch2
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006), that "against him (Jehoiakim)
came up Nebuchadnezzar, and bound him with brass chains, to carry him
(להוליכו) to Babylon;" and in [Dan
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001), that "in the year three of the
reign of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzar came against Jerusalem and besieged
it; and the Lord gave Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, into his hand, and a
portion of the holy vessels, and he brought them (the vessels) into the
land of Shinar, into the house of his god," etc. Bertheau (on Chr.)
admits that all three passages relate to Nebuchadnezzar's first
expedition against Jehoiakim and the first taking of Jerusalem by the
king of Babylon, and rejects the alteration of להוליכו, "to lead him to
Babylon" (Chr.), into ἀπήγαγεν αὐτὸν (lxx), for which Thenius decides in
his prejudice in favour of the lxx. He has also correctly observed, that
the chronicler intentionally selected the infinitive with ל, because he
did not intend to speak of the actual transportation of Jehoiakim to
Babylon. The words of our text, "Jehoiakim became servant (עבד) to him,"
i.e., subject to him, simply affirm that he became tributary, not that
he was led away. And in the book of Daniel also there is nothing about
the leading away of Jehoiakim to Babylon. Whilst, therefore, the three
accounts agree in the main with one another, and supply one another's
deficiencies, so that we learn that Jehoiakim was taken prisoner at the
capture of Jerusalem and put in chains to be led away, but that,
inasmuch as he submitted to Nebuchadnezzar and vowed fidelity, he was
not taken away, but left upon the throne as vassal of the king of
Babylon; the statement in the book of Daniel concerning the time when
this event occurred, which is neither contained in our account nor in
the Chronicles, presents a difficulty when compared with Jer 25 and [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002), and different attempts, some of
them very constrained, have been made to remove it. According to [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002), Nebuchadnezzar smote Necho the
king of Egypt at Carchemish, on the Euphrates, in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim. This year is not only called the first year of Nebuchadnezzar
in [Jer 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001), but is represented by
the prophet as the turning-point of the kingdom of Judah by the
announcement that the Lord would bring His servant Nebuchadnezzar upon
Judah and its inhabitants, and also upon all the nations dwelling round
about, that he would devastate Judah, and that these nations would serve
the king of Babylon seventy years ([Jer
25:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009)). Consequently not only the
defeat of Necho at Carchemish, but also the coming of Nebuchadnezzar to
Judah, fell in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, and not in the third. To
remove this discrepancy, some have proposed that the time mentioned, "in
the fourth year of Jehoiakim" ([Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)), should be understood as
relating, not to the year of the battle at Carchemish, but to the time
of the prophecy of Jeremiah against Egypt contained in Jer 46, and that
Jer 25 should also be explained as follows, that in this chapter the
prophet is not announcing the first capture of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, but is proclaiming a year after this the destruction of
Jerusalem and the devastation of the whole land, or a total judgment
upon Jerusalem and the rest of the nations mentioned there (M. v. Nieb.
Gesch. pp. 86, 87, 371). But this explanation is founded upon the
erroneous assumption, that [Jer
46:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003) does not contain a prediction
of the catastrophe awaiting Egypt, but a picture of what has already
taken place there; and it is only in a very forced manner that it can be
brought into harmony with the contents of Jer 25.

(Note: Still less tenable is the view of Hofman, renewed by Zndel (Krit.
Unterss. b. d. Abfassungszeit des B. Daniel, p. 25), that Nebuchadnezzar
conquered Jerusalem in the third year of Jehoiakim, and that it was not
till the following, or fourth year, that he defeated the Egyptian army
at Carchemish, because so long as Pharaoh Necho stood with his army by
or in Carchemish, on the Euphrates, Nebuchadnezzar could not possibly
attempt to pass it so as to effect a march upon Jerusalem.)

We must rather take "the year three of the reign of Jehoiakim" ([Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)) as the extreme terminus a quo of
Nebuchadnezzar's coming, i.e., must understand the statement thus: that
in the year referred to Nebuchadnezzar commenced the expedition against
Judah, and smote Necho at Carchemish at the commencement of the fourth
year of Jehoiakim ([Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)), and
then, following up this victory, took Jerusalem in the same year, and
made Jehoiakim tributary, and at the same time carried off to Babylon a
portion of the sacred vessels, and some young men of royal blood as
hostages, one of whom was Daniel ([Ch2
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007); [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002).). The fast mentioned in [Jer
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009), which took place in the fifth
year of Jehoiakim, cannot be adduced in disproof of this; for
extraordinary fast-days were not only appointed for the purpose of
averting great threatening dangers, but also after severe calamities
which had fallen upon the land or people, to expiate His wrath by
humiliation before God, and to invoke the divine compassion to remove
the judgment that had fallen upon them. The objection, that the godless
king would hardly have thought of renewing the remembrance of a divine
judgment by a day of repentance and prayer, but would rather have
desired to avoid everything that could make the people despair, falls to
the ground, with the erroneous assumption upon which it is founded, that
by the fast-day Jehoiakim simply intended to renew the remembrance of
the judgment which had burst upon Jerusalem, whereas he rather desired
by outward humiliation before God to secure the help of God to enable
him to throw off the Chaldaean yoke, and arouse in the people a
religious enthusiasm for war against their oppressors. - Further
information concerning this first expedition of Nebuchadnezzar is
supplied by the account of Berosus, which Josephus (Ant. x. 11, and c.
Ap. i. 19) has preserved from the third book of his Chaldaean history,
namely, that when Nabopolassar received intelligence of the revolt of
the satrap whom he had placed over Egypt, Coele-Syria, and Phoenicia,
because he was no longer able on account of age to bear the hardships of
war, he placed a portion of his army in the hands of his youthful son
Nebuchadnezzar and sent him against the satrap. Nebuchadnezzar defeated
him in battle, and established his power over that country again. In the
meantime Nabopolassar fell sick and died in Babylon; and as soon as the
tidings reached Nebuchadnezzar, he hastened through the desert to
Babylon with a small number of attendants, and directed his army to
follow slowly after regulating the affairs of Egypt and the rest of the
country, and to bring with it the prisoners from the Jews, Syrians,
Phoenicians, and Egyptian tribes, and with the heavily-armed troops. So
much, at any rate, is evident from this account, after deducting the
motive assigned for the war, which is given from a Chaldaean point of
view, and may be taken as a historical fact, that even before his
father's death Nebuchadnezzar had not only smitten the Egyptians, but
had also conquered Judah and penetrated to the borders of Egypt. And
there is no discrepancy between the statement of Berosus, that
Nebuchadnezzar was not yet king, and the fact that in the biblical books
he is called king proleptically, because he marched against Judah with
kingly authority.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 24:2</span></span>

To punish Jehoiakim's rebellion, Jehovah sent hosts of Chaldaeans,
Aramaeans, Moabites, and Ammonites against him and against Judah to
destroy it (להאבידו). Nebuchadnezzar was probably too much occupied with
other matters relating to his kingdom, during the earliest years of his
reign after his father's death, to be able to proceed at once against
Jehoiakim and punish him for his revolt.

(Note: Compare the remarks of M. v. Niebuhr on this point (Gesch. pp.
208,209) and his summary at p. 209: "Nebuchadnezzar had enough to do in
Babylon and the eastern half of his kingdom, to complete the
organization of the new kingdom, to make the military roads to the
western half of the kingdom along the narrow valley of the Euphrates and
through the desert, and also to fortify them and provide them with
watering stations and every other requisite, to repair the damages of
the Scythian hordes and the long contest with Nineveh, to restore the
shattered authority, and to bring Arabs and mountain-tribes to order.
All this was more important than a somewhat more rapid termination of
the Egyptian war and the pacification of Syria.")

He may also have thought it a matter of too little importance for him to
go himself, as there was not much reason to be afraid of Egypt since its
first defeat (cf. M. v. Niebuhr, p. 375). He therefore merely sent such
troops against him as were in the neighbourhood of Judah at the time.
The tribes mentioned along with the Chaldaeans were probably all subject
to Nebuchadnezzar, so that they attacked Judah at his command in
combination with the Chaldaean tribes left upon the frontier. How much
they effected is not distinctly stated; but it is evident that they were
not able to take Jerusalem, from the fact that after the death of
Jehoiakim his son was able to ascend the throne ([Kg2
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#006)). - The sending of these troops
is ascribed to Jehovah, who, as the supreme controller of the fate of
the covenant-nation, punished Jehoiakim for his rebellion. For, after
the Lord had given Judah into the hands of the Chaldaeans as a
punishment for its apostasy from Him, all revolt from them was rebellion
against the Lord. "According to the word of Jehovah, which He spake by
His servants the prophets," viz., Isaiah, Micah, Habakkuk, Jeremiah, and
others.

[Kg2 24:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003)

יי על־פּי אך: "only according to the mouth (command) of Jehovah did this
take place against Judah," i.e., for no other reason than because the
Lord had determined to put away Judah from before His face because of
Manasseh's sins (cf. [Kg2 21:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012),
and [Kg2 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#027)). "And Jehovah would
not forgive," even if the greatest intercessors, Moses and Samuel, had
come before Him ([Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001).), because
the measure of the sins was full, so that God was obliged to punish
according to His holy righteousness. We must repeat בּ from the
preceding words before הנּקי דּם.

[Kg2 24:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#006)

"Jehoiakim lay down to (fell asleep with) his fathers, and Jehoiachin
his son became king in his stead." That this statement is not in
contradiction to the prophecies of [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019) : "Jehoiakim shall be buried
like an ass, carried away and cast out far away from the gates of
Jerusalem," and [Jer 36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030) : "no son
of his shall sit upon the throne of David, and his body shall lie
exposed to the heat by day and to the cold by night," is now generally
admitted, as it has already been by J. D. Michaelis and Winer. But the
solution proposed by Michaelis, Winer, and M. v. Niebuhr (Gesch. p. 376)
is not sufficient, namely, that at the conquest of Jerusalem, which took
place three months after the death of Jehoiakim, his bones were taken
out of the grave, either by the victors out of revenge for his
rebellion, or by the fury of the people, and cast out before the city
gate; for Jeremiah expressly predicts that he shall have no funeral and
no burial whatever. We must therefore assume that he was slain in a
battle fought with the troops sent against him, and was not buried at
all; an assumption which is not at variance with the words, "he laid
himself down to his fathers,"' since this formula does not necessarily
indicate a peaceful death by sickness, but is also applied to king Ahab,
who was slain in battle ([Kg1 22:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#040),
cf. [Kg2 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020)).

(Note: The supposition of Ewald (Gesch. iii. p. 733), that Jehoiakim was
enticed out of the capital by a stratagem of the enemy, and taken
prisoner, and because he made a furious resistance was hurried off in a
scuffle and mercilessly slaughtered, is at variance with the fact that,
according to v. 10, it was not till after his death that the army of the
enemy advanced to the front of Jerusalem and commenced the siege.)

\- And even though his son Jehoiachin ascended the throne after his
father's death and maintained his position for three months against the
Chaldaeans, until at length he fell into their hands and was carried
away alive to Babylon, the prophet might very truly describe this short
reign as not sitting upon the throne of David (cf. Graf on [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019)). - To the death of Jehoiakim
there is appended the notice in [Kg2
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007), that the king of Egypt did not
go out of his own land any more, because the king of Babylon had taken
away everything that had belonged to the king of Egypt, from the brook
of Egypt to the river Euphrates. The purpose of this notice is to
indicate, on the one hand, what attitude Necho, whose march to the
Euphrates was previously mentioned, had assumed on the conquest of Judah
by the Chaldaeans, and on the other hand, that under these circumstances
a successful resistance to the Chaldaeans on the part of Judah was not
for a moment to be thought of.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 24:8</span></span>

(cf. [Ch2 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009) and [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010)). Jehoiachin, יהויכין or יויכין
([Eze 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)), i.e., he whom Jehovah
fortifies, called יכניהוּ in [Ch1
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#016), and [Jer
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#020); [Jer
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#004), etc., and כּניהוּ in [Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024), [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028); [Jer
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#001), probably according to the
popular twisting and contraction of the name Jehoiachin, was eighteen
years old when he ascended the throne (the eight years of the Chronicles
are a slip of the pen), and reigned three months, or, according to the
more precise statement of the Chronicles, three months and ten days, in
the spirit of his father. Ezekiel ([Eze
19:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#005)) describes him not only as a
young lion, who learned to prey and devoured men, like Jehoahaz, but
also affirms of him that he knew their (the deceased men's) widows,
i.e., ravished them, and destroyed their cities-that is to say, he did
not confine his deeds of violence to individuals, but extended them to
all that was left behind by those whom he had murdered, viz., to their
families and possessions; and nothing is affirmed in [Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024) and [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028) respecting his character at
variance with this. His mother Nehushta was a daughter of Elnathan, a
ruler of the people, or prince, from Jerusalem ([Jer
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#022); [Jer
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012), [Jer
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#025)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 24:10</span></span>

"At that time," i.e., when Jehoiachin had come to the throne, or,
according to [Ch2 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010), "at the turn
of the year," i.e., in the spring (see at [Kg1
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#022)), the servants (generals) of
Nebuchadnezzar marched against Jerusalem, and the city was besieged. The
Keri עלוּ is substantially correct, but is an unnecessary alteration of
the Chethb עלה, since the verb when it precedes the subject is not
unfrequently used in the singular, though before a plural subject (cf.
Ewald, 316, a.). The נב עבדי are different from the גדוּדים of [Kg2
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002). As the troops sent against
Jehoiakim had not been able to conquer Judah, especially Jerusalem,
Nebuchadnezzar sent his generals with an army against Jerusalem, to
besiege the city and take it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 24:11</span></span>

During the siege he came himself to punish Jehoiakim's revolt in the
person of his successor.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 24:12</span></span>

Then Jehoiachin went out to the king of Babylon to yield himself up to
him, because he perceived the impossibility of holding the city any
longer against the besiegers, and probably hoped to secure the favour of
Nebuchadnezzar, and perhaps to retain the throne as his vassal by a
voluntary submission. Nebuchadnezzar, however, did not show favour any
more, as he had done to Jehoiakim at the first taking of Jerusalem, but
treated Jehoiachin as a rebel, made him prisoner, and led him away to
Babylon, along with his mother, his wives ([Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015)), his princes and his
chamberlains, as Jeremiah had prophesied ([Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024).), in the eighth year of his
(Nebuchadnezzar's) reign. The reference to the king's mother in [Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012) and [Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015) is not to be explained on the
ground that she still acted as guardian over the king, who was not yet
of age (J. D. Mich.), but from the influential position which she
occupied in the kingdom as הגּבירה ([Jer
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#002) : see at [Kg1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021)). The eighth year of the reign
of Nebuchadnezzar is reckoned from the time when his father had
transferred to him the chief command over the army to make war upon
Necho, according to which his first year coincides with the fourth year
of Jehoiakim ([Jer 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)). As
Nebuchadnezzar acted as king, so far as the Jews were concerned, from
that time forward, although he conducted the war by command of his
father, this is always reckoned as the point of time at which his reign
commenced, both in our books and also in Jeremiah (cf. [Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008); [Jer
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)). According to this calculation,
his reign lasted forty-four years, viz., the eight years of Jehoiakim
and the thirty-six years of Jehoiachin's imprisonment, as is evident
from [Kg2 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 24:13</span></span>

Nebuchadnezzar thereupon, that is to say, when he had forced his way
into the city, plundered the treasures of the temple and palace, and
broke the gold off the vessels which Solomon had made in the temple of
Jehovah. קצּץ, to cut off, break off, as in [Kg2
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#017), i.e., to bear off the gold
plates. Nebuchadnezzar had already taken a portion of the golden vessels
of the temple away with him at the first taking of Jerusalem in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim, and had placed them in the temple of his god
at Babylon ([Ch2 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007); [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002)). They were no doubt the smaller
vessels of solid gold-basins, scoops, goblets, knives, tongs, etc., -
which Cyrus delivered up again to the Jews on their return to their
native land ([Ezr 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007).). This time he
took the gold off the larger vessels, which were simply plated with that
metal, such as the altar of burnt-offering, the table of shew-bread and
ark of the covenant, and carried it away as booty, so that on the third
conquest of Jerusalem, in the time of Zedekiah, beside a few gold and
silver basins and scoops ([Kg2 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#015))
there were only the large brazen vessels of the court remaining ([Kg2
25:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013); [Jer
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#018).). The words, "as Jehovah had
spoken," refer to [Kg2 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#017) and [Isa
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#006), and to the sayings of other
prophets, such as [Jer 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013); [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003), etc.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 24:14</span></span>

Beside these treasures, he carried away captive to Babylon the cream of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, not only the most affluent, but, as is
evident from [Jer 24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001), the best
portion in a moral respect. In [Kg2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014) the number of those who were
carried off is simply given in a general form, according to its
sum-total, as 10,000; and then in [Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015), [Kg2
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#016) the details are more minutely
specified. "All Jerusalem" is the whole of the population of Jerusalem,
which is first of all divided into two leading classes, and then more
precisely defined by the clause, "nothing was left except the common
people," and reduced to the cream of the citizens. The king,
queen-mother, and king's wives being passed over and mentioned for the
first time in the special list in [Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015), there are noticed here
כּל־השּׂרים and החיל גּבּורי כּל, who form the first of the leading
classes. By the שׂרים are meant, according to [Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015), the סריסים, chamberlains, i.e.,
the officials of the king's court in general, and by הארץ אוּלי ("the
mighty of the land") all the heads of the tribes and families of the
nation that were found in Jerusalem; and under the last the priests and
prophets, who were also carried away according to [Jer
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#001), with Ezekiel among them ([Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)), are included as the spiritual
heads of the people. The החיל גּבּורי are called החיל אנשׁי in [Kg2
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#016); their number was 7000. The
persons intended are not warriors, but men of property, as in [Kg2
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#020). The second class of those who
ere carried away consisted of כּל־החרשׁ, all the workers in stone,
metal, and wood, that is to say, masons, smiths, and carpenters; and
המּסגּר, the locksmiths, including probably not actual locksmiths only,
but makers of weapons also. There is no need for any serious refutation
of the marvellous explanation given of מסגּר by Hitzig (on [Jer
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001)), who derives it from מס and גּר,
and supposes it to be an epithet applied to the remnant of the
Canaanites, who had been made into tributary labourers, although it has
been adopted by Thenius and Graf, who make them into artisans of the
foreign socagers. עם־הארץ דּלּת = דלּת־הארץ ([Kg2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#012)), the poor people of the land,
i.e., the lower portion of the population of Jerusalem, from whom
Nebuchadnezzar did not fear any rebellion, because they possessed
nothing ([Jer 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#010)), i.e., neither
property (money nor other possessions), nor strength and ability to
organize a revolt. The antithesis to these formed by the מלחמה עשׂי מ
גּבּורים, the strong or powerful men, who were in a condition to
originate and carry on a war; for this category includes all who were
carried away, not merely the thousand workmen, but also the seven
thousand החיל אנשׁי, and the king's officers and the chiefs of the
nation, whose number amounted to two thousand, since the total number of
the exiles was then thousand. There is no special allusion to warriors
or military, because in the struggle for the rescue of the capital and
the kingdom from destruction every man who could bear arms performed
military service, so that the distinction between warriors and
non-warriors was swept away, and the actual warriors are swallowed up in
the ten thousand. Babel is the country of Babylonia, or rather the
Babylonian empire.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 24:17</span></span>

Over the lower classes of the people who had been left behind
Nebuchadnezzar placed the paternal uncle of the king, who had been led
away, viz., Mattaniah, and made him king under the name of Zedekiah. He
was the youngest son of Josiah ([Jer
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#003); [Jer
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#001)); was only ten years old when his
father died, and twenty-one years old when he ascended the throne; and
as the uncle of Jehoiachin, who being only a youth of eighteen could not
have a son capable of reigning, had the first claim to the throne.
Instead of דּדו, his uncle, we have in [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010) אהיו, his brother, i.e., his
nearest relation. On the change in the name see at [Kg2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034). The name צדקיּהוּ, i.e., he who
has Jehovah's righteousness, was probably chosen by Mattaniah in the
hope that through him or in his reign the Lord would create the
righteousness promised to His people.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 24:18</span></span>

(Note: To this section the historical appendix to the book of Jeremiah
(Jer 52) furnishes a parallel, which agrees with it for the most part
word for word, omitting only the short account of the murder of Gedaliah
and of the flight of the people to Egypt ([Kg2
25:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022)), and adding instead a
computation of the number of the people who were led away to Babel by
Nebuchadnezzar ([Jer 52:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#028)). Apart
from the less important variations, which have arisen in part simply
from copyists' errors, we have in [Jer
52:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#018), and especially in [Jer
52:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#021) and [Jer
52:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#022), by no means unimportant notices
concerning the vessels of the temple, especially concerning the
ornaments of the brazen pillars, which do not occur anywhere in our
books. It is evident from this that our text was not derived from Jer
(Hvernick), and that Jer was not borrowed from our books of Kings and
appended to the book of Jeremiah's prophecies (Ros., Maur., Ew., Graf).
On the contrary, the two accounts are simply brief extracts from one
common and more elaborate history of the later times of the kingdom of
Judah, possibly composed by Jeremiah or Baruch, analogous to the two
extracts from the history of Hezekiah in 2 Kings 18-20 and Isa 36-39. -
More minute accounts of this space of time are given in the historical
portions of the prophecies of Jeremiah (Jer 39-44), which form an
explanatory commentary to the section before us.)

[Kg2 24:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#018)

Length and spirit of Zedekiah's reign (cf. [Jer
52:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001), and [Ch2
36:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#011)). - Zedekiah's mother
Hamital, daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah, was also the mother of Jehoahaz
([Kg2 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031)); consequently he was his
own brother and the half-brother of Jehoiakim, whose mother was named
Zebidah ([Kg2 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#036)). His reign lasted
eleven years, and in its attitude towards the Lord exactly resembled
that of his brother Jehoiakim, except that Zedekiah does not appear to
have possessed so much energy for that which was evil. According to [Jer
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#005) and [Jer
38:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#024)., he was weak in character, and
completely governed by the great men of his kingdom, having no power or
courage whatever to offer resistance. but, like them, he did not hearken
to the words of the Lord through Jeremiah ([Jer
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#002)), or, as it is expressed in [Ch2
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#012), "he did not humble himself
before Jeremiah the prophet, who spake to him out of the mouth of the
Lord."

[Kg2 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#020)

"For because of the wrath of the Lord it happened concerning Judah and
Jerusalem." The subject to היתה is to be taken from what precedes, viz.,
Zedekiah's doing evil, or that such a God-resisting man as Zedekiah
became king. "Not that it was of God that Zedekiah was wicked, but that
Zedekiah, a man (if we believe Brentius, in loc.) simple, dependent upon
counsellors, yet at the same time despising the word of God and
impenitent ([Ch2 36:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#012)), became
king, so as to be the cause of Jerusalem's destruction" (Seb. Schm.). On
וגו השׁליכו עד cf. [Kg2 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003), and [Kg2
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#018), [Kg2
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#023). "And Zedekiah rebelled against
the king of Babel," who, according to [Ch2
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#013), had made him swear by God, to
whom he was bound by oath to render fealty. This breach of covenant and
frivolous violation of his oath Ezekiel also condemns in sharp words
([Eze 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#013).), as a grievous sin
against the Lord. Zedekiah also appears from the very first to have had
no intention of keeping the oath of fealty which he took to the king of
Babel with very great uprightness. For only a short time after he was
installed as king he despatched an embassy to Babel ([Jer
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#003)), which, judging from the
contents of the letter to the exiles that Jeremiah gave to the
ambassadors to take with them, can hardly have been sent with any other
object that to obtain from the king of Babel the return of those who had
been carried away. Then in the fourth year of his reign he himself made
a journey to Babel ([Jer 51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)),
evidently to investigate the circumstances upon the spot, and to ensure
the king of Babel of his fidelity. And in the fifth month of the same
year, probably after his return from Babel, ambassadors of the Moabites,
Ammonites, Tyrians, and Sidonians came to Jerusalem to make an alliance
with him for throwing off the Chaldaean yoke ([Jer
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#003)). Zedekiah also had recourse to
Egypt, where the enterprising Pharaoh Hophra (Apries) had ascended the
throne; and then, in spite of the warnings of Jeremiah, trusting to the
help of Egypt, revolted from the king of Babel, probably at a time when
Nebuchadnezzar (according to the combinations of M. v. Nieb., which are
open to question however) was engaged in a war with Media.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 25](kg2025)

</div>
