<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2021)  [Next](kg2023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 22:0</span></span>

Reign of King Josiah - 2 Kings 22:1-23:30

After a brief account of the length and spirit of the reign of the pious
Josiah ([Kg2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001), [Kg2
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#002)), we have a closely connected
narrative, in v. 3-23:24, of what he did for the restoration of
idolatry; and the whole of the reform effected by him is placed in the
eighteenth year of his reign, because it was in this year that the book
of the law was discovered, through which the reformation of worship was
carried to completion. It is evident that it was the historian's
intention to combine together everything that Josiah did to this end, so
as to form one grand picture, from the circumstance that he has not
merely placed the chronological datum, "it came to pass in the
eighteenth year of king Josiah," at the beginning, but has repeated it
at the close ([Kg2 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#023)). If we run
over the several facts which are brought before us in this section-the
repairing of the temple ([Kg2 22:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003));
the discovery of the book of the law; the reading of the book to the
king; the inquiry made of the prophetess Huldah, and her prophecy ([Kg2
23:8-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008)); the reading of the law to
the assembled people in the temple, with the renewal of the covenant
([Kg2 23:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001)); the eradication of
idolatry not only from Jerusalem and Judah, but from Bethel also, and
all the cities of Samaria (vv. 4-20); and, lastly, the passover ([Kg2
23:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#021)), - there is hardly any need
to remark, that all this cannot have taken place in the one eighteenth
year of his reign, even if, with Usher (Annales ad a.m. 3381), we were
to place the solemn passover at the close of the eighteenth year of
Josiah's reign, which is hardly suitable, and by no means follows from
the circumstance that the chronological datum, "in the eighteenth year,"
stands at the commencement of the complete account of the reform of
worship introduced by that king. For we may clearly infer that the
several details of this account are not arranged chronologically, but
according to the subject-matter, and that the historian has embraced the
efforts of Josiah to restore the legal worship of Jehovah, which spread
over several years, under the one point of view of a discovery of the
law, and therefore within the eighteenth year of his reign, from the
fact that he introduces the account of the repairing of the temple ([Kg2
22:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003)) in a period by itself, and
makes it subordinate to the account of the discovery of the book of the
law, and indeed only mentions it in a general manner, because it led to
the finding of the book of the law. It is true that the other facts are
attached to one another in the narrative by Vav consec.; but, on a
closer inspection of the several details, there cannot be any doubt
whatever that the intention is not to arrange them in their
chronological order. The repairing of the temple must have commenced
before the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign, inasmuch as in that year,
in which the incident occurred which led to the discovery of the book of
the law ([Kg2 22:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003)), not only were
the builders occupied with the repairs of the temple, but money had been
brought by all the people to the house of God to carry on this work, and
had been collected by the Levites who kept the door. Moreover, from the
very nature of the case, we cannot conceive of the restoration of the
temple, that had fallen to decay, without the removal of the idolatrous
abominations found in the temple. And the assumption is an equally
inconceivable one, that all the people entered into covenant with the
Lord ([Kg2 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#003)), before any
commencement had been made towards the abolition of the prevailing
idolatry, or that the pious king had the book of the law read in the
temple and entered into covenant with the Lord, so long as the Ashera
was standing in the temple, and the idolatrous altars erected by
Manasseh in the courts, together with the horses and chariots dedicated
to the sun. If the conclusion of a covenant in consequence of the public
reading of the book of the law was to be an act in accordance with the
law, the public memorials of idolatry must be destroyed at all events in
the neighbourhood of the temple. And is it likely that the king, who had
been so deeply moved by the curses of the law, would have undertaken so
solemn a transaction in sight of the idolatrous altars and other
abominations of idolatry in the house of Jehovah, and not rather have
seen that this would be only a daring insult to Jehovah? These reasons
are quite sufficient to prove that the extermination of idolatry had
commenced before the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign, and had simply
been carried out with greater zeal throughout the whole kingdom after
the discovery of the book of the law.

This view of our account is simply confirmed by a comparison with the
parallel history in 2 Chron 34 and 35. According to [Ch2
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#003)., Josiah began to seek the God of
his father David in the eighth year of his reign, when he was still a
youth, that is to say, not more than sixteen years old, and in the
twelfth year of his reign began to purify Judah and Jerusalem from
idolatry; and, according to [Ch2
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#008)., in the eighteenth year of his
reign, at the purification of the land and temple, and the renovation of
the temple, the book of the law was found by the high priest, and handed
over to the king and read before him (vv. 8-28), after which the renewal
of the covenant took place, and all the abominations of idolatry that
still remained in the land were swept away ([Ch2
34:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#029)), and, lastly, a solemn
passover was celebrated, of which we have an elaborate account in 2
Chron. 35:1-19. Consequently the account given in the Chronicles is, on
the whole, arranged with greater chronological precision, although even
there, after the commencement of the extermination of idolatry has been
mentioned, we have a brief and comprehensive statement of all that
Josiah did to accomplish that results; so that after the renewal of the
covenant ([Ch2 34:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#033)) we have nothing
more than a passing allusion, by way of summary, to the complete
abolition of the abominations of idolatry throughout the whole land.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 22:1</span></span>

Length and spirit of Josiah's reign. - Josiah (for the name, see at [Kg1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002)), like Hezekiah, trode once more
in the footsteps of his pious forefather David, adhering with the
greatest constancy to the law of the Lord. He reigned thirty-one years.
As a child he had probably received a pious training from his mother;
and when he had ascended the throne, after the early death of his
godless father, he was under the guidance of pious men who were
faithfully devoted to the law of the Lord, and who turned his heart to
the God of their fathers, as was the case with Joash in [Kg2
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#003), although there is no allusion to
guardianship. His mother Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah, was of
Boscath, a city in the plain of Judah, of which nothing further is known
(see at [Jos 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039)). The description
of his character, "he turned not aside to the right hand and to the
left," sc. from that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, is based
upon [Deu 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029); [Deu
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#011), [Deu
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#020), and [Deu
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#014), and expresses an unwavering
adherence to the law of the Lord.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 22:3</span></span>

Repairing of the temple, and discovery of the book of the law (cf. [Ch2
34:8-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#008)). - When Josiah sent Shaphan
the secretary of state (סופר, see at [Sa2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017)) into the temple, in the
eighteenth year of his reign, with instructions to Hilkiah the high
priest to pay to the builders the money which had been collected from
the people for repairing the temple by the Levites who kept the door,
Hilkiah said to Shaphan, "I have found the book of the law." [Kg2
22:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003) form a long period. The
apodosis to וגו ויהי, "it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king
Josiah-the king had sent Shaphan," etc., does not follow till [Kg2
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008) : "that Hilkiah said," etc. The
principal fact which the historian wished to relate, was the discovery
of the book of the law; and the repairing of the temple is simply
mentioned because it was when Shaphan was sent to Hilkiah about the
payment of the money to the builders that the high priest informed the
king's secretary of state of the discovery of the book of the law in the
temple, and handed it over to him to take to the king. המּלך שׁלח, in
[Kg2 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003), forms the commencement to
the minor clauses inserted within the principal clause, and subordinate
to it: "the king had sent Shaphan," etc. According to [Ch2
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#008), the king had deputed not only
Shaphan the state-secretary, but also Maaseiah the governor of the city
and Joach the chancellor, because the repairing of the temple was not a
private affair of the king and the high priest, but concerned the city
generally, and indeed the whole kingdom. In [Kg2
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#004), [Kg2
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#005) there follows the charge given by
the king to Shaphan: "Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may make
up the money, ... and hand it over to the workmen appointed over the
house of Jehovah," etc. יתּם, from תּמם, Hiphil, signifies to finish or
set right, i.e., not pay out (Ges., Dietr.), but make it up for the
purpose of paying out, namely, collect it from the door-keepers, count
it, and bind it up in bags (see [Kg2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#011)). יתּם is therefore quite
appropriate here, and there is no alteration of the text required. The
door-keepers had probably put the money in a chest placed at the
entrance, as was the case at the repairing of the temple in the time of
Joash ([Kg2 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010)). In [Kg2
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#005) the Keri יתנהוּ is a bad
alteration of the Chethb יתנה, "and give (it) into the hand," which is
perfectly correct. המּלאכה עשׁי might denote both the masters and the
workmen (builders), and is therefore defined more precisely first of all
by יי בּבית המּפקדים, "who had the oversight at the house of Jehovah,"
i.e., the masters or inspectors of the building, and secondly by יי
בּבית אשׁר, who were (occupied) at the house of Jehovah, whilst in the
Chronicles it is explained by י עשׂים ב אשׁר. The Keri יי בּית is an
alteration after [Kg2 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#009), whereas
the combination בּבית מפקדים is justified by the construction of הפקיד
c. acc. pers. and בּ rei in [Jer 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#005).
The masters are the subject to ויתּנוּ; they were to pay the money as it
was wanted, either to the workmen, or for the purchase of materials for
repairing the dilapidations, as is more precisely defined in [Kg2
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#006). Compare [Kg2
12:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#012); and for [Kg2
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#007) compare [Kg2
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#016). The names of the masters or
inspectors are given in [Ch2 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#012). -
The execution of the king's command is not specially mentioned, that the
parenthesis may not be spun out any further.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 22:8</span></span>

Hilkiah the high priest (cf. [Ch2
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#015)) said, "I have found the book of
the law in the house of Jehovah." התּורה ספר, the book of the law (not a
law-book or a roll of laws), cannot mean anything else, either
grammatically or historically, than the Mosaic book of the law (the
Pentateuch), which is so designated, as is generally admitted, in the
Chronicles, and the books of Ezra and Nehemiah.

(Note: Thenius has correctly observed, that "the expression shows very
clearly, that the allusion is to something already known, not to
anything that had come to light for the first time;" but is he greatly
mistaken when, notwithstanding this, he supposes that what we are to
understand by this is merely a collection of the commandments and
ordinances of Moses, which had been worked up in the Pentateuch, and
more especially in Deuteronomy. For there is not the smallest proof
whatever that any such collection of commandments and ordinances of
Moses, or, as Bertheau supposes, the collection of Mosaic law contained
in the three middle books of the Pentateuch, or Deuteronomy 1-28
(according to Vaihinger, Reuss, and others), was ever called התורה ספר,
or that any such portions had had an independent existence, and had been
deposited in the temple. These hypotheses are simply bound up with the
attacks made upon the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch, and ought to
be given up, since De Wette, the great leader of the attack upon the
genuineness of the Pentateuch, in 162a of the later editions of his
Introduction to the Old Testament, admits that the account before us
contains the first certain trace of the existence of our present
Pentateuch. The only loophole left to modern criticism, therefore, is
that Hilkiah forged the book of the law discovered by him under the name
of Moses, - a conclusion which can only be arrived at by distorting the
words of the text in the most arbitrary manner, turning "find" into
"forge," but which is obliged either to ignore or forcibly to set aside
all the historical evident of the previous existence of the whole of the
Pentateuch, including Deuteronomy.)

The finding of the book of the law in the temple presupposes that the
copy deposited there had come to light. But it by no means follows from
this, that before its discovery there were no copies in the hands of the
priests and prophets. The book of the law that was found was simply the
temple copy,

(Note: Whether the original written by Moses' own hand, as Grotius
inferred from the משה ביד of the Chronicles, or a later copy of this, is
a very superfluous question; for, as Hvernick says, "even in the latter
case it was to be regarded just in the same light as the autograph,
having just the same claims, since the temple repaired by Josiah was the
temple of Solomon still.")

deposited, according to [Deu 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026), by
the side of the ark of the covenant, which had been lost under the
idolatrous kings Manasseh and Amon, and came to light again now that the
temple was being repaired. We cannot learn, either from the account
before us, or from the words of the Chronicles ([Ch2
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014)), "when they were taking out the
money brought into the house of Jehovah, Hilkiah found the book of the
law of the Lord," in what part of the temple it had hitherto lain; and
this is of no importance so far as the principal object of the history
is concerned. Even the words of the Chronicles simply point out the
occasion on which the book was discovered, and do not affirm that it had
been lying in one of the treasure-chambers of the temple, as Josephus
says. The expression ויּקראהוּ does not imply that Shaphan read the
whole book through immediately.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 22:9</span></span>

The reading of the book of the law to the king, and the inquiry made of
the prophetess Huldah concerning it. - [Kg2
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#009), [Kg2
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#010). When Shaphan informed the king
of the execution of his command, he also told him that Hilkiah had given
him a book, and read it to the king. דּבר השׁיב, to bring an answer, to
give a report as to a commission that has been received. התּיכוּ, they
poured out the money, i.e., out of the chest in which it was collected,
into bags. ויּקראהוּ, "he read it to the king," is simplified in the
Chronicles ([Kg2 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#018)) by בו יקרא,
"he read therein." That יקראהו does not signify that the whole was read,
is evident from a comparison of [Kg2
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#002), where the reading of the whole
is expressed by כּל־דּברי ס. Which passages or sections Shaphan read by
himself ([Kg2 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008)), and which he read
to the king, it is impossible to determine exactly. To the king he most
likely read, among other things, the threats and curses of the law
against those who transgressed it (Deut 28), and possibly also Lev 26,
because the reading made such an impression upon him, that in his
anguish of soul he rent his clothes. Nor is it possible to decide
anything with certainty, as to whether the king had hitherto been
altogether unacquainted with the book of the law, and had merely a
traditional knowledge of the law itself, or whether he had already had a
copy of the law, but had not yet read it through, or had not read it
with proper attention, which accounted for the passages that were read
to him now making so deep and alarming an impression upon him. It is a
well-known experience, that even books which have been read may, under
peculiar circumstances, produce an impression such as has not been made
before. But in all probability Josiah had not had in his possession any
copy of the law, or even read it till now; although the thorough
acquaintance with the law, which all the prophets display, places the
existence of the Pentateuch in prophetical circles beyond the reach of
doubt.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 22:11</span></span>

In his alarm at the words of the book of the law that had been read to
him, Josiah rent his clothes, and sent a deputation to the prophetess
Huldah, to make inquiry of Jehovah through her concerning the things
which he had heard from the law. The deputation consisted of the high
priest Hilkiah, Ahikam the supporter of Jeremiah ([Jer
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#024)) and the father of Gedaliah the
governor ([Kg2 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022); [Jer
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#014), etc.), Achbor the son of
Michaiah, Shaphan the state-secretary ([Kg2
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003)), and Asahiah the servant (i.e.,
an officer) of the king.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 22:13</span></span>

From the commission, "Inquire ye of Jehovah for me and for the people
and for all Judah (i.e., the whole kingdom) concerning the words of this
book of the law that has been found, for great is the wrath of the Lord
which has been kindled against us, because our fathers have not heard
...," we may infer that the curses of the law upon the despisers of the
commandments of God in Lev 26; [Deu
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001), and other passages, had been
read to the king. את־יי דּרשׁ means to inquire the will of the Lord,
what He has determined concerning the king, his people, and the kingdom.
על שׁמע signifies here to hearken to anything, to observe it, for which
אל is used elsewhere. על כּתב, to prescribe for performance. עלינוּ,
"prescribed for us," is quite appropriate, since the law was not only
given to the fathers to obey, but also to the existing generation-a fact
which Thenius has overlooked with his conjecture עליו. To render the
king's alarm and his fear of severe judgments from God intelligible,
there is no need for the far-fetched and extremely precarious
hypothesis, that just at that time the Scythians had invaded and
devastated the land.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 22:14</span></span>

Nothing further is known of the prophetess Huldah than what is mentioned
here. All that we can infer from the fact that the king sent to her is,
that she was highly distinguished on account of her prophetical gifts,
and that none of the prophets of renown, such as Jeremiah and Zephaniah,
were at that time in Jerusalem. Her father Shallum was keeper of the
clothes, i.e., superintendent over either the priests' dresses that were
kept in the temple (according to the Rabbins and Wits. de proph. in his
Miscell. ss. i. p. 356, ed. 3), or the king's wardrobe. The names of his
ancestors תּקוה and הרחס are written תּוקהת and חסרה in the Chronicles.
Huldah lived at Jerusalem בּמּשׁנה, "in the second part" or district of
the city, i.e., in the lower city, upon the hill Ἄκρα (Rob. Pal. i. p.
391), which is called המּשׁנה in [Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010), and משׁנה העיר in [Neh
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#009), and ἄλλη πόλις in Joseph. Ant.
xv. 11, 5.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 22:15</span></span>

The reply of Huldah the prophetess. - Huldah confirmed the fear
expressed by Josiah, that the wrath of the Lord was kindled against
Jerusalem and its inhabitants on account of their idolatry, and
proclaimed first of all ([Kg2 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#016),
[Kg2 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#017)), that the Lord would bring
upon Jerusalem and its inhabitants all the punishments with which the
rebellious and idolaters are threatened in the book of the law; and
secondly ([Kg2 22:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#018)), to the king
himself, that on account of his sincere repentance and humiliation in
the sight of God, he would not live to see the predicted calamities, but
would be gathered to his fathers in peace. The first part of her
announcement applies "to the man who has sent you to me" ([Kg2
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#015)), the second "to the king of
Judah, who has sent to inquire of the Lord" ([Kg2
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#018)). "The man" who had sent to her
was indeed also the king; but Huldah intentionally made use of the
general expression "the man," etc., to indicate that the word announced
to him applied not merely to the king, but to every one who would
hearken to the word, whereas the second portion of her reply had
reference to the king alone. הזּה המּקום, in [Kg2
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#016), [Kg2
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#019), and [Kg2
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020), is Jerusalem as the capital of
the kingdom. In [Kg2 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#016), הסּפר
כּל־דּברי is an explanatory apposition to רעה. [Kg2
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#017). "With all the work of their
hands," i.e., with the idols which they have made for themselves (cf.
[Kg1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007)). The last clause in [Kg2
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#018), "the words which thou hast
heard," is not to be connected with the preceding one, "thus saith the
Lord," and על or ל to be supplied; but it belongs to the following
sentence, and is placed at the head absolutely: as for the words, which
thou hast heart - because thy heart has become soft, i.e., in despair at
the punishment with which the sinners are threatened (cf. [Deu
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#003); [Isa
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004)), and thou hast humbled thyself,
when thou didst hear, etc.; therefore, behold, I will gather thee to thy
fathers, etc. לשׁמּה להיות, "that they (the city and inhabitants) may
become a desolation and curse." These words, which are often used by the
prophets, but which are not found connected like this except in [Jer
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022), rest upon Lev 26 and Deut 28,
and show that these passages had been read to the king out of the book
of the law.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 22:20</span></span>

To gather to his fathers means merely to let him die, and is generally
applied to a peaceful death upon a sick-bed, like the synonymous phrase,
to lie with one's fathers; but it is also applied to a violent death by
being slain in battle ([Kg1 22:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#040) and
[Kg1 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#034)), so that there is no
difficulty in reconciling this comforting assurance with the slaying of
Josiah in battle ([Kg2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029)).
בּשׁלום, in peace, i.e., without living to witness the devastation of
Jerusalem, as is evident from the words, "thine eyes will not see," etc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 23](kg2023)

</div>
