<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2006)  [Next](kg2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 7:1</span></span>

Elisha announced to him the word of the Lord: "At the (this) time
to-morrow a seah of wheaten flour (סלת, see at [Kg1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002)) will be worth a shekel, and two
seahs of barley a shekel in the gate, i.e., in the market, at Samaria."
A seah, or a third of an ephah = a Dresden peck (Metze), for a shekel
was still a high price; but in comparison with the prices given in [Kg2
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#025) as those obtained for the most
worthless kinds of food, it was incredibly cheap. The king's
aide-de-camp (שׁלישׁ: see at [Sa2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008); נשׁען למּלך אשׁר, an error in
writing for נשׁ המּלך אשׁר, cf. [Kg2
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#017), and for the explanation [Kg2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#018)) therefore replied with mockery
at this prophecy: "Behold (i.e., granted that) the Lord made windows in
heaven, will this indeed be?" i.e., such cheapness take place. (For the
construction, see Ewald, 357, b.) The ridicule lay more especially in
the "windows in heaven," in which there is an allusion to [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011), sc. to rain down a flood of
flour and corn. Elisha answered seriously: "Behold, thou wilt see it
with thine eyes, but not eat thereof" (see [Kg2
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#017).). The fulfilment of these words
of Elisha was brought about by the event narrated in [Kg2
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#003).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 7:3</span></span>

"Four men were before the gate as lepers," or at the gateway, separated
from human society, according to the law in [Lev
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#046); [Num
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#003), probably in a building erected
for the purpose (cf. [Kg2 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#005)), just
as at the present day the lepers at Jerusalem have their huts by the
side of the Zion gate (vid., Strauss, Sinai u. Golgatha, p. 205, and
Tobler, Denkbltter aus Jerus. p. 411ff.). These men being on the point
of starvation, resolved to invade the camp of the Syrians, and carried
out this resolution בּנּשׁף, in the evening twilight, not the morning
twilight (Seb. Schm., Cler., etc.), on account of [Kg2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#012), where the king is said to have
received the news of the flight of the Syrians during the night. Coming
to "the end of the Syrian camp," i.e., to the outskirts of it on the
city side, they found no one there. For ([Kg2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#006), [Kg2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#007)) "the Lord had caused the army of
the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots and horses, a noise of a great
army," so that, believing the king of Israel to have hired the kings of
the Hittites and Egyptians to fall upon them, they fled from the camp in
the twilight אל־נפשׁם, with regard to their life, i.e., to save their
life only, leaving behind them their tents, horses, and asses, and the
camp as it was. - The miracle, by which God delivered Samaria from the
famine or from surrendering to the foe, consisted in an oral delusion,
namely, in the fact that the besiegers thought they heard the march of
hostile armies from the north and south, and were seized with such panic
terror that they fled in the greatest haste, leaving behind them their
baggage, and their beasts of draught and burden. It is impossible to
decide whether the noise which they heard had any objective reality, say
a miraculous buzzing in the air, or whether it was merely a deception of
the senses produced in their ears by God; and this is a matter of no
importance, since in either case it was produced miraculously by God.
The kings of the Hittites are kings of northern Canaan, upon Lebanon and
towards Phoenicia; חתּים in the broader sense for Canaanites, as in [Kg1
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#029). The plural, "kings of the
Egyptians," is probably only occasioned by the parallel expression
"kings of the Hittites," and is not to be pressed.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 7:8</span></span>

When these lepers (these, pointing back to [Kg2
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#003).) came into the camp which the
Syrians had left, they first of all satisfied their own hunger with the
provisions which they found in the tents, and then took different
valuables and concealed them. But their consciences were soon aroused,
so that they said: We are not doing right; this day is a day of joyful
tidings: if we are silent and wait till the morning light, guilt will
overtake us; "for it is the duty of citizens to make known things
relating to public safety" (Grotius). They then resolved to announce the
joyful event in the king's palace, and reported it to the watchman at
the city gate. העיר שׁער stands as a generic term in a collective sense
for the persons who watched at the gate; hence the following plural להם,
and in [Kg2 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#011) השּׁערים. "And the
gate-keepers cried out (what they had heard) and reported it in the
king's palace."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 7:12</span></span>

The king imagined that the unexpected departure of the Syrians was only
a ruse, namely, that they had left the camp and hidden themselves in the
field, to entice the besieged out of the fortress, and then fall upon
them and press into the city. בּהשּׂדה according to later usage for
בּשּׂדה (vid., Ewald, 244, a). In order to make sure of the correctness
or incorrectness of this conjecture, one of the king's servants
(counsellors) gave this advice: "Let them take (the Vav before יקחוּ as
in [Kg2 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#041)) five of the horses left
in the city, that we may send and see how the matter stands." The words,
"Behold they (the five horses) are as the whole multitude of Israel that
are left in it (the city); behold they are as the whole multitude of
Israel that are gone," have this meaning: The five horsemen (for horses
stand for horsemen, as it is self-evident that it was men on horseback
and not the horses themselves that were to be sent out as spies) can but
share the fate of the rest of the people of Samaria, whether they return
unhurt to meet death by starvation with the people that still remain, or
fall into the hands of the enemy and are put to death, in which case
they will only suffer the lot of those who have already perished. Five
horses is an approximative small number, and is therefore not at
variance with the following statement, that two pair of horses were sent
out with chariots and men. The Chethb ההמון is not to be altered, since
there are other instances in which the first noun is written with the
article, though in the construct state (vid., Ewald, 290, e.); and the
Keri is only conformed to the following כּכל־המון. [Kg2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#014), [Kg2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#015). They then sent out two chariots
with horses, who pursued the flying enemy to the Jordan, and found the
whole of the road full of traces of the hurried flight, consisting of
clothes and vessels that had been thrown away. The Chethb בּהחפזם is the
only correct reading, since it is only in the Niphal that חפז has the
meaning to fly in great haste (cf. [Sa1
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026); [Psa
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#006); [Psa
104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 7:16</span></span>

When the returning messengers reported this, the people went out and
plundered the camp of the Syrians, and this was followed by the
consequent cheapness of provisions predicted by Elisha. As the people
streamed out, the unbelieving aide-de-camp, whom the king had ordered to
take the oversight at the gate (הפקיד, to deliver the oversight) for the
purpose of preserving order in the crowding of the starving multitude,
was trodden down by the people, so that he died, whereby this prediction
of Elisha was fulfilled. The exact fulfilment of this prediction
appeared so memorable to the historian, that he repeats this prophecy in
[Kg2 7:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#018) along with the event
which occasioned it, and refers again to its fulfilment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 8](kg2008)

</div>
