<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2022)  [Next](kg2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 23:1</span></span>

Instead of resting content with the fact that he was promised
deliverance from the approaching judgment, Josiah did everything that
was in his power to lead the whole nation to true conversion to the
Lord, and thereby avert as far as possible the threatened curse of
rejection, since the Lord in His word had promised forgiveness and mercy
to the penitent. He therefore gathered together the elders of the
nation, and went with them, with the priests and prophets and the
assembled people, into the temple, and there had the book of the law
read to those who were assembled, and concluded a covenant with the
Lord, into which the people also entered. After this he had all the
remnants of idolatry eradicated, not only in Jerusalem and Judah, but
also in Bethel and the other cities of Samaria, and directed the people
to strengthen themselves in their covenant fidelity towards the Lord by
the celebration of a solemn passover.

[Kg2 23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001)

Reading of the law in the temple, and renewal of the covenant (cf. [Ch2
34:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#029)). Beside the priests, Josiah
also gathered together the prophets, including perhaps Jeremiah and
Zedekiah, that he might carry out the solemn conclusion of the covenant
with their co-operation, and, as is evident from Jer 1-11, that they
might then undertake the task, by their impressive preaching in
Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, of making the people conscious of the
earnestness of the covenant duties which they had so recently undertaken
(see Oehler in Herzog's Cycl.). Instead of the prophets, the Levites are
mentioned in the Chronicles, probably only because the Levites are
mentioned along with the priests in other cases of a similar kind.
ויּקרא, he read, i.e., had it read; for the duty of reading the law in
the temple devolved upon the priests as the keepers of the law ([Deu
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009).).

[Kg2 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#003)

The king stood העמּוּד על, as in [Kg2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#014). For וגו ויּכרת see [Kg2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#017). ללכת, i.e., he bound himself
solemnly to walk after the Lord, that is to say, in his walk to follow
the Lord and keep His commandments (see at [Kg1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#003)). - בּבּרית...ויּעמוד, all the
people entered into the covenant (Luther and others); not perstitit,
stood firm, continued in the covenant (Maurer, Ges.), which would be at
variance with [Jer 11:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#009); [Jer
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#003)., and other utterances of the
prophets.

2 Kings 23:4-20

The eradication of idolatry. - According to [Ch2
34:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#003), this had already begun, and
was simply continued and carried to completion after the renewal of the
covenant.

[Kg2 23:4-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004)

In Jerusalem and Judah. [Kg2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004). The
king commanded the high priest and the other priests, and the Levites
who kept the door, to remove from the temple everything that had been
made for Baal and Asherah, and to burn it in the valley of Kidron.
המּשׁנה כּהני, sacerdotes secundi ordinis (Vulg., Luth., etc.), are the
common priests as distinguished from הגּדול הכּהן, the high priest. The
Rabbins are wrong in their explanation vicarii summi sacerdotis,
according to which Thenius would alter the text and read כּהן for כּהני.
הסּף שׁמרי, the keepers of the threshold, are the Levites whose duty it
was to watch the temple, as in [Kg2
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#004) (cf. [Ch1
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#005)). כּל־הכּלים (alles Zeug, Luth.),
i.e., all the apparatus, consisting of altars, idols, and other things,
that had been provided for the worship of Baal and Astarte. Josiah had
these things burned, according to the law in [Deu
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025), and that outside Jerusalem in
the fields of the Kidron valley. The קדרון שׁדמות (fields of Kidron) are
probably to be sought for to the north-east of Jerusalem, where the
Kidron valley is broader than between the city and the Mount of Olives,
and spreads out into a basin of considerable size, which is now
cultivated and contains plantations of olive and other fruit-trees (Rob.
Pal. i. p. 405). "And he had their dust carried to Bethel," i.e., the
ashes of the wooden objects which were burned, and the dust of those of
stone and metal which were ground to powder, to defile the idolatrous
place of worship at Bethel as the chief seat of idolatry and false
worship.

[Kg2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005)

"He abolished the high priests." כּמרים are also mentioned in [Hos
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005) and [Zac
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004) : they were not idolatrous priests
or prophets of Baal, but priests whom the kings of Judah had appointed
to offer incense upon the altars of the high places; for they are
distinguished from the idolatrous priests, or those who burnt incense to
Baal, the sun, etc. In [Hos 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005) the
priests appointed in connection with the golden calf at Bethel are
called כמרים; and in [Zep 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004) the
כמרים are not exclusively idolatrous priests, but such as did service
sometimes for Jehovah, who had been degraded into a Baal, and sometimes
to actual idols. Now as כּהנים who burnt incense upon high places are
also mentioned in [Kg2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008), we must
understand by the כמרים non-Levitical priests, and by the כהנים in [Kg2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008) Levitical priests who were
devoted to the worship on the high places. The primary signification of
כּמר is disputed. In Syriac the word signifies the priest, in Hebrew
spurious priests, probably from כּמר in the sense of to bring together,
or complete, as the performers of sacrifice, like ἕρδων, the sacrificer
(Dietr.); whereas the connection suggested by Hitzig (on Zeph.) with
(Arabic) kfr, to be unbelieving, in the opposite sense of the religious,
is very far-fetched, and does not answer either to the Hebrew or the
Syriac use of the word.

(Note: In any case the derivation from כמר, to be black (Ges. Thes. p.
693), and the explanation given by Frst from vi occultandi magicasque,
h. e. arcanas et reconditas artes exercendi, and others given in Iden's
Dissertatt. theol. philol. i. diss. 12, are quite untenable.)

The singular ויקטּר is striking, inasmuch as if the imperf. c. Vav rel.
were a continuation of נתנוּ, we should expect the plural, "and who had
burnt incense," as it is given in the Chaldee. The lxx, Vulg., and Syr.
have rendered לקטּר, from which ויקטּר has probably arisen by a mistake
in copying. In the following clause, "and those who had burnt incense to
Baal, to the sun and to the moon," etc., Baal is mentioned as the deity
worshipped in the sun, the moon, and the stars (see at [Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003)). מזּלות, synonymous with מזּרות
in [Job 38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032), does not mean the
twenty-eight naxatra, or Indian stations of the moon,

(Note: According to A. Weber, Die vedischen Nachrichten von den naxatra,
in the Abhandlungen der Berl. Acad. d. Wiss. 1860 and 1861. Compare, on
the other hand, Steinschneider, Hebr. Bibliographie, 1861, No. 22, pp.
93, 94, his article in the Deutsch. morgld. Zeitschrift, 1864, p.
118ff.)

but the twelve signs or constellations of the zodiac, which were
regarded by the Arabs as menâzil, i.e., station-houses, in which the sun
took up its abode in succession when describing the circuit of the year
(cf. Ges. Thes. p. 869, and Delitzsch on [Job
38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032)).

[Kg2 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006)

The image of Asherah (האשׁרה = הא פּסל, [Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003), [Kg2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007)), which Manasseh placed in the
temple and then removed after his return from Babylon ([Ch2
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015)), but which Amon had replaced,
Josiah ordered to be burned and ground to powder in the valley of
Kidron, and the dust to be thrown upon the graves of the common people.
ויּדק, from דקק, to make fine, to crush, refers to the metal covering of
the image (see at [Exo 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010)). Asa had
already had an idol burned in the Kidron valley ([Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013)), and Hezekiah had ordered the
idolatrous abominations to be taken out of the city and carried thither
([Ch2 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#016)); so that the valley had
already been defiled. There was a burial-place there for העם בּני, i.e.,
the common people (cf. [Jer 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#023)),
who had no graves of their own, just as at the present day the
burial-ground of the Jews there lies to the north of Kefr Silwn. Josiah
ordered the ashes to be cast upon these graves, probably in order to
defile them as the graves of idolaters.

[Kg2 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#007)

הקּדשׁים בּתּי, the houses (places of abode) of the paramours (for
הקדשים see at [Kg1 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#024)), were
probably only tents or huts, which were erected in the court of the
temple for the paramours to dwell in, and in which there were also women
who wove tent-temples (בּתּים) for Asherah (see at [Kg2
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#030)).

(Note: On this worship Movers has the following among other remarks
(Phn. i. p. 686): "The mutilated Gallus (קדש) fancies that he is a
woman: negant se viros esse ... muleires se volunt credi (Firmic.). He
lives in close intimacy with the women, and they again are drawn towards
the Galli by peculiar affection." He also expresses a conjecture "that
the women of Jerusalem gave themselves up in honour of the goddess in
the tents of the Galli which were pitched in the temple circle, on which
account the כלב מחיר went to the temple treasury.")

[Kg2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008)

All the (Levitical) priests he sent for from the cities of Judah to
Jerusalem, and defiled the altars of the high places, upon which they
had offered incense, from Geba to Beersheba, i.e., throughout the whole
kingdom. Geba, the present Jeba, about three hours to the north of
Jerusalem (see at [Jos 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024)), was the
northern frontier of the kingdom of Judah, and Beersheba (Bir-seba: see
the Comm. on [Gen 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#031)) the southern
frontier of Canaan. It is evident from [Kg2
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#009) that כּהנים are Levitical
priests. He ordered them to come to Jerusalem, that they might not carry
on illegal worship any longer in the cities of Judah. He then commanded
that the unlawful high places should be defiled throughout the whole
land, for the purpose of suppressing this worship altogether. He also
destroyed "the altars of the high places at the gates, (both that) which
was at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, (and
also that) which was at the left of every one (entering) by the city
gate." The two clauses beginning with אשׁר contain a more precise
description of השּׁערים בּמות. The gate of Joshua the governor of the
city is not mentioned anywhere else, but it was probably near to his
home, i.e., near the citadel of the city; but whether it was the future
gate of Gennath, as Thenius supposes, or some other, it is impossible to
determine. This also applies to the opinion that העיר שׁער is the valley
gate or Joppa gate (Thenius) as being the gate of greatest traffic; for
the traffic through the northern or Ephraim gate was certainly not less.
אישׁ על־שׂמאול, at the left of every one, sc. going into the city.

[Kg2 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#009)

"Only the priests of the high places did not sacrifice, ... but ate
unleavened bread in the midst of their brethren." The אך is connected
with [Kg2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008) : Josiah did not allow
the priests, whom he had brought out of the cities of Judah to
Jerusalem, to offer sacrifice upon the altar of Jehovah in the temple,
i.e., to perform the sacrificial service of the law, though he did allow
them "to eat that which was unleavened," i.e., to eat of the sacred
altar-gifts intended for the priests ([Lev
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009) and [Lev
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022)); only they were not allowed to
consume this at a holy place, but simply in the midst of their brethren,
i.e., at home in the family. They were thus placed on a par with the
priests who were rendered incapable of service on account of a bodily
defect ([Lev 21:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017)).

[Kg2 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)

He also defiled the place of sacrifice in the valley of Benhinnom, for
the purpose of exterminating the worship of Moloch. Moloch's place of
sacrifice is called התּפת, as an object of abhorrence, or one to be spat
at (תּפת: [Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)), from תּוּף, to
spit, or spit out (cf. Roediger in Ges. thes. p. 1497, where the other
explanations are exploded).

(Note: Jerome (on [Jer 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031)) says:
Thophet, quae est in valle filiorum Enom, illum locum significat, qui
Silo fontibus irrigatur et est amoenus atque nemorosus, hodieque
hortorum praebet delicias. From the name Gehinnom the Rabbins formed the
name Γέεννα, Gehenna ([Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022), [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029), etc.), with special reference to
the children burnt here to Moloch, to signify hell and hell-fire.)

On the valley Bne or Ben-hinnom, at the south side of Mount Zion, see at
[Jos 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008).

[Kg2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011)

He cleared away the horses dedicated to the sun, and burned up the
chariots of the sun. As the horses were only cleared away (ויּשׁבּת),
whereas the chariots were burned, we have not to think of images of
horses (Selden, de Diis Syr. ii. 8), but of living horses, which were
given to the sun, i.e., kept for the worship of the sun. Horses were
regarded as sacred to the sun by many nations, viz., the Armenians,
Persians, Massagetae, Ethiopians, and Greeks, and were sacrificed to it
(for proofs see Bochart, Hieroz. i. lib. ii. c. 10); and there is no
doubt that the Israelites received this worship first of all from Upper
Asia, along with the actual sun-worship, possibly through the Assyrians.
"The kings of Judah" are Ahaz, Manasseh, and Amon. These horses were
hardly kept to be offered to the sun in sacrifice (Bochart and others),
but, as we must infer from the "chariots of the sun," were used for
processions in connection with the worship of the sun, probably,
according to the unanimous opinion of the Rabbins, to drive and meet the
rising sun. The definition יי בּית מבּא, "from the coming into the house
of Jehovah," i.e., near the entrance into the temple, is dependent upon
נתנוּ, "they had given (placed) the horses of the sun near the temple
entrance," אל־לשׁכּת, "in the cell of Nethanmelech." אל does not mean at
the cell, i.e., in the stable by the cell (Thenius), because the
ellipsis is too harsh, and the cells built in the court of the temple
were intended not merely as dwelling-places for the priests and persons
engaged in the service, but also as a dept for the provisions and
vessels belonging to the temple ([Neh
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#038).; [Ch1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#026)). One of these depts was arranged
and used as a stable for the sacred horses. This cell, which derived its
name from Nethanmelech, a chamberlain (סריס), of whom nothing further is
known, possibly the builder or founder of it, was בּפּרורים, in the
Pharvars. פּרורים, the plural of פּרור, is no doubt identical with
פּרבּר in [Ch1 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#018). This was the
name given to a building at the western or hinder side of the outer
temple-court by the gate Shalleket at the ascending road, i.e., the road
which led up from the city standing in the west into the court of the
temple ([Ch1 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#016) and [Ch1
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#018)). The meaning of the word פרור
is uncertain. Gesenius (thes. p. 1123) explains it by porticus, after
the Persian frwâr, summer-house, an open kiosk. Bttcher (Proben, p.
347), on the other hand, supposes it to be "a separate spot resembling a
suburb," because in the Talmud פרורין signifies suburbia, loca urbi
vicinia.

[Kg2 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012)

The altars built upon the roof of the aliyah of Ahaz were dedicated to
the host of heaven ([Zep 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005); [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013); [Jer
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029)), and certainly built by Ahaz;
and inasmuch as Hezekiah had undoubtedly removed them when he reformed
the worship, they had been restored by Manasseh and Amon, so that by
"the kings of Judah" we are to understand these three kings as in [Kg2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011). We are unable to determine
where the עליּה, the upper chamber, of Ahaz really was. But since the
things spoken of both before and afterwards are the objects of idolatry
found in the temple, this aliyah was probably also an upper room of one
of the buildings in the court of the temple (Thenius), possibly at the
gate, which Ahaz had built when he removed the outer entrance of the
king into the temple ([Kg2 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#018)),
since, according to [Jer 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#004), the
buildings at the gate had upper stories. The altars built by Manasseh in
the two courts of the temple (see [Kg2
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005)) Josiah destroyed, משּׁם ויּרץ,
"and crushed them to powder from thence," and cast their dust into the
Kidron valley. yaarots, not from רוּץ, to run, but from רצץ, to pound or
crush to pieces. The alteration proposed by Thenius into ויּרץ, he
caused to run and threw = he had them removed with all speed, is not
only arbitrary, but unsuitable, because it is impossible to see why
Josiah should merely have hurried the clearing away of the dust of these
altars, whereas רצץ, to pound or grind to powder, was not superfluous
after נתץ, to destroy, but really necessary, if the dust was to be
thrown into the Kidron. ויּרץ is substantially equivalent to ויּדק in
[Kg2 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006).

[Kg2 23:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013)

The places of sacrifice built by Solomon upon the southern height of the
Mount of Olives (see at [Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007))
Josiah defiled, reducing to ruins the monuments, cutting down the
Asherah idols, and filling their places with human bones, which polluted
a place, according to [Num 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#016). [Kg2
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#014) gives a more precise definition
of טמּא in [Kg2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013) in the form of a
simple addition (with Vav cop.). הר־המּשׁחית, mountain of destruction
(not unctionis = המּשׁחה, Rashi and Cler.), is the southern peak of the
Mount of Olives, called in the tradition of the Church mons offensionis
or scandali (see at [Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007)). For
מצּבוה and אשׁרים see at [Kg1 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023).
מקומם are the places where the Mazzeboth and Asherim stood by the altars
that were dedicated to Baal and Astarte, so that by defiling them the
altar-places were also defiled.

[Kg2 23:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015)

Extermination of idolatry in Bethel and the cities of Samaria. - In
order to suppress idolatry as far as possible, Josiah did not rest
satisfied with the extermination of it in his own kingdom Judah, but
also destroyed the temples of the high places and altars and idols in
the land of the former kingdom of the ten tribes, slew all the priests
of the high places that were there, and burned their bones upon the high
places destroyed, in order to defile the ground. The warrant for this is
not to be found, as Hess supposes, in the fact that Josiah, as vassal of
the king of Assyria, had a certain limited power over these districts,
and may have looked upon them as being in a certain sense his own
territory, a power which the Assyrians may have allowed him the more
readily, because they were sure of his fidelity in relation to Egypt.
For we cannot infer that Josiah was a vassal of the Assyrians from the
imprisonment and release of Manasseh by the king of Assyria, nor is
there any historical evidence whatever to prove it. The only reason that
can have induced Josiah to do this, must have been that after the
dissolution of the kingdom of the ten tribes he regarded himself as the
king of the whole of the covenant-nation, and availed himself of the
approaching or existing dissolution of the Assyrian empire to secure the
friendship of the Israelites who were left behind in the kingdom of the
ten tribes, to reconcile them to his government, and to win them over to
his attempt to reform; and there is no necessity whatever to assume, as
Thenius does, that he asked permission to do so of the newly arisen
ruler Nabopolassar. For against this assumption may be adduced not only
the improbability that Nabopolassar would give him any such permission,
but still more the circumstance that at a still earlier period, even
before Nabopolassar became king of Babylon, Josiah had had taxes
collected of the inhabitants of the kingdom of Israel for the repairing
of the temple ([Ch2 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009)), from which
we may see that the Israelites who were left behind in the land were
favourably disposed towards his reforms, and were inclined to attach
themselves in religious matters to Judah (just as, indeed, even the
Samaritans were willing after the captivity to take part in the building
of the temple, [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002).), which the
Assyrians at that time were no longer in a condition to prevent.

[Kg2 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015)

"Also the altar at Bethel, the high place which Jeroboam had made-this
altar also and the high place he destroyed." It is grammatically
impossible to take הבּמה as an accusative of place (Thenius); it is in
apposition to המּזבּח, serving to define it more precisely: the altar at
Bethel, namely the high place; for which we have afterwards the altar
and the high place. By the appositional הבּמה the altar at Bethel is
described as an illegal place of worship. "He burned the בּמה," i.e.,
the buildings of this sanctuary, ground to powder everything that was
made of stone or metal, i.e., both the altar and the idol there. This is
implied in what follows: "and burned Asherah," i.e., a wooden idol of
Astarte found there, according to which there would no doubt be also an
idol of Baal, a מצּבה of stone. The golden calf, which had formerly been
set up at Bethel, may, as [Hos 10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005)
seems to imply, have been removed by the Assyrians, and, after the
settlement of heathen colonists in the land, have been supplanted by
idols of Baal and Astarte (cf. [Kg2
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#029)).

[Kg2 23:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016)

In order to desecrate this idolatrous site for all time, Josiah had
human bones taken out of the graves that were to be found upon the
mountain, and burned upon the altar, whereby the prophecy uttered in the
reign of Jeroboam by the prophet who came out of Judah concerning this
idolatrous place of worship was fulfilled; but he spared the tomb of
that prophet himself (cf. [Kg1
13:26-32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#026)). The mountain upon which
Josiah saw the graves was a mountain at Bethel, which was visible from
the bamah destroyed. ציּוּן, a sepulchral monument, probably a stone
erected upon the grave. וימלּטוּ: "so they rescued (from burning) his
bones (the bones of the prophet who had come from Judah), together with
the bones of the prophet who had come from Samaria," i.e., of the old
prophet who sprang from the kingdom of the ten tribes and had come to
Bethel ([Kg1 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011)). משּׁמרון בּא in
antithesis to מיהוּדה ot sisehtit בּא denotes simply descent from the
land of Samaria.

(Note: [Kg2 23:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016) are neither an
interpolation of the editor, i.e., of the author of our books of Kings
(Staehelin), nor an interpolation from a supplement to the account in 1
Kings 13:1-32 (Thenius). The correspondence between the וגם in [Kg2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015) and the וגם in [Kg2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#018) does not require this
assumption; and the pretended discrepancy, that after Josiah had already
reduced the altar to ruins ([Kg2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015)) he could not possibly defile it
by burning human bones upon it ([Kg2
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016)), is removed by the very natural
solution, that המזבח in [Kg2 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016)
does not mean the altar itself, but the site of the altar that had been
destroyed.)

[Kg2 23:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#019)

All the houses of the high places that were in the (other) cities of
Samaria Josiah also destroyed in the same way as that at Bethel, and
offered up the priests of the high places upon the altars, i.e., slew
them upon the altars on which they had offered sacrifice, and burned
men's bones upon them (the altars) to defile them. The severity of the
procedure towards these priests of the high places, as contrasted with
the manner in which the priests of the high places in Judah were treated
([Kg2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008) and [Kg2
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#009)), may be explained partly from
the fact that the Israelitish priests of the high places were not
Levitical priests, but chiefly from the fact that they were really
idolatrous priests.

[Kg2 23:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#021)

The passover is very briefly noticed in our account, and is described as
such an one as had not taken place since the days of the judges. [Kg2
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#021) simply mentions the appointment
of this festival on the part of the king, and the execution of the
king's command has to be supplied. [Kg2
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#022) contains a remark concerning the
character of the passover. In 2 Chron 35:1-19 we have a very elaborate
description of it. What distinguished this passover above every other
was, (1) that "all the nation," not merely Judah and Benjamin, but also
the remnant of the ten tribes, took part in it, or, as it is expressed
in [Ch2 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018), "all Judah and Israel;"
(2) that it was kept in strict accordance with the precepts of the
Mosaic book of the law, whereas in the passover instituted by Hezekiah
there were necessarily many points of deviation from the precepts of the
law, more especially in the fact that the feast had to be transferred
from the first month, which was the legal time, to the second month,
because the priests had not yet purified themselves in sufficient
numbers and the people had not yet gathered together at Jerusalem, and
also that even then a number of the people had inevitably been allowed
to eat the passover without the previous purification required by the
law ([Ch2 30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#002), [Ch2
30:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#017)). This is implied in the
words, "for there was not holden such a passover since the days of the
judges and all the kings of Israel and Judah." That this remark does not
preclude the holding of earlier passovers, as Thenius follows De Wette
in supposing, without taking any notice of the refutations of this
opinion, was correctly maintained by the earlier commentators. Thus
Clericus observes: "I should have supposed that what the sacred writer
meant to say was, that during the times of the kings no passover had
ever been kept so strictly by every one, according to all the Mosaic
laws. Before this, even under the pious kings, they seem to have
followed custom rather than the very words of the law; and since this
was the case, many things were necessarily changed and neglected."
Instead of "since the days of the judges who judged Israel," we find in
[Ch2 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018), "since the days of Samuel
the prophet," who is well known to have closed the period of the judges.

[Kg2 23:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#024)

Conclusion of Josiah's reign. - [Kg2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#024). As Josiah had the passover kept
in perfect accordance with the precepts of the law, so did he also
exterminate the necromancers, the teraphim and all the abominations of
idolatry, throughout all Judah and Jerusalem, to set up the words of the
law in the book of the law that had been found, i.e., to carry them out
and bring them into force. For האבות and היּדּענים see at [Kg2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006). תּרפים, penates, domestic gods,
which were worshipped as the authors of earthly prosperity and as
oracular deities (see at [Gen 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)).
גּלּלים and שׁקּצים, connected together, as in [Deu
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#016), as a contemptuous description
of idols in general. - In [Kg2 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#025)
the account of the efforts made by Josiah to restore the true worship of
Jehovah closes with a general verdict concerning his true piety. See the
remarks on this point at [Kg2 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#005). He
turned to Jehovah with all his heart, etc.: there is an evident allusion
here to [Deu 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005). Compare with this
the sentence of the prophet Jeremiah concerning his reign ([Jer
22:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015)).

[Kg2 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#026)

Nevertheless the Lord turned not from the great fierceness of His wrath,
wherewith He had burned against Judah on account of all the provocations
"with which Manasseh had provoked Him." With this sentence, in which שבּ
לא אך forms an unmistakeable word-play upon יי אל שבּ אשׁר, the
historian introduces the account not merely of the end of Josiah's
reign, but also of the destruction of the kingdom of Judah. Manasseh is
mentioned here and at [Kg2 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003) and
[Jer 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004) as the person who, by his
idolatry and his unrighteousness, with which he provoked God to anger,
had brought upon Judah and Jerusalem the unavoidable judgment of
rejection. It is true that Josiah had exterminated outward and gross
idolatry throughout the land by his sincere conversion to the Lord, and
by his zeal for the restoration of the lawful worship of Jehovah, and
had persuaded the people to enter into covenant with its God once more;
but a thorough conversion of the people to the Lord he had not been able
to effect. For, as Clericus has correctly observed, "although the king
was most religious, and the people obeyed him through fear, yet for all
that the mind of the people was not changed, as is evident enough from
the reproaches of Jeremiah, Zephaniah, and other prophets, who
prophesied about that time and a little after." With regard to this
point compare especially the first ten chapters of Jeremiah, which
contain a resum of his labours in the reign of Josiah, and bear witness
to the deep inward apostasy of the people from the Lord, not only before
and during Josiah's reform of worship, but also afterwards. As the Holy
One of Israel, therefore, God could not forgive any more, but was
obliged to bring upon the people and kingdom, after the death of Josiah,
the judgment already foretold to Manasseh himself ([Kg2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012).).

[Kg2 23:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#027)

The Lord said: I will also put away Judah (in the same manner as Israel:
cf. [Kg2 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#020), [Kg2
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#023)) from my face, etc. ויּאמר
expresses the divine decree, which was announced to the people by the
prophets, especially Jeremiah and Zephaniah.

[Kg2 23:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029)

Compare [Ch2 35:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020). The predicted
catastrophe was brought to pass by the expedition of Necho the king of
Egypt against Assyria. "In his days (i.e., towards the end of Josiah's
reign) Pharaoh Necho the king of Egypt went up against the king of
Asshur to the river Euphrates." Necho (נכה or נכו, [Ch2
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020); [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002); called Νεχαώ by Josephus,
Manetho in Jul. Afric., and Euseb., after the lxx; and Νεκώς by Herod.
ii. 158,159, iv. 42, and Diod. Sic. i. 33; according to Brugsch, hist.
d'Eg. i. p. 252, Nekou) was, according to Man., the sixth king of the
twenty-sixth (Saitic) dynasty, the second Pharaoh of that name, the son
of Psammetichus I and grandson of Necho I; and, according to Herodotus,
he was celebrated for a canal which he proposed to have cut in order to
connect the Nile with the Red Sea, as well as for the circumnavigation
of Africa (compare Brugsch, l.c., according to whom he reigned from 611
to 595 b.c.). Whether "the king of Asshur" against whom Necho marched
was the last ruler of the Assyrian empire, Asardanpal (Sardanapal),
Saracus according to the monuments (see Brandis, Ueber den Gewinn, p.
55; M. v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Assurs, pp. 110ff. and 192), or the existing
ruler of the Assyrian empire which had already fallen, Nabopolassar the
king of Babylon, who put an end to the Assyrian monarchy in alliance
with the Medes by the conquest and destruction of Nineveh, and founded
the Chaldaean or Babylonian empire, it is impossible to determine,
because the year in which Nineveh was taken cannot be exactly decided,
and all that is certain is that Nineveh had fallen before the battle of
Carchemish in the year 606 b.c. Compare M. v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Assurs,
pp. 109ff. and 203, 204. - King Josiah went against the Egyptian, and
"he (Necho) slew him at Megiddo when he saw him," i.e., caught sight of
him. This extremely brief notice of the death of Josiah is explained
thus in the Chronicles: that Necho sent ambassadors to Josiah, when he
was taking the field against him, with an appeal that he would not fight
against him, because his only intention was to make war upon Asshur, but
that Josiah did not allow himself to be diverted from his purpose, and
fought a battle with Necho in the valley of Megiddo, in which he was
mortally wounded by the archers. What induced Josiah to oppose with
force of arms the advance of the Egyptian to the Euphrates,
notwithstanding the assurance of Necho that he had no wish to fight
against Judah, is neither to be sought for in the fact that Josiah was
dependent upon Babylon, which is at variance with history, nor in the
fact that the kingdom of Judah had taken possession of all the territory
of the ancient inheritance of Israel, and Josiah was endeavouring to
restore all the ancient glory of the house of David over the surrounding
nations (Ewald, Gesch. iii. p. 707), but solely in Josiah's conviction
that Judah could not remain neutral in the war which had broken out
between Egypt and Babylon, and in the hope that by attacking Necho, and
frustrating his expedition to the Euphrates, he might be able to avert
great distress from his own land and kingdom.

(Note: M. v. Niebuhr (Gesch. Ass. p. 364) also calls Josiah's enterprise
"a perfectly correct policy. Nineveh was falling (if not already
fallen), and the Syrian princes, both those who had remained
independent, like Josiah, and also the vassals of Asshur, might hope
that, after the fall of Nineveh, they would succeed in releasing Syria
from every foreign yoke. Now well-founded this hope was, is evident from
the strenuous exertions which Nabukudrussur was afterwards obliged to
make, in order to effect the complete subjugation of Syria. It was
therefore necessary to hinder at any price the settlement of the
Egyptians now. Even though Necho assured Josiah that he was not marching
against him ([Ch2 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#021)), Josiah knew
that if once the Egyptians were lords of Coele-Syria, his independence
would be gone.")

This battle is also mentioned by Herodotus (ii. 159); but he calls the
place where it was fought Μάγδολον, i.e., neither Migdol, which was
twelve Roman miles to the south of Pelusium (Forbiger, Hdb. d. alten
Geogr. ii. p. 695), nor the perfectly apocryphal Magdala or Migdal
Zebaiah mentioned by the Talmudists (Reland, Pal. p. 898,899), as Movers
supposes. We might rather think with Ewald (Gesch. iii. p. 708) of the
present Mejdel, to the south-east of Acca, at a northern source of the
Kishon, and regard this as the place where the Egyptian camp was
pitched, whereas Israel stood to the east of it, at the place still
called Rummane, at Hadad-Rimmon in the valley of Megiddo, as Ewald
assumes (Gesch. iii. p. 708). But even this combination is overthrown by
the face that Rummane, which lies to the east of el Mejdel at the
distance of a mile and three-quarters (geogr.), on the southern edge of
the plain of Buttauf, cannot possibly be the Hadad-Rimmon mentioned in
[Zac 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#011), where king Josiah died
after he had been wounded in the battle. For since Megiddo is identical
with the Roman Legio, the present Lejun, as Robinson has proved (see at
[Jos 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#021)), and as is generally
admitted even by C. v. Raumer (Pal. p. 447, note, ed. 4), Hadad-Rimmon
must be the same as the village of Rmmuni (Rummane), which is
three-quarters of an hour to the south of Lejun, where the Scottish
missionaries in the year 1839 found many ancient wells and other traces
of Israelitish times (V. de Velde, R. i. p. 267; Memoir, pp. 333, 334).
But this Rummane is four geographical miles distant from el Mejdel, and
Mediggo three and a half, so that the battle fought at Megiddo cannot
take its name from el Mejdel, which is more than three miles off. The
Magdolon of Herodotus can only arise from some confusion between it and
Megiddo, which was a very easy thing with the Greek pronunciation
Μαγεδδώ, without there being any necessity to assume that Herodotus was
thinking of the Egyptian Migdol, which is called Magdolo in the Itin.
Ant. p. 171 (cf. Brugsch, Geogr. Inschriften altgypt. Denkmler, i. pp.
261,262). If, then, Josiah went to Megiddo in the plain of Esdrelom to
meet the king of Egypt, and fell in with him there, there can be no
doubt that Necho came by sea to Palestine and landed at Acco, as des
Vignoles (Chronol. ii. p. 427) assumed.

(Note: This is favoured by the account in Herodotus (ii. 159), that
Necho built ships: τριήρεες αἱ μὲν ἐπὶ τῇ βορηΐ́η θαλάσσῃ ... αἱ δὲ ἐν τῷ
Ἀραβίῳ κόλπῳ (triremes in septentrionale et australe mare mittendas.
Bhr) - καὶ ταυτῃσί τε ἐχρᾶτο ἐν τῷ δέοντι· καὶ Σύροισι πεζῇ ὁ Νεκὼς
συμβαλὼν ἐν Μαγδόλῳ ἐνίκησε; from which we may infer that Necho carried
his troops by sea to Palestine, and then fought the battle on the land.
M. v. Niebuhr (Gesch. p. 365) also finds it very improbable that Necho
used his fleet in this war; but he does not think it very credible "that
he embarked his whole army, instead of marching them by the land route
so often taken by the Egyptian army, the key of which, viz., the land of
the Philistines, was at least partially subject to him," because the
ὅλκαδες (ships of burden) required for the transport of a large army
were hardly to be obtained in sufficient numbers in Egypt. But this
difficulty, which rests upon mere conjecture, is neutralized by the
fact, which M. Duncker (Gesch. i. p. 618) also adduces in support of the
voyage by sea, namely, that the decisive battle with the Jews was fought
to the north-west of Jerusalem, and when the Jews were defeated, the way
to Jerusalem stood open for their retreat. Movers (Phniz. ii. 1, p.
420), who also imagines that Necho advanced with a large land-army
towards the frontier of Palestine, has therefore transferred the battle
to Magdolo on the Egyptian frontier; but he does this by means of the
most arbitrary interpretation of the account given by Herodotus.)

For if the Egyptian army had marched by land through the plain of
Philistia, Josiah would certainly have gone thither to meet it, and not
have allowed it to advance into the plain of Megiddo without fighting a
battle.

[Kg2 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#030)

The brief statement, "his servants carried him dead from Megiddo and
brought him to Jerusalem," is given with more minuteness in the
Chronicles: his servants took him, the severely wounded king, by his own
command, from his chariot to his second chariot, and drove him to
Jerusalem, and he died and was buried, etc. Where he died the Chronicles
do not affirm; the occurrence of ויּמת after the words "they brought him
to Jerusalem," does not prove that he did not die till he reached
Jerusalem. If we compare [Zac 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#011),
where the prophet draws a parallel between the lamentation at the death
of the Messiah and the lamentation of Hadad-Rimmon in the valley of
Megiddo, as the deepest lamentation of the people in the olden time,
with the account given in [Ch2 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025)
of the lamentation of the whole nation at the death of Josiah, there can
hardly be any doubt that Josiah died on the way to Jerusalem at
Hadad-Rimmon, the present Rummane, to the south of Lejun (see above),
and was taken to Jerusalem dead. - He was followed on the throne by his
younger son Jehoahaz, whom the people (הארץ עם, as in [Kg2
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#024)) anointed king, passing over the
elder, Eliakim, probably because they regarded him as the more able man.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg2 23:31</span></span>

Reign of Jehoahaz (cf. [Ch2 36:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#001)). -
Jehoahaz, called significantly by Jeremiah ([Jer
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#011)) Shallum, i.e., "to whom it is
requited," reigned only three months, and did evil in the eyes of the
Lord as all his fathers had done. The people (or the popular party), who
had preferred him to his elder brother, had apparently set great hopes
upon him, as we may judge from [Jer
22:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#010), and seem to have expected
that his strength and energy would serve to avert the danger which
threatened the kingdom on the part of Necho. Ezekiel ([Eze
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#003)) compares him to a young lion
which learned to catch the prey and devoured men, but, as soon as the
nations heard of him, was taken in their pit and led by nose-rings to
Egypt, and thus attributes to him the character of a tyrant disposed to
acts of violence; and Josephus accordingly (Ant. x. 5, 2) describes him
as ἀσεβὴς καὶ μιαρὸς τὸν τρόπον.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg2 23:33</span></span>

"Pharaoh Necho put him in fetters (ויּאסרהוּ) at Riblah in the land of
Hamath, when he had become king at Jerusalem." In [Ch2
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#003) we have, instead of this, "the
king of Egypt deposed him (יסירהוּ) at Jerusalem." The Masoretes have
substituted as Keri ממּלך, "away from being king," or "that he might be
no longer king," in the place of בּמלך, and Thenius and Bertheau prefer
the former, because the lxx have τοὺ μὴ βασιλεύειν not in our text only,
but in the Chronicles also; but they ought not to have appealed to the
Chronicles, inasmuch as the lxx have not rendered the Hebrew text there,
but have simply repeated the words from the text of the book of Kings.
The Keri is nothing more than an emendation explaining the sense, which
the lxx have also followed. The two texts are not contradictory, but
simply complete each other: for, as Clericus has correctly observed,
"Jehoahaz would of course be removed from Jerusalem before he was cast
into chains; and there was nothing to prevent his being dethroned at
Jerusalem before he was taken to Riblah."

We are not told in what way Necho succeeded in getting Jehoahaz into his
power, so as to put him in chains at Riblah. The assumption of J. D.
Michaelis and others, that his elder brother Eliakim, being dissatisfied
with the choice of Jehoahaz as king, had recourse to Necho at Riblah, in
the hope of getting possession of his father's kingdom through his
instrumentality, is precluded by the face that Jehoahaz would certainly
not have been so foolish as to appear before the enemy of his country at
a mere summons from Pharaoh, who was at Riblah, and allow him to depose
him, when he was perfectly safe in Jerusalem, where the will of the
people had raised him to the throne. If Necho wanted to interfere with
the internal affairs of the kingdom of Judah, it would never have done
for him to proceed beyond Palestine to Syria after the victory at
Megiddo, without having first deposed Jehoahaz, who had been raised to
the throne at Jerusalem without any regard to his will. The course of
events was therefore probably the following: After the victory at
Megiddo, Necho intended to continue his march to the Euphrates; but on
hearing that Jehoahaz had ascended the throne, and possibly also in
consequence of complaints which Eliakim had made to him on that account,
he ordered a division of his army to march against Jerusalem, and while
the main army was marching slowly to Riblah, he had Jerusalem taken,
king Jehoahaz dethroned, the land laid under tribute, Eliakim appointed
king as his vassal, and the deposed Jehoahaz brought to his headquarters
at Riblah, then put into chains and transported to Egypt; so that the
statement in [Ch2 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#003), "he deposed
him at Jerusalem," is to be taken quite literally, even if Necho did not
come to Jerusalem in propri person, but simply effected this through the
medium of one of his generals.

(Note: Ewald (Gesch. iii. p. 720) also observes, that "Necho himself may
have been in Jerusalem at the time for the purpose of installing his
vassal:" this, he says, "is indicated by the brief words in [Kg2
23:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033), and nothing can be found to
say against it in other historical sources;" though he assumes that
Jehoahaz had allowed himself to be enticed by Necho to go to Riblah into
the Egyptian camp, where he was craftily put into chains, and soon
carried off as a prisoner to Egypt. - We should have a confirmation of
the taking of Jerusalem by Necho in the account given by Herodotus (ii.
159): μετὰ δὲ τήν μάχην (i.e., after the battle at Megiddo) Κάδυτιν
πόλιν τῆς Συρίης ἐοῦσαν μεγάλην εἶλε, if any evidence could be brought
to establish the opinion that by Κάδυτις we are to understand Jerusalem.
But although what Herodotus says (iii. 5) concerning Κάδυτις does not
apply to any other city of Palestine so well as to Jerusalem, the use of
the name Κάδυτις for Jerusalem has not yet been sufficiently explained,
since it cannot come from קדושה, the holy city, because the ש of this
word does not pass into t in any Semitic dialect, and the explanation
recently attempted by Bttcher (N. ex. Krit. Aehrenlese, ii. pp. 119ff.)
from the Aramaean חדיתא, the renewed city (new-town), is based upon many
very questionable conjectures. At the same time so much is certain, that
the view which Hitzig has revived (de Cadyti urbe Herod. Gott. 1829, p.
11, and Urgeschichte der Philister, pp. 96ff.), and which is now the
prevalent one, viz., that Κάδυτις is Gaza, is exposed to some
well-founded objections, even after what Stark (Gaza, pp. 218ff.) has
adduced in its favour. The description which Herodotus gives (iii. 5) of
the land-road to Egypt: ἀπὸ Φοινίκης μέχρι οὔρων τῶν Καδύτιος πόλιος ἥ
ἐστι Σύρων τῶν Παλαιστινῶν καλεομένων· ἀπὸ δὲ Καδύτιος, ἐούσης πόλιος
(ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκέει) Σαρδίων ου ̓ πολλῷ ἐλάσσονος, ἀπὸ ταύτης τὰ ἐμπόρια τὰ
ἐπὶ θαλάσσης μέχρι Ἰηνύσου πόλιός ἐστι τοῦ Ἀραβίου· does not apply to
Gaza, because there were no commercial towns on the sea-coast between
the district of Gaza and the town of Yenysus (the present Khan Ynas);
but between the district of Jerusalem and the town of Yenysus there were
the Philistian cities Ashkelon and Gaza, which Herodotus might call τὰ
ἐμπόρια τοὺ Ἀραβίου, whereas the comparison made between the size of
Kadytis and that of Sardes points rather to Jerusalem than to Gaza.
Still less can the datum in [Jer 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001),
"before Pharaoh smote Gaza," be adduced in support of Gaza. If we bear
in mind that Jeremiah's prophecy (2 Kings 47) was not uttered before the
fourth year of Jehoiakim's reign, and therefore that Pharaoh had not
smitten Gaza at that time, supposing that this Pharaoh was really Necho,
it cannot have been till after his defeat at Carchemish that Necho took
Gaza on his return home. Ewald, Hitzig, and Graf assume that this was
the case; but, as M. v. Niebuhr has correctly observed, it has "every
military probability" against it, and even the incredibility that "a
routed Oriental army in its retreat, which it evidently accomplished in
one continuous march, notwithstanding the fact that on its line of march
there were the strongest positions, on the Orontes, Lebanon, etc., at
which it might have halted, should have taken the city upon its flight."
And, lastly, the name Κάδυτις does not answer to the name Gaza, even
through the latter was spelt Gazatu in early Egyptian (Brugsch,
Geograph. Inschr. ii. p. 32) since the u (y) of the second syllable
still remains unexplained.)

Riblah has been preserved in the miserable village of Rible, from ten to
twelve hours to the S.S.W. of Hums (Emesa) by the river el Ahsy
(Orontes), in a large fruitful plain of the northern portion of the
Bekaa, which was very well adapted to serve as the camping ground of
Necho's army as well as of that of Nebuchadnezzar ([Kg2
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#006), [Kg2
25:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#020)), not only because it
furnished the most abundant supply of food and fodder, but also on
account of its situation on the great caravan-road from Palestine by
Damascus, Emesa, and Hamath to Thapsacus and Carchemish on the Euphrates
(cf. Rob. Bibl. Res. pp. 542-546 and 641).

In the payment imposed upon the land by Necho, one talent of gold (c.
25,000 thalers: 3750) does not seem to bear any correct proportion to
100 talents of silver (c. 250,000 thalers, or 37,500), and consequently
the lxx have 100 talents of gold, the Syr. and Arab. 10 talents; and
Thenius supposes this to have been the original reading, and explains
the reading in the text from the dropping out of a y (= 10), though
without reflecting that as a rule the number 10 would require the plural
כּכּרים.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg2 23:34</span></span>

From the words "Necho made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the place
of his father Josiah," it follows that the king of Egypt did not
acknowledge the reign of Jehoahaz, because he had been installed by the
people without his consent. "And changed his name into Jehoiakim." The
alteration of the name was a sign of dependence. In ancient times
princes were accustomed to give new names to the persons whom they took
into their service, and masters to give new names to their slaves (cf.
[Gen 41:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#045); [Ezr
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014); [Dan
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007), and Hvernick on the last
passage). - But while these names were generally borrowed from heathen
deities, Eliakim, and at a later period Mattaniah ([Kg2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017)), received genuine Israelitish
names, Jehoiakim, i.e., "Jehovah will set up," and Zidkiyahu, i.e.,
"righteousness of Jehovah;" from which we may infer that Necho and
Nebuchadnezzar did not treat the vassal kings installed by them exactly
as their slaves, but allowed them to choose the new names for
themselves, and simply confirmed them as a sign of their supremacy.
Eliakim altered his name into Jehoiakim, i.e., El (God) into Jehovah, to
set the allusion to the establishment of the kingdom, which is implied
in the name, in a still more definite relation to Jehovah the covenant
God, who had promised to establish the seed of David ([Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)), possibly with an intentional
opposition to the humiliation with which the royal house of David was
threatened by Jeremiah and other prophets. - "But Jehoahaz he had taken
(לקח, like יקּח in [Kg2 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012)), and he
came to Egypt and died there" - when, we are not told. - In [Kg2
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#035), even before the account of
Jehoiakim's reign, we have fuller particulars respecting the payment of
the tribute which Necho imposed upon the land ([Kg2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033)), because it was the condition
on which he was appointed king. - "The gold and silver Jehoiakim gave to
Pharaoh; yet (אך = but in order to raise it) he valued (העריך as in [Lev
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#008)) the land, to give the money
according to Pharaoh's command; of every one according to his valuation,
he exacted the silver and gold of the population of the land, to give it
to Pharaoh Necho." נגשׂ, to exact tribute, is construed with a double
accusative, and בּערכּו אישׁ placed first for the sake of emphasis, as
an explanatory apposition to הערץ את־עם.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg2 23:36</span></span>

Reign of Jehoiakim (cf. [Ch2 36:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#005)).
- Jehoiakim reigned eleven years in the spirit of his ungodly
forefathers (compare [Kg2 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#037) with
[Kg2 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#032)). Jeremiah represents him
([Kg2 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#013).) as a bad prince, who
enriched himself by the unjust oppression of his people, "whose eyes and
heart were directed upon nothing but upon gain, and upon innocent blood
to shed it, and upon oppression and violence to do them" (compare [Kg2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#004) and [Jer
26:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#022)). Josephus therefore
describes him as τὴν φύσιν ἄδικος καὶ κακοῦργος, καὶ μήτε πρὸς Θεὸν
ὅσιος, μήτε πρὸς ἀνθρώπους ἐπιεικής (Ant. x. 5, 2). The town of Rumah,
from which his mother sprang, is not mentioned anywhere else, but it has
been supposed to be identical with Aruma in the neighbourhood of Shechem
([Jdg 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#041)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 24](kg2024)

</div>
