<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](lam002)  [Next](lam004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 3:0</span></span>

The Suffering and the Consolation of the Gospel

1 I am the man that have seen affliction by the rod of His wrath.

2 Me hat He led, and brought \[through\] darkness, and not light.

3 Only against me He repeatedly turneth His hand all the day.

4 He has wasted away my flesh and my skin; He hath broken my bones.

5 He buildeth up round about me poison and toil.

6 He maketh me sit down in dark places, like those for ever dead.

7 He hath hedged me about, so that I cannot get out; He hath made heavy
my chain.

8 Moreover, when I cry and shout, He obstructeth my prayer.

9 He hath walled round my ways with hewn stone, He hath subverted my
paths.

10 He is to me \[like\] a bear lying in wait, a lion in secret places.

11 He removeth my ways, and teareth me in pieces; He maketh me desolate.

12 He bendeth His bow, and setteth me up as the mark for the arrow.

13 He causeth the sons of His quiver to go into my reins.

14 I am become a derision to all my people, their \[subject of\] satire
all the day.

15 He filleth me with bitterness, maketh me drink wormwood.

16 And He grindeth my teeth on gravel, He covereth me with ashes.

17 And my soul hath become despised by prosperity; I have forgotten
\[what\] good \[is\].

18 And I said, My vital power is gone, and my hope from Jahveh.

19 Remember my misery and my persecution, wormwood and poison.

20 My soul remembereth \[them\] indeed, and sinketh down in me.

21 This I bring back to my mind, therefore have I hope.

22 \[It is a sign of\] the mercies of Jahveh that we are not consumed,
for His compassions fail not;

23 \[They are\] new every morning: great is Thy faithfulness.

24 Jahveh \[is\] my portion, saith my soul; therefore I hope in Him.

25 Jahveh is good unto those who wait for Him, to a soul \[that\]
seeketh Him.

26 It is good that \[one\] should wait, and that is silence, for the
salvation of Jahveh.

27 It is good for man that he should bear a yoke in his youth.

28 Let him sit solitary and be silent, for \[God\] hath laid \[the
burden\] on him.

29 Let him put his mouth in the dust; perhaps there is \[still\] hope.

30 Let him give \[his\] cheek to him that smites him, let him be filled
with reproach.

31 Because the Lord will not cast off for ever:

32 For, though He causeth grief, He also pities, according to the
multitude of His mercies.

33 For He doth not afflict from His heart, and grieve the children of
men.

34 To the crushing all the prisoners of the earth under one's feet,

35 To the setting aside of a man's rights before the face of the Most
High.

36 To the overthrowing of a man in his cause: - doth not the Lord look
\[to such doings as these\]?

37 Who hath spoken, and it was done, \[which\] the Lord commanded not?

38 Doth not evil and good come out of the mouth of Jahveh?

39 Why doth a man complain \[because\] he liveth? \[Let every\] man
\[rather lament\] because of his sins.

40 Let us search and examine our ways, and let us return to Jahveh.

41 Let us lift up our heart to \[our\] hands towards God in the heavens.

42 We have transgressed and rebelled, Thou hast not pardoned.

43 Thou didst cover \[Thyself\] with anger, and didst persecute us; Thou
hast slain, Thou hast not pitied.

(Note: In the latter part of this verse, Keil has written mitten unter
den Vlkern, which is also (correctly) given as the rendering of the
second part of [Lam 3:45](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#045). This obvious
inadvertence has been rectified in the English translation. - Tr.)

44 Thou didst cover Thyself with a cloud, so that prayer could not pass
through.

45 Thou didst make us \[like\] offscourings and refuse in the midst of
the nations.

46 All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

47 Terror and a snare are ours, destruction and ruin.

48 Mine eye runneth down \[with\] streams of water, because of the ruin
of the daughter of my people.

49 Mine eye poureth itself forth, and ceaseth not, so that there are no
stoppings,

50 Until Jahveh shall look down and behold from heaven.

51 Mine eye causeth pain to my soul, because of all the daughters of my
city.

(Note: Keil has here misread the Hebrew text, and translated "my people"
(עמּי) instead of "my city" (עירי). - Tr.)

52 Mine enemies closely pursued me, like a bird, without cause.

53 They were for destroying my life in the pit, and cast a stone on me.

54 Waters overflowed over my head; I said, I am cut off.

55 I called on Thy name, O Jahveh, out of the lowest dungeon.

56 Thou hast heard my voice; hide not Thine ear at my sighing, at my
cry.

57 Thou art near in the day \[when\] I call on Thee; Thou sayest, Fear
not.

58 Thou hast defended, O Lord, my soul; Thou hast redeemed my life.

59 Thou hast seen, O Jahveh, mine oppression; judge my cause.

60 Thou hast seen all their vengeance, all their projects against me.

61 Thou hast heard their reproach, O Jahveh, all their projects against
me;

62 The lips of those who rise up against me, and their meditation
against me all the day.

63 Behold their sitting down and their rising up: I am their satire.

64 Thou shalt return a recompense to them, O Jahveh, according to the
work of their hands.

65 Thou shalf give to them blindness of heart, - Thy curse to them.

66 Thou shalt pursue \[them\] in anger, and destroy them from under the
heavens of Jahveh.

Lamentations 3:1-66

The two preceding poems ended with sorrowful complaint. This third poem
begins with the complaint of a man over grievous personal suffering.
Regarding the contents of this poem, and its relation to the two which
precede, Ewald makes the following excellent remarks: "In consequence of
experiences most peculiarly his own, the individual may indeed at first
make complaint, in such a way that, as here, still deeper despair for
the third time begins (vv. 1-18); but, by the deepest meditation for
himself on the eternal relation of God to men, he may also very readily
come to the due acknowledgment of his own sins and the necessity for
repentance, and thereby also to believing prayer. Who is this individual
that complains, and thinks, and entreats in this fashion, whose I passes
unobserved, but quite appropriately, into we? O man, it is the very
image of thyself! Every one must now speak and think as he does. Thus it
is just by this address, which commences in the most doleful tones, that
sorrow for the first time, and imperceptibly, has passed into true
prayer." This remark contains both the deepest truth and the key to the
proper understanding of the contents of this poem, and its position in
the middle of the Lamentations. Both of these points have been mistaken
by expositors, who (e.g., C. B. Michaelis, Pareau, Maurer, Kalkschmidt,
and Bleek in his Introduction) are of opinion that the writer here makes
his personal sufferings the subject of complaint. This cannot be made
out, either from [Lam 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014) or from the
description given in [Lam 3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053).: the
reverse rather is shown by the fact that, in [Lam
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022) and [Lam
3:40-47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040), we is used instead of I; from
which it is evident that the prophet, in the remainder of the poem, is
not speaking of himself, or bewailing his own personal sufferings. The
confession found in [Lam 3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042), "We
have transgressed and rebelled, Thou hast not pardoned," etc.,
necessarily presupposes not only that the dealing of God towards the
sinful and apostate nation, as described in [Lam
3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042)., stands in the closest
connection with the sufferings of which the prophet complains in vv.
1-18, but also that the chastisement, by means of God's wrath, which was
experienced by the man who utters his complaint in vv. 1-18, is
identical with the anger which, according to [Lam
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043), discharged itself on the people;
hence the suffering of the individual, which is described in vv. 1-18,
is to be regarded as the reflex of but a special instance of the
suffering endured by the whole community. Perhaps this was the view of
Aben Ezra, when he says that, in this lamentation, it is individual
Israelites who speak; and most expositors acknowledge that the prophet
pours forth his lamentations and his prayers in the name of the godly.

The poem begins by setting forth the grievous soul-sufferings of the
godly in their cheerless and hopeless misery (vv. 1-18); then it
ascends, through meditation upon the compassion and almighty providence
of God, to hope (vv. 19-39), and thus attains to the recognition of
God's justice in sending the punishment, which, however, is so
intensified through the malice of enemies, that the Lord cannot pass by
the attempt to crush His people ([Lam
3:40-54](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040)). This reliance on the justice
of God impels to prayer, in which there is manifested confidence that
God will send help, and take vengeance on the enemy ([Lam
3:55-66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055)).

[Lamentations 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 3:1</span></span>

Lamentation over grievous sufferings. The author of these sufferings is
not, indeed, expressly named in the whole section, but it is
unmistakeably signified that God is meant; moreover, at the end of [Lam
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018) the name יהוה is mentioned. The
view thus given of the sufferings shows, not merely that he who utters
the complaint perceives in these sufferings a chastisement by God, but
also that this chastisement has become for him a soul-struggle, in which
he may not take the name of God into his mouth; and only after he has
given vent in lamentations to the deep sorrow of his soul, does his
spirit get peace to mention the name of the Lord, and make complaint to
Him of his need. Nothing certain can be inferred from the lamentations
themselves regarding the person who makes complaint. It does not follow
from [Lam 3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001) that he was burdened
with sorrows more than every one else; nor from [Lam
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014) that he was a personage well
known to all the people, so that one could recognise the prophet in him.
As little are they sufferings which Jeremiah has endured alone, and for
his own sake, but sufferings such as many godly people of his time have
undergone and struggled through. Against the Jeremianic authorship of
the poem, therefore, no argument can be drawn from the fact that the
personality of him who utters the complaint is concealed.

[Lam 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)

In the complaint, "I am the man that saw (i.e., lived to see) misery,"
the misery is not specified; and we cannot, with Rosenmller, refer עני
(without the article) to the misery announced by the prophet long
before. "The rod of His wrath," as in [Pro
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#008), is the rod of God's anger; cf.
[Job 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009); [Job
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034); [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005), etc. The suffix in עברתו is not
to be referred, with Aben Ezra, to the enemy.

[Lam 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#002)

"Me hath He (God) led and brought through darkness (חשׁך, local accus.),
and not light," is a combination like that in [Job
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#025) and [Amo
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018). The path of Jeremiah's life
certainly lay through darkness, but was not wholly devoid of light,
because God had promised him His protection for the discharge of his
official functions. The complaint applies to all the godly, to whom, at
the fall of Jerusalem, no light appeared to cheer the darkness of life's
pathway.

[Lam 3:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#003)

"Only upon (against) me does He repeatedly turn His hand." ישׁוּב is
subordinated to the idea of יהפך in an adverbial sense; cf. Gesenius,
142, 3, b. "His hand" is the smiting hand of God. אך, "only upon me,"
expresses the feeling which makes him on whom grievous sufferings have
fallen to regard himself as one smitten in a special manner by God. "The
whole day," i.e., continually; cf. [Lam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013). - From [Lam
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#004) onwards this divine chastisement
is more minutely set forth under various figures, and first of all as a
wasting away of the vital force. בּלּה means to wear out by rubbing,
cause to fall away, from בּלה, to be worn out, which is applied to
clothes, and then transferred to bodies, [Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028); [Psa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015). "Flesh and skin" are the
exterior and soft constituents of the body, while the bones are the
firmer parts. Skin, flesh, and bones together, make up the substance of
the human body. [Pro 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#011) forms the
foundation of the first clause. "He hath broken my bones" is a
reminiscence from the lamentation of Hezekiah in [Isa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013); cf. [Psa
51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010); [Job
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017). The meaning is thus excellently
given by Pareau: indicantur animi, fortius irae divinae malorumque sensu
conquassati, angores. - The figure in [Lam
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005), "He builds round about and
encircles me," is derived from the enclosing of a city by besieging it.
עלי is to be repeated after wayaqeep. The besieging forces, which
encompass him so that he cannot go out and in, are ראשׁ וּתלאה. That the
former of these two words cannot mean κεφαλήν μου (lxx), is abundantly
evident. ראשׁ or רושׁ is a plant with a very bitter taste, hence a
poisonous plant; see on [Jer 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014). As
in that passage מי ראשׁ, so here the simple ראשׁ is an emblem of bitter
suffering. The combination with תּלאה, "toil," is remarkable, as a case
in which a figurative is joined with a literal expression; this,
however, does not justify the change of תּלאה into לענה (Castell,
Schleussner, etc.). The combination is to be explained on the ground
that ראשׁ had become so common a symbol of bitter suffering, that the
figure was quite lost sight of behind the thing signified.

[Lam 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#006)

[Lam 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#006) is a verbatim reminiscence
from [Psa 143:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#003). מחשׁכּים is the
darkness of the grave and of Sheol; cf. [Psa
88:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#007). מתי עולם does not mean "the dead
of antiquity" (Rosenmller, Maurer, Ewald, Thenius, etc.), but, as in
[Psa 143:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#003), those eternally dead, who
lie in the long night of death, from which there is no return into this
life. In opposition to the explanation dudum mortui, Gerlach fittingly
remarks, that "it makes no difference whether they have been dead long
ago or only recently, inasmuch as those dead and buried a short time ago
lie in darkness equally with those who have long been dead;" while it
avails nothing to point to [Psa
88:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005), as Ngelsbach does, since the
special subject there treated of is not those who have long been dead.

[Lam 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#007)

God has hedged him round like a prisoner, cut off all communication from
without, so that he cannot escape, and He has loaded him with heavy
chains. This figure is based on [Job
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008) and [Hos
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008). גּדר בּעדי, "He hath made an
hedge round me," does not suggest prison walls, but merely seclusion
within a confined space, where he is deprived of free exit. "I cannot go
out," as in [Psa 88:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#009). The seclusion
is increased by fetters which are placed on the prisoner. נחשׁת,
"brass," for fetters, as in German and English, "irons," for iron
chains.

[Lam 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#008)

This distress presses upon him all the more heavily, because, in
addition to this, the Lord does not listen to his prayer and cries, but
has rather closed His ear; cf. [Jer
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016); [Psa
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#042), etc. שׂתם for סתם (only written
here with שׂ), to stop the prayer; i.e., not to prevent the prayer from
issuing out of the breast, to restrain supplication, but to prevent the
prayer from reaching His ear; cf. [Lam
3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044) and [Pro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028).

[Lam 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#009)

In [Lam 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#009), the idea of prevention
from freedom of action is further carried out on a new side. "He hath
walled in my paths with hewn stones." גּזית = גזית אבּני, 1 Kings 5:31,
are hewn stones of considerable size, employed for making a very strong
wall. The meaning is: He has raised up insurmountable obstacles in the
pathway of my life. "My paths hath He turned," i.e., rendered such that
I cannot walk in them. עוּה is to turn, in the sense of destroying, as
in [Isa 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001), not contortas fecit
(Michaelis, Rosenmller, Kalkschmidt), nor per viam tortuosam ire cogor
(Raschi); for the prophet does not mean to say (as Ngelsbach imagines),
"that he has been compelled to walk in wrong and tortuous ways," but he
means that God has rendered it impossible for him to proceed further in
his path; cf. [Job 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#013). But we are
not in this to think of the levelling of a raised road, as Thenius does;
for נתיבה does not mean a road formed by the deposition of rubbish, like
a mound, but a footpath, formed by constant treading (Gerlach).

[Lam 3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#010)

Not merely, however, has God cut off every way of escape for him who
here utters the complaint, but He pursues him in every possible way,
that He may utterly destroy him. On the figure of a bear lying in wait,
cf. [Hos 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008); [Amo
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019). It is more usual to find enemies
compared to lions in ambush; cf. Ps. 10:19; [Psa
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012). The last-named passage seems to
have been present to the writer's mind. The prophets frequently compare
enemies to lions, e.g., [Jer 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006); [Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007); [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019); [Jer
50:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#044). - In [Lam
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#011) the figure of the lion is
discontinued; for cowreer דּרכי cannot be said of a beast. The verb here
is not to be derived from סרר, to be refractory, but is the Pilel of
סוּר, to go aside, deviate, make to draw back. To "make ways turn aside"
may signify to make a person lose the right road, but not to drag back
from the road (Thenius); it rather means to mislead, or even facere ut
deficiant viae, to take away the road, so that one cannot escape. פּשּׁח
is ἅπ. λεγ. in Hebrew; in Aramean it means to cut or tear in pieces: cf.
\[the Targum on\] [Sa1 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033), "Samuel
פּשּׁח Agag," hewed him in pieces; and on [Psa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003), where the word is used for the
Heb. פּרק, to tear in pieces (of a lion); here it signifies to tear away
(limbs from the body, boughs from trees). This meaning is required by
the context; for the following expression, שׂמני שׁומם, does not lead us
to think of tearing in pieces, lacerating, but discerpere, plucking or
pulling to pieces. For שׁומם, see on [Lam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013), [Lam
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#016).

[Lam 3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#012)

"He hath bent His bow," as in [Lam
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#004). The second member, "He hath made
me the mark for His arrows," is taken almost verbatim from [Job
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#012). The arrows are the ills and
sorrows appointed by God; cf. [Deu
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#023); [Psa
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003); [Job
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004).

[Lam 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014)

"Abused in this way, he is the object of scoffing and mockery"
(Gerlach). In the first clause, the complaint of Jeremiah in [Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007) is reproduced. Rosenmller, Ewald,
and Thenius are inclined to take עמּי as an abbreviated form of the
plur. עמּים, presuming that the subject of the complaint is the people
of Israel. But in none of the three passages in which Ewald (Gram. 177,
a), following the Masoretes, is ready to recognise such a plural-ending,
does there seem any need or real foundation for the assumption. Besides
this passage, the others are [Sa2
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044) and [Psa
144:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#002). In these last two cases עמּי
gives a suitable enough meaning as a singular (see the expositions of
these passages); and in this verse, as Gerlach has already remarked,
against Rosenmller, neither the conjoined כּל nor the plural suffix of
נגינתם requires us to take עמּי as a plural, the former objection being
removed on a comparison of [Gen 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#010),
and the latter when we consider the possibility of a constructio ad
sensum in the case of the collective עם. But the assumption that here
the people are speaking, or that the poet (prophet) is complaining of
the sufferings of the people in their name, is opposed by the fact that
הגּבר stands at the beginning of this lamentation, [Lam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001). If, however, the prophet
complained in the name of each individual among God's people, he could
not set up כּל־עמּי in opposition to them, because by that very
expression the scoffing is limited to the great body of the people. The
Chaldee, accordingly, is substantially correct in its paraphrase,
omnibus protervis populi mei (following [Dan
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#014)). But that the mass of the
people were not subdued by suffering, and that there was a great number
of those who would not recognise the chastening hand of God in the fall
of the kingdom, and who scoffed at the warnings of the prophets, is
evinced, not merely by the history of the period immediately after the
destruction of Jerusalem (Jer. 41ff.), and by the conduct of Ishmael and
his followers ([Jer 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#002).), and of the
insolent men who marched to Egypt in spite of Jeremiah's warning ([Jer
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#002)), but also by the spirit that
prevailed among the exiles, and against which Ezekiel had to contend;
cf. e.g., [Eze 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#022). נגינתם is a
reminiscence from [Job 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009); cf. [Psa
69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013).

[Lam 3:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015)

"He fills me with bitternesses" is a reminiscence from [Job
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#018), only ממרורים being exchanged for
מרורים. Of these two forms, the first occurs only in Job, l.c.; the
latter denotes, in [Exo 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008) and [Num
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011), "bitter herbs," but here
"bitternesses." The reality (viz., bitter sorrow) is what Jeremiah
threatens the people with in [Jer
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#014); [Jer
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#015). The figure employed in [Lam
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#016) is still stronger. "He made my
teeth be ground down on gravel." חצץ means a gravel stone, gravel, [Pro
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#017). גּרס (which occurs only in [Psa
119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020) as well as here, and is allied
to גּרשׂ, from which comes גּרשׂ, something crushed, [Lev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014), [Lev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#016)) signifies to be ground down, and
in Hiphil to grind down, not to cause to grind; hence בּחצץ cannot be
taken as a second object, "He made my teeth grind gravel" (Ewald); but
the words simply mean, "He ground my teeth on the gravel," i.e., He made
them grind away on the gravel. As regards the application of the words,
we cannot follow the older expositors in thinking of bread mixed with
stones, but must view the giving of stones for bread as referring to
cruel treatment. The lxx have rendered הכפּישׁני by ἐψώμισέν με σποδόν,
the Vulgate by cibavit me cinere. This translation has not been
lexically established, but is a mere conjecture from [Psa
102:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#010). The ἁπ λεγ. ̔́̔̀נבך̓̀צ is allied
with ,כּבשׁsubigere, and means in Rabbinic, deprimere; cf. Buxtorf, Lex.
Rabb. s.v. Similarly, the Chaldee had previously explained the words to
mean humiliavit ( )כּנעme in cinere; and Raschi, כפה inclinavit s.
subegit me. Luther follows these in his rendering, "He rolls me in the
ashes," which is a figure signifying the deepest disgrace and
humiliation, or a hyperbolical expression for sprinkling with ashes
([Eze 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#030)), as a token of descent
into the depths of sorrow.

[Lam 3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#017)

In [Lam 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#017) and [Lam
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018) the speaker, in his lamentation,
gives expression to that disposition of his heart which has been
produced by the misery that has befallen him to so fearful an extent. He
has quite given up hopes of attaining safety and prosperity, and his
hope in the Lord is gone. In [Lam 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#017)
it is a question whether תּזנח is second or third pers. of the imperf.
Following the lxx, who give the rendering ἀπώσατο ἐξ εἰρήνης ψυχήν μου,
Rosenmller, Gesenius, De Wette, and Ngelsbach consider זנח transitive,
as in [Deu 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007), and take תּזנח as of
the second pers.: "Thou didst reject my soul (me) from peace." But to
this view of the words there is the decided objection, that neither
before nor after is there any direct address to Jahveh, and that the
verbs which immediately follow stand in the first person, and succeed
the first clause appropriately enough, provided we take נפשׁי as the
subject to תּזנח (third pers.). זנח has both a transitive and an
intransitive meaning in Kal; cf. [Hos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#003) (trans.) and [Hos
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005) (intrans.). Ngelsbach has no
ground for casting doubt on the intrans. meaning in [Hos
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005). Moreover, the objection that the
passage now before us is a quotation from [Psa
88:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#015) (Ngelsbach) does not prove that
תּזנח נפשׁי is to be taken in the same sense here as in that passage: "O
Jahveh, Thou despisest my soul." By adding משּׁלום, Jeremiah has made an
independent reproduction of that passage in the Psalms, if he had it
before his mind. This addition does not permit of our attaching a
transitive sense to תּזנח, for the verb means to despise, not to reject;
hence we cannot render the words, "Thou didst reject my soul from
peace." The meaning of the clause is not "my soul loathes prosperity,"
as it is rendered by Thenius, who further gives the sense as follows: "I
had such a thorough disgust for life, that I had no longer the least
desire for prosperity." As Gerlach has already remarked, this
explanation neither harmonizes with the meaning of שׁלום, not with the
expression of doubt in the following verse, which implies a very lively
"sense of the prosperous;" moreover, it has no good lexical basis. The
fundamental meaning of זנח is to stink, be rancid, from which comes the
metaphorical one of instilling disgust, - not, feeling disgust ([Hos
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005)), - and further, that of
despising. The meaning "to instil disgust" does not suit this passage,
but only that of being despised. "My soul is despised of prosperity,"
i.e., so that it shares not in prosperity; with this accords the
intransitive use of the Hiphil הזניח with מן, [Ch2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#014). The Vulgate, which does not
catch the idea of זנח so exactly, renders the passage by expulsa est a
pace anima mea. To this there are appropriately joined the words, "I
have forgotten good" (good fortune), because I constantly experience
nothing but misfortune; and not less appropriate is the expression of
doubt, "I say (i.e., I think) my strength and my hope from Jahveh is
gone (vanished)," i.e., my strength is worn out through suffering, and I
have nothing more to hope for from Jahveh. Starting from the fundamental
idea of stability, permanence, נצח, according to the traditional
explanation, means vigor, strength; then, by a metaphor, vis vitalis,
[Isa 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003), [Isa
63:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#006), - not trust (Rosenmller,
Thenius, Ngelsbach, etc.), in support of which we are pointed to [Sa1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029), but without sufficient reason;
see Delitzsch on Isaiah, l.c. The complaint here attains its deepest and
worst. The complainant in his thoughts has gone far from God, and is on
the very verge of despair. But here also begins the turning-point. When
for the first time he utters the name of God in the expression "my hope
from Jahveh," he shows that Jahveh is to him also still the ground of
hope and trust. Hence also he not merely complains, "my strength is
gone," etc., but introduces this thought with the words ואמר, "I said,"
sc. in my heart, i.e., I thought, "my strength is gone, and my hope from
Jahveh lost," i.e., vanished. The mention of the name Jahveh, i.e., the
Covenant-God, keeps him from sinking into despair, and urges him not to
let go his trust on the Lord, so that he can now (in what follows)
complain to the Lord of his state of distress, and beseech His help.

[Lamentations 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lam 3:19</span></span>

Consideration of God's compassion and His omnipotence as displayed at
critical junctures in the affairs of men. C. B. Michaelis has correctly
perceived, and thus set forth, the transition from the complaint,
bordering on despair, to hope, as given in [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019) : luctatur hic contra
desperationis adfectum, quo tentatus fuerat, [Lam
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018), mix inde per fidem emersurus. In
like manner it is said in the Berleburger Bibel, "In [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019) he struggles with despair, to
which he had been tempted, and in the following verse soars up once more
into the region of faith." By the resumption of עני from [Lam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001), and of לענה and ראשׁ from [Lam
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015) and [Lam
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005), the contents of the whole
preceding lamentation are given in a summary, and by זכר are presented
to God in prayer. "Mine affliction" is intensified by the addition of
"my persecution" (see on [Lam 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007)),
and the contents of the lamentation thereby more plainly pointed out.
This connection of the verse has been misunderstood in many ways. An old
interpretation of the words, still maintained by Bttcher and Thenius,
makes זכר an infinitive; according to this view, [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019) would require to be conjoined
with the preceding, and the inf. without ל would stand for the ground,
recordando, "while I think of," - which is grammatically impossible.

(Note: Seb. Mnster long since said: Secundum quosdam est זכר infinit.,
ut sit sensus: periit spes mea, recordante me afflictionis meae. Calvin
also gives the preference to this view, with the remark: Videtur enim
hic propheta exprimere, quomodo fere a spe exciderit, ut nihil reperiret
amplius fortitudinis in Deo, quia scilicet oppressus erat malis; in
support of which he affirms that it is valde absurdum, eos qui experti
sunt aliquando Dei misericordiam, sic omnem spem abjicere, ut non
statuant amplius sibi esse refugium ad Deum.)

The same remark applies to the assumption that זכר is an infinitive
which is resumed in [Lam 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020) : "it
thinks of my misery...yes, my soul thinks thereon" (Bttcher, Thenius).
Gerlach very properly remarks concerning this view that such a
construction is unexampled, and, as regards the change in the form of
the infinitive (constr. and abs.), would be unintelligible. The
objection of Thenius, however, that the imperative meaning usually
attached to זכר is against the whole context, and quite inappropriate
here, is connected with the erroneous assumption that [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019) and [Lam
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020) form a continuation of what
precedes, and that the idea of the speaker's being completely
overwhelmed by the thought of all that he had suffered and still
suffers, forms the proper conclusion of the first part, after which,
from [Lam 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021) onwards, there follows
relief. Gerlach has rightly opposed to these arguments the following
considerations: (1) That, after the outburst of despair in [Lam
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018), "my strength is gone, and my
hope from Jahveh," the words "my soul is bowed down in me" form far too
feeble a conclusion; (2) That it is undoubtedly more correct to make the
relief begin with a prayer breathed out through sighs ([Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019)), than with such a reflection as
is expressed in [Lam 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021). Ewald also
is right in taking זכר as an imperative, but is mistaken in the notion
that the speaker addresses any one who is ready to hear him; this view
is shown to be erroneous by the simple fact that, in what precedes and
succeeds, the thoughts of the speaker are directed to God only.

[Lam 3:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020)

The view taken of this verse will depend on the answer to the question
whether תּזכר is second or third pers. fem. Following in the wake of
Luther ("Thou wilt assuredly think thereon"), C. B. Michaelis, Pareau,
Rosenmller, and Kalkschmidt take it as second pers.: "Think, yea, think
wilt Thou, that my soul is bowed down in me," or "that my soul is at
rest within me" (Ngelsbach). But it is impossible to maintain either of
these views in the face of the language employed. To take the ו before
תּשׁיח in the meaning of quod is characterized by Ngelsbach as an
arbitrary procedure, unwarranted either by [Gen
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027) or [Eze
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#011); but neither can the meaning of
resting, being at east, which is attributed to שׁוּח or שׁיח by that
writer, be established. The verb means to sink down, [Pro
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#018), and metaphorically, to be bowed
down, [Psa 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026). The latter meaning
is required in the present passage, from the simple fact that the
sentence undeniably refers to [Psa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006).

(Note: Luther's translation, "for my soul tells me," is founded on the
circumstance that the lxx have mistaken שׁיח for שׂיח: καταδολεσχήσει ἐπ
̓ ἐμὲ ἡ ψυχή μου.)

ותּשׁיח expresses the consequence of זכר תּזכר, which therefore can only
be the third pers., and "my soul" the subject of both clauses; for there
is no logical consecution of the meaning given by such a rendering as,
"If Thou wilt remember, my soul shall be bowed within me." The
expression, "If my soul duly meditates thereon (on the deep suffering),
it becomes depressed within me," forms the foundation of the request
that God would think of his distress, his misery; and [Lam
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021), "I will lay this to heart,"
connects itself with the leading thought set forth in [Lam
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019), the reason for which is given in
[Lam 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020), viz., that my soul is only
bowed down within me over the thought of my distress, and must complain
of it to God, that He may think of it and alleviate it: This will I lay
to heart and set my hope upon. על־כּן is a strong inferential
expression: "therefore," because God alone can help, will I hope. This
self-encouragement begins with [Lam
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022), inasmuch as the prophet
strengthens his hope by a consideration of the infinite compassion of
the Lord. (It is) חסדי, "the mercies of God," i.e., proofs of His mercy
(cf. [Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002); [Psa
107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043); [Isa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007)), "that we are not utterly
consumed," as Luther and similarly our English translators have
excellently rendered תּמנוּ. This form stands for תּמּונוּ, as in [Jer
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#018); [Num
17:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#001) :28, not for תּמּוּ, third
pers., as Pareau, Thenius, Vaihinger, and Ewald, referring to his
Grammar, 84, b, would take it. The proofs of the grace of God have their
foundation in His compassion, from which they flow. In [Lam
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#023) we take חסדי as the subject of
חדשׁים; it is the proofs of the grace of God that are new every morning,
not "His compassions," although the idea remains the same. לבּקרים,
every morning, as in [Isa 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#002); [Psa
73:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014). Ubi sol et dies oritur, simul
et radii hujus inexhaustae bonitatis erumpunt (Tarnovius in Rosenmller).
The consciousness of this constant renewal of the divine favour impels
to the prayerful exclamation, "great is Thy faithfulness;" cf. [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006).

[Lam 3:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#024)

"My portion is Jahveh:" this is a reminiscence from [Psa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005); [Psa
73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026); [Psa
142:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#006); cf. [Psa
119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057), where the expression found
here is repeated almost verbatim. The expression is based on [Num
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020), where the Lord says to Aaron,
"I am thy portion and thine inheritance;" i.e., Jahveh will be to the
tribe of Levi what the other tribes receive in their territorial
possessions in Canaan; Levi shall have his possession and enjoyment in
Jahveh. The last clause, "therefore will I hope," etc., is a repetition
of what is in [Lam 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021), as if by way
of refrain.

This hope cannot be frustrated, [Lam
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025). The fundamental idea of the
section contained in [Lam 3:25-33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025) is
thus stated by Ngelsbach: "The Lord is well disposed towards the
children of men under all circumstances; for even when He smites them,
He seeks their highest interest: they ought so to conduct themselves in
adversity, that it is possible for Him to carry out His designs." On
[Lam 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025), cf. [Psa
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009); [Psa
86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005); and on the general meaning, also
[Psa 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#003); [Psa
69:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007). If the Lord is kind to those who
hope in Him, then it is good for man to wait patiently for His help in
suffering. Such is the mode in which [Lam
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026) is attached to [Lam
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025). טוב, [Lam
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026) and [Lam
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027), followed by ל dat., means to be
good for one, i.e., beneficial. Some expositors (Gesenius, Rosenmller,
Maurer, Ngelsbach) take יחיל as a noun-form, substantive or adjective;
דּוּמם is then also taken in the same way, and ו - ו as correlative: "it
is good both to wait and be silent." But although there are analogous
cases to support the view that יחיל is a noun-form, the constant
employment of דּוּמם as an adverb quite prevents us from taking it as an
adjective. Moreover, "to be silent for the help of the Lord," would be a
strange expression, and we would rather expect "to be silent and wait
for;" and finally, waiting and silence are so closely allied, that the
disjunctive ו - ו et - et appears remarkable. We prefer, then, with
Ewald (Gram. ֗235, a) and others, to take יחיל as a verbal form, and
that, too, in spite of the i in the jussive form of the Hiphil for יחל,
from חוּל, in the meaning of יחל, to wait, tarry. "It is good that he
(man) should wait, and in silence too (i.e., without complaining), for
the help of the Lord." On the thought presented here, cf. [Psa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007) and [Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015). Hence it is also good for man
to bear a yoke in youth ([Lam 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027)),
that he may exercise himself in calm waiting on the help of the Lord. In
the present context the yoke is that of sufferings, and the time of
youth is mentioned as the time of freshness and vigour, which render the
bearing of burdens more easy. He who has learned in youth to bear
sufferings, will not sink into despair should they come on him in old
age. Instead of בּנעוּריו, Theodotion has ἐκ νεότητος αὐτοῦ, which is
also the reading of the Aldine edition of the lxx; and some codices have
מנּעוּריו. But this reading is evidently a correction, prompted by the
thought that Jeremiah, who composed the Lamentations in his old age, had
much suffering to endure from the time of his call to the prophetic
office, in the earlier portion of his old age; nor is it much better
than the inference of J. D. Michaelis, that Jeremiah composed this poem
when a youth, on the occasion of King Josiah's death. - In [Lam
3:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028), the effect of experience by
suffering is set forth, yet not in such a way that the verses are to be
taken as still dependent on כּי in [Lam
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027) (Luther, Pareau, De Wette,
Maurer, and Thenius): "that he should sit alone and be silent," etc.
Such a combination is opposed to the independent character of each
separate alphabetic strophe. Rather, the result of early experience in
suffering and patience is developed in a cohortative form. The
connection of thought is simply as follows: Since it is good for man
that he should learn to endure suffering, let him sit still and bear it
patiently, when God puts such a burden on him. Let him sit solitary, as
becomes those in sorrow (see on [Lam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)), and be silent, without murmuring
(cf. [Lam 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026)), when He lays a burden
on him. There is no object to נטל expressly mentioned, but it is easily
understood from the notion of the verb (if He lays anything on him), or
from על in [Lam 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027) (if He lays a
yoke on him). We are forbidden to consider the verbs as indicatives ("he
sits alone and is silent;" Gerlach, Ngelsbach) by the apocopated form
יתּן in [Lam 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#029), [Lam
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#030), which shows that ישׁב and ידּם
are also cohortatives.

[Lam 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#029)

"Let him put his mouth in the dust," i.e., humbly bow beneath the mighty
hand of God. The expression is derived from the Oriental custom of
throwing oneself in the most reverential manner on the ground, and
involves the idea of humble silence, because the mouth, placed in the
dust, cannot speak. The clause, "perhaps there is hope," indicates the
frame of mind to be observed in the submission. While the man is to show
such resignation, he is not to give up the hope that God will deliver
him from trouble; cf. [Job 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#018); [Jer
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017).

[Lam 3:30-36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#030)

Let him also learn patiently to bear abuse and reviling from men. Let
him present his cheek to him who smites him, as was done by Job ([Job
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#010)) and the servant of Jahveh ([Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)); cf. [Mat
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039). On [Lam
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#030), cf. [Psa
88:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004); [Psa
123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003), etc. There is a certain
gradation in the three verses that it quite unmistakeable. The sitting
alone and in silence is comparatively the easiest; it is harder to place
the mouth in the dust, and yet cling to hope; it is most difficult of
all to give the cheek to the smiter, and to satiate oneself with
dishonour (Ngelsbach). In [Lam 3:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#031)
follow the grounds of comfort. The first is in [Lam
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#031) : the sorrow will come to an end;
the Lord does not cast off for ever; cf. [Jer
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#005), [Jer
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012). The second is in [Lam
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#032) : when He has caused sorrow, He
shows pity once more, according to the fulness of His grace. Compassion
outweighs sorrow. On this subject, cf. [Psa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006); [Job
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#018); [Isa
54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008). The third ground of comfort is
in [Lam 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033) : God does not send
affliction willingly, as if it brought Him joy (cf. [Jer
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041)), but merely because
chastisement is necessary to sinful man for the increase of his
spiritual prosperity; cf. [Act 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022);
[Co2 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017). ויּגּה is for וייגּה: cf.
Ewald, 232, f; Gesenius, 69, 3, Rem. 6.

That he may bring home to the hearts of God's people the exhortation to
bear suffering with patience and resignation, and that he may lead them
to see that the weight of sorrow under which they are sighing has been
sent from the Lord as a chastisement for their sins, the prophet carries
out the thought, in [Lam 3:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034), that
every wrong committed upon earth is under the divine control ([Lam
3:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034)), and generally that nothing
happens without God's permission; hence man ought not to mourn over the
suffering that befalls him, but rather over his sins ([Lam
3:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037)).

[Lam 3:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034)

These verses form one connected sentence: while the subject and
predicate for the three infinitival clauses do not follow till the words
אדני לא ראה, the infinitives with their objects depend on ראה. If there
were any foundation for the assertion of Bttcher in his Aehrenlese, that
ראה never occurs in construction with ל, we could take the infinitives
with ל as the objects of ראה, in the sense, "As to the crushing of all
the prisoners," etc. But the assertion is devoid of truth, and disproved
by [Sa1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007), האדם יראה לעינים ויהוה
יראה. In the three infinitival clauses three modes of unjust dealing are
set forth. The treading down to the earth of all prisoners under his
(the treader's) feet, refers to cruel treatment of the Jews by the
Chaldeans at the taking of Jerusalem and Judah, and generally to deeds
of violence perpetrated by victors in war. This explains כּל, which
Kalkschmidt and Thenius incorrectly render "all captives of the land
(country)." Those intended are prisoners generally, who in time of war
are trodden down to the earth, i.e., cruelly treated. The other two
crimes mentioned, vv. 35 and 36, are among the sins of which Judah and
Israel have been guilty, - the former being an offence against the
proper administration of justice, and the latter falling under the
category of unjust practices in the intercourse of ordinary life. "To
pervert the right of a man before the face of the Most High" does not
mean, in general, proterve, et sine ull numinis inspectantis reverenti
(C. B. Michaelis, Rosenmller); but just as הטות משׁפּט is taken from the
law ([Exo 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006); [Num
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019), etc.), so also is נגד פּני
עליון to be explained in accordance with the directions given in the law
([Exo 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007), [Exo
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#009)), that certain clauses were to be
brought before האלהים, where this word means the judge or judges
pronouncing sentence in the name of God; cf. [Psa
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006), where the judges, as God's
representatives, are called אלהים and בּני אלהים. "Before the face of
the Most High" thus means, before the tribunal which is held in the name
of the Most High. "To turn aside a man in his cause" means to pervert
his right in a dispute (cf. [Job 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003);
[Job 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#012), etc.), which may also be
done in contested matters that do not come before the public tribunal.
The meaning of the three verses depends on the explanation given of אדני
לא ראה, which is a disputed point. ראה with ל, "to look on something,"
may mean to care for it, be concerned about it, but not to select,
choose, or to resolve upon, approve (Michaelis, Ewald, Thenius). Nor can
the prophet mean to say, "The Lord does not look upon the treading down
of the prisoners, the perversion of justice." If any one be still
inclined, with Rosenmller and others, to view the words as the
expression of a fact, then he must consider them as an exception taken
by those who murmur against God, but repelled in [Lam
3:37](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037). Moreover, he must, in some such
way as the following, show the connection between [Lam
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033) and [Lam
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034), by carrying out the idea
presented in the exhortation to hope for compassion: "But will any one
say that the Lord knows nothing of this - does not trouble Himself about
such sufferings?" Whereupon, in [Lam
3:37](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037), the answer follows: "On the
contrary, nothing happens without the will of God" (Gerlach). But there
is no point of attachment that can possibly be found in the words of the
text for showing such a connection; we must therefore reject this view
as being artificial, and forced upon the text. The difficulty is solved
in a simple manner, by taking the words אדני לא as a question, just as
has been already done in the Chaldee paraphrase: fierine potest ut in
conspectu Jovae non reveletur? The absence of the interrogative particle
forms no objection to this, inasmuch as a question is pretty often
indicated merely by the tone. [Lam
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#038) must also be taken
interrogatively. Bצttcher and Thenius, indeed, think that the perfect
ראה is incompatible with this; but the objection merely tells against
the rendering, "Should not the Lord see it?" (De Wette, Maurer,
Kalkschmidt), which of course would require יראה. But the idea rather
is, "Hath not the Lord looked upon this?" The various acts of injustice
mentioned in the three verses are not set forth merely as possible
events, but as facts that have actually occurred.

[Lam 3:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037)

[Lam 3:37](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037) brings the answer to this
question in a lively manner, and likewise in an interrogative form: "Who
hath spoken, and it came to pass, which the Lord hath not commanded?"
The thought here presented reminds us of the word of the Creator in [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003). The form of the expression is an
imitation of [Psa 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009). Rosenmller
gives the incorrect rendering, Quis est qui dixit: factum est (i.e.,
quis audeat dicere fieri quicquam), non praecipiente Deo; although the
similar but more free translation of Luther, "Who dares to say that such
a thing happens without the command of the Lord?" gives the sense in a
general way. The meaning is as follows: Nothing takes place on the earth
which the Lord has not appointed; no man can give and execute a command
against the will of God. From this it further follows ([Lam
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#038)), that evil and good will proceed
from the mouth of the Lord, i.e., be wrought by Him; on this point, cf.
[Isa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007); [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006). לא תצא gives no adequate meaning
unless it be taken interrogatively, and as indicating what is usual -
wont to be. And then there is established from this, in [Lam
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039), the application of the general
principle to the particular case in question, viz., the grievous
suffering of individuals at the downfall of the kingdom of Judah. "Why
does a man sigh as long as he lives? Let every one \[sigh\] for his
sins." Man is not to sigh over suffering and sorrow, but only over his
sin. התאונן occurs only here and in [Num
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001), and signifies to sigh, with the
accessory notion of murmuring, complaining. חי appended to אדם is more
of a predicate than a simple attributive: man, as long as he lives,
i.e., while he is in this life. The verse is viewed in a different light
by Pareau, Ewald, Neumann, and Gerlach, who combine both members into
one sentence, and render it thus: "Why doth a man complain, so long as
he lives, - a man over the punishment of his sins?" \[Similar is the
rendering of our "Authorized" Version.\] Neumann translates: "A man in
the face of \[Ger. bei\] his sins." But this latter rendering is
lexically inadmissible, because על esua in this connection cannot mean
"in view of." The other meaning assigned is improbable, though there is
nothing against it, lexically considered. For though חטא, sin, may also
signify the punishment of sin, the latter meaning does not suit the
present context, because in what precedes it is not said that the people
suffer for their sins, but merely that their suffering has been
appointed by God. If, then, in what follows, there is an exhortation to
return to the Lord ([Lam 3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040).), and
in [Lam 3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042) a confession of sins
made; if, moreover, [Lam 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039) forms
the transition from [Lam 3:33-38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033) to
the exhortation that succeeds ([Lam
3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040).); then it is not abstinence from
murmuring or sighing over the punishment of sins that forms the true
connecting link of the two lines of thought, but merely the refraining
from complaint over sufferings, coupled with the exhortation to sigh
over their won sins. Tarnov also has viewed the verse in this way, when
he deduces from it the advice to every soul labouring under a weight of
sorrows: est igitur optimus ex malis emergendi modus Deum excusare et se
ipsum accusare.

[Lamentations 3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">lam 3:40</span></span>

Confession of sins, and complaint against the cruelty of enemies, as
well as over the deep misery into which all the people have sunk. [Lam
3:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040). The acknowledgment of guilt
implies to prayer, to which also there is a summons in [Lam
3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040), [Lam
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041). The transitional idea is not,
"Instead of grumbling in a sinful spirit, let us rather examine our
conduct" (Thenius); for the summons to examine one's conduct is thereby
placed in contrast with [Lam 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039), and
the thought, "let every one mourn over his own sins," transformed into a
prohibition of sinful complaint. The real transition link is given by
Rosenmller: quum mala nostra a peccatis nostris oriantur, culpas nostras
et scrutemur et corrigamus. The searching of our ways, i.e., of our
conduct, if it be entered on in an earnest spirit, must end in a return
to the Lord, from whom we have departed. It is self-evident that עד יהוה
does not stand for אל יי, but means as far as (even to) Jahveh, and
indicates thorough conversion - no standing half-way. The lifting up of
the heart to the hands, also, - not merely of the hands to God, -
expresses earnest prayer, that comes from the heart. אל־כּפּים, to the
hands (that are raised towards heaven). "To God in heaven," where His
almighty throne is placed ([Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)),
that He may look down from thence ([Lam
3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059)) and send help. With [Lam
3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042) begins the prayer, as is shown by
the direct address to God in the second member. There is no need,
however, on this account, for supplying לאמר before the first member;
the command to pray is immediately followed by prayer, beginning with
the confession of sins, and the recognition of God's chastisement; cf.
[Psa 106:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#006); [Dan
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005). נחנוּ is contrasted with אתּה.
"Thou hast not pardoned," because Thy justice must inflict punishment.

[Lamentations 3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">lam 3:43</span></span>

God has not pardoned, but positively punished, the people for their
misdeeds. "Thou hast covered with anger," [Lam
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043), corresponds to "Thou hast
covered with a cloud," [Lam 3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044);
hence "Thou hast covered" is plainly used both times in the same
meaning, in spite of the fact that לך is wanting in [Lam
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043). סכך means to "cover," here to
"make a cover." "Thou didst make a cover with anger," i.e., Thou didst
hide Thyself in wrath; there is no necessity for taking סכך as in itself
reflexive. This mode of viewing it agrees also with what follows. The
objection of J. D. Michaelis, qui se obtegit non persequitur alios, ut
statim additur, which Bttcher and Thenius have repeated, does not hold
good in every respect, but chiefly applies to material covering. And the
explanation of Thenius, "Thou hast covered us with wrath, and persecuted
us," is shown to be wrong by the fact that סכך signifies to cover for
protection, concealment, etc., but not to cover in the sense of heaping
upon, pouring upon (as Luther translates it); nor, again, can the word
be taken here in a sense different from that assigned to it in [Lam
3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044). "The covering of wrath, which
the Lord draws around Him, conceals under it the lightnings of His
wrath, which are spoken of immediately afterwards" (Ngelsbach). The
anger vents itself in the persecution of the people, in killing them
unsparingly. For, that these two are connected, is shown not merely in
[Lam 3:66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#066), but still more plainly by
the threatening in [Jer 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#018) : "I
will pursue them with sword, and famine, and pestilence, and give them
for maltreatment to all the kingdoms of the earth." On "Thou hast slain,
Thou hast not spared," cf. [Lam 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#021).
In [Lam 3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044), לך is further appended
to סכּותה: "Thou makest a cover with clouds for Thyself," round about
Thee, so that no prayer can penetrate to Thee; cf. [Psa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#002). These words form the expression
of the painful conclusion drawn by God's people from their experience,
that God answered no cry for help that came to Him, i.e., granted no
help. Israel was thereby given up, in a defenceless state, to the foe,
so that they could treat them like dirt and abuse them. סחי (from סחה,
[Eze 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004)), found only here as a noun,
signifies "sweepings;" and מאוס is a noun, "disesteem, aversion." The
words of [Lam 3:45](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#045), indeed, imply the
dispersion of Israel among the nations, but are not to be limited to the
maltreatment of the Jews in exile; moreover, they rather apply to the
conduct of their foes when Judah was conquered and Jerusalem destroyed.
Such treatment, especially the rejection, is further depicted in [Lam
3:46](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046). The verse is almost a verbatim
repetition of [Lam 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016), and is quite
in the style of Jeremiah as regards the reproduction of particular
thoughts; while Thenius, from the repetition, is inclined to infer that
chs. 2 and 3 had different authors: cf. Gerlach on the other side. The
very next verse might have been sufficient to keep Thenius from such a
precipitate conclusion, inasmuch as it contains expressions and figures
that are still more clearly peculiar to Jeremiah. On פּחד ופחת, cf. [Jer
48:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043); השׁבר is also one of the
favourite expressions of the prophet. hashee't is certainly ἅπ. λεγ.,
but reminds one of בּני , [Num 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017),
for which in [Jer 48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045) there stands
בּני שׁאון. It comes from שׁאה, to make a noise, roar, fall into ruins
with a loud noise, i.e., be laid waste (cf. [Isa
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#011)); and, as Raschi has already
observed, it has the same meaning as שׁאיּה, "devastation," [Isa
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#012). It is incorrect to derive the
word from the Hiphil of נשׁא (J. D. Michaelis and Ewald), according to
which it ought to mean "disappointment," for the ה does not form an
essential portion of the word, but is the article, as והשׁבר shows.
Still more erroneous are the renderings ἔπαρσις (lxx, from נשׂא) and
vaticinatio (Jerome, who has confounded השּׁאת with משּׂא).

Over this terrible calamity, rivers of tears must be shed, until the
Lord looks down from heaven on it, [Lam
3:48-51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048). The prophet once more utters
this complaint in the first person, because he who has risked his life
in his endeavour to keep the people in the service of God must feel the
deepest sympathy for them in their misfortunes. "Rivers of water" is
stronger than "water," [Lam 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#016), and
"tears like a stream," [Lam 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#018); but
the mode of expression is in the main like that in those passages, and
used again in [Psa 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136), but in a
different connection. The second member of the verse is the same as in
[Lam 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011).

[Lamentations 3:49](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">lam 3:49</span></span>

נגּר means to be poured out, empty self; cf. [Sa2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014); [Mic
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004). "And is not silent" = and rests
not, i.e., incessantly; cf. [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017). מאין הפגות does not mean, eo
quod non sint intermissiones miseriarum vel fletus (C. B. Michaelis and
Rosenmller, following the Chaldee), but "so that there is no
intermission or drying up." As to הפגות, which means the same as פּוּגה,
see on [Lam 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#018). "Until the Lord look
down from heaven and examine," in order to put an end to the distress,
or to take compassion on His people. On ישׁקיף, cf. [Psa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002); [Psa
102:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#020).

[Lamentations 3:51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">lam 3:51</span></span>

[Lam 3:51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#051), taken literally, runs thus:
"Mine eye does evil to my soul" (עולל with ל signifies to inflict an
injury on one, cause suffering, as in [Lam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#002), [Lam
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#022); [Lam
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020)), i.e., it causes pain to the
soul, as the Chaldee has already paraphrased it. The expression does not
merely signify "causes me grief" (Thenius, Gerlach); but the eye,
weakened through incessant weeping, causes pain to the soul, inasmuch as
the pain in the eye increases the pain in the soul, i.e., heightens the
pain of the soul through the superaddition of physical pain (Ngelsbach).
Ewald has quite missed the meaning of the verse in his translation,
"Tears assail my soul," and in his explanatory remark that עוללה is used
in a bad sense, like the Latin afficit; for, if עולל had this meaning,
עיני could not stand for tears, because it is not the tears, but only
the eyes weakened by weeping, that affect the soul with pain. Ewald is
also wrong in seeking, with Grotius, to understand "the daughters of my
city" as signifying the country towns, and to explain the phrase by
referring to [Lam 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#022). For, apart
from the consideration that the appeal to [Lam
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#022) rests on a false conception of
that passage, the meaning attributed to the present verse is shown to be
untenable by the very fact that the expression "daughters of my city" is
never used for the daughter-towns of Jerusalem; and such a designation,
however possible it might be in itself, would yet be quite
incomprehensible in this present connection, where there is no other
subject of lamentation, either before or after, than Jerusalem in its
ruined condition, and the remnant of its inhabitants (Gerlach). "The
daughters of my city" are the daughters of Jerusalem, the female portion
of the inhabitants of the city before and after its destruction. Nor
will what is added, "because of the daughters of my city," seem strange,
if we consider that, even in [Lam 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004),
[Lam 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#018) and [Lam
2:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020), the fate and the wretched
condition of the virgins of the city are mentioned as peculiarly
deplorable, and that, in fact, the defenceless virgins were most to be
pitied when the city fell; cf. [Lam
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#011). But the objection of Bttcher and
Thenius, that מכּל בּנות forms a harsh construction, whether we view it
grammatically or in the light of the circumstances, inasmuch as מן,
after "mine eye pains me," is unsuitable, whether taken in a causal or a
comparative meaning: - this objection, certainly, has some truth in its
favour, and tells against any attempt to take the words as indicating a
comparison. but there is nothing against the causal meaning, if "mine
eyes causes pain to my soul" merely signifies "my eye pains me," because
the pain of the eye is the result of the profuse weeping. If those
words, however, possess the meaning we have given above (the pain in the
eyes increases the smart in the soul), then there is nothing strange at
all in the thought, "The evil condition of the daughters of my city is
so deplorable, that mine eyes fail through weeping, and the sorrow of my
soul is thereby intensified." Gerlach has already refuted, though more
fully than was necessary, the conjecture of Bttcher, that בּנות should
be changed into בּכּות (from all the weeping of my city).

[Lamentations 3:52](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">lam 3:52</span></span>

His pain and sorrow over the sad condition of the people recall to his
memory the persecutions and sufferings which the godly have endured. The
figure, "They who without cause are mine enemies have hunted me like a
bird," is an imitation of [Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001).
איבי חנּם reminds one of שׂנאי , [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019) and [Psa
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005). But the prophet prefers איבי to
שׂנאי, lest any one should restrict the words to persecutions which
arose out of personal hatred.

[Lamentations 3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">lam 3:53</span></span>

צמתוּ is here used transitively in Kal, as the Piel is elsewhere, [Psa
119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139), and the Pilpel, [Psa
88:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#017). צמתוּ בבּור, "they were
destroying (cutting off) my life down into the pit," is a pregnant
construction, and must be understood de conatu: "they sought to destroy
my life when they hurled me down into the pit, and cast stones on me,"
i.e., not "they covered the pit with a stone" (Pareau, De Wette,
Neumann). The verb ידה construed with בּ does not take this meaning, for
ידה merely signifies to cast, e.g., lots ([Jos
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#003), etc.), arrows ([Jer
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#014)), or to throw down = destroy,
annihilate, [Zac 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004); and בּי does not
mean "in the pit in which I was," but "upon (or against) me." The sing.
אבן is to be understood in accordance with the expression רגם אבן, to
cast stones = stone ([Kg1 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#018); [Lev
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002), [Lev
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027)). As to ויּדּוּ for ויידּוּ, see
on ויּגּה in [Lam 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033). "Waters flowed
over my head" is a figurative expression, denoting such misery and
distress as endanger life; cf. [Psa
59:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#002), [Psa
59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015)., [Psa
124:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#004)., [Psa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008). 'I said (thought), I am cut off
(from God's eyes or hand)," [Psa
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023); [Psa
88:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#006), is a reminiscence from these
Psalms, and does not essentially differ from "cut off out of the land of
the living," [Isa 43:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#008). For, that we
must thereby think of death, or sinking down into Sheol, is shown by
מבּור תּחתּיּות, [Lam 3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055). The
complaint in these verses (52-54) is regarded by some expositors as a
description of the personal sufferings of Jeremiah; and the casting into
the pit is referred to the incident mentioned in [Jer
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006). Such is the view, for instance,
taken by Vaihinger and Ngelsbach, who point for proof to these
considerations especially: (1) That the Chaldeans certainly could not,
without good cause ([Lam 3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053)), be
understood as the "enemies;" (2) that Jeremiah could not represent the
people, speaking as if they were righteous and innocent; and (3) that
the writer already speaks of his deliverance from their power, and
contents himself with merely calling down on them the vengeance of God
([Lam 3:55-66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055)). But not one of these
reasons is decisive. For, in the first place, the contents of [Lam
3:52](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#052) do not harmonize with the known
hostility which Jeremiah had to endure from his personal enemies. That
is to say, there is nothing mentioned or known of his enemies having
stoned him, or having covered him over with a stone, after they had cast
him into the miry pit ([Jer 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006).),
The figurative character of the whole account thus shows itself in the
very fact that the separate portions of it are taken from reminiscences
of passages in the Psalms, whose figurative character is universally
acknowledged. Moreover, in the expression איבי חנּם, even when we
understand thereby the Chaldeans, it is not at all implied that he who
complains of these enemies considers himself righteous and innocent, but
simply that he has not given them any good ground for their hostile
conduct towards him. And the assertion, that the writer is already
speaking of his deliverance from their power, rests on the erroneous
notion that, in [Lam 3:55-66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055), he is
treating of past events; whereas, the interchange of the perfects with
imperatives of itself shows that the deliverance of which he there
speaks is not an accomplished or bygone fact, but rather the object of
that assured faith which contemplates the non-existent as existent.
Lastly, the contrast between personal suffering ad the suffering of the
people, on which the whole reasoning rests, is quite beside the mark.
Moreover, if we take the lamentations to be merely symbolical, then the
sufferings and persecutions of which the prophet here complains are not
those of the people generally, but of the godly Israelites, on whom they
were inflicted when the kingdom was destroyed, not merely by the
Chaldeans, but also by their godless fellow-countrymen. Hence we cannot,
of course, say that Jeremiah here speaks from personal experience;
however, he complains not merely of the persecutions that befall him
personally, but also of the sufferings that had come on him and all
godly ones. The same remark applies to the conclusion of this
lamentation, - the prayer, [Lam
3:55-66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055), in which he entreats the Lord
for deliverance, and in the spirit of faith views this deliverance as
already accomplished.

[Lamentations 3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">lam 3:55</span></span>

Prayer for deliverance, and confident trust in its realization. [Lam
3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055). "Out of the lowest pit I call, O
Lord, on Thy name;" cf. [Psa 88:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#007),
[Psa 88:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#014); [Psa
130:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001). The perfect קראתי is not a
preterite,

(Note: The perfects are so viewed by Ngelsbach, who also thinks that the
speaker, in [Lam 3:55-58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055), thanks the
Lord for deliverance from the pit, and in [Lam
3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055) reminds the Lord of the prayer he
has addressed to Him out of the pit. But could he possibly think that
the Lord had forgotten this? What, we should like to know, would be the
use of this reminder, even if 'תּעלם וגו, [Lam
3:56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056), could be taken as the words of
address to the Lord? For we can discover no thanksgiving in [Lam
3:55-58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055). This whole mode of viewing
the passage breaks down before [Lam
3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059) : "Thou hast seen mine
oppression; judge me!" For, if the perfects in [Lam
3:55-58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055) are preterites, then also
ראיתה, [Lam 3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059), can only be a
preterite; and the prophet can only be speaking of injustice that has
been done him previously: hence he cannot add thereto the request,
"Judge me," inasmuch as the Lord (according to Ngelsbach) has already
judged him by delivering him from the pit. Moreover, it is quite
arbitrary to understand the perfects in [Lam
3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059) and [Lam
3:62](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#062) as referring to what has been
done and is still being done to the speaker by his enemies, if it be
agreed that the perfects in [Lam
3:55-58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055) refer only to past events.)

but expresses what has already happened, and still happens. This is
evident from the fact that the corresponding perfect, שׁמעתּ, [Lam
3:56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056), is continued by the optative
אל־תּעלם. בּור תּחתּיּות is taken from [Psa
88:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#007) : "pit of the lower regions of
the earth,"-the תּחתּיּות ארץ, [Psa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#010); [Eze
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#018), [Eze
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#024), i.e., Sheol, essentially the
same with מהשׁכּים, [Lam 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#006), which is
thereby connected with [Psa 88:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#007), -
the dark regions of the depth, whose open mouth is the grave for every
one (see Delitzsch on Psalms, l.c.), hence the symbol of mortal danger.

[Lam 3:56-66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056)

"Thou hast heard my voice" expresses the full assurance of faith from
which the request comes: "Cover not Thine ear from my sighing." רוחה,
"breathing out again;" in [Eze 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#011),
mitigation of oppression, yet not here respiratio, relaxatio (C. B.
Michaelis, Rosenmller, etc.), - since the asyndetic לשׁועתי does not
accord with such an interpretation, - but a relieving of oneself by
means of deeply-drawn sighs, as in [Job
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#020); hence "sighing," as Luther has
already rendered it, following the Vulgate: ne avertas aurem tuum a
singultu meo (Thenius, Gerlach, etc.). - In [Lam
3:57](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#057) and [Lam
3:58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#058), the writer still more fully
expresses his confidence that the Lord will accept him. "Thou art near
on the day when I call on Thee" is a sentence found in [Psa
145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018), and uttered as the experience
of all believers. "Thou sayest, Fear not," i.e., Thou assurest me of
Thine assistance; cf. [Jer 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008), [Jer
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017), etc. "Thou dost conduct the
causes (Ger. Streitsachen) of my soul" (ריבי נפשׁי), i.e., not merely
"my lawsuits," but causas quae vitam et salutem meam concernunt (C. B.
Michaelis). This is shown by the parallel member, "Thou redeemest my
life," sc. from the destruction which threatens it; cf. [Lam
3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053)., [Psa
103:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#004). With this is connected the
request in [Lam 3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059), "Thou dost
certainly see my oppression" (עוּתה from עוּת, to bend, oppress), the
oppression which I suffer; "judge my cause," i.e., help me in my cause,
cf. [Jer 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028). The suppliant bases
this request, [Lam 3:60-62](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#060), on the
recollection that God, as the Omniscient One, knows the plans and
intentions of his opponents. "Thou seest all their plans for revenge."
נקמה is not here the outcome of revenge, but the thought of revenge
cherished in the heart; it does not, however, mean desire of revenge, or
revengeful disposition, but simply the thinking and meditating on
revenge, which certainly has the spirit of revenge for its basis, but is
not identical with this. Their thoughts are the plans of vengeance.
,ליdat. incomm., "to my hurt;" the reading עלי of some codices is simply
a correction after [Lam 3:61](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#061). This
revenge they express in reproaches and invectives. שׂפתי, "lips," for
utterances of the lips; and קמי as in [Psa
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040), [Psa
18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049) = קמים עלי, [Psa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003), etc. שׂפתי קמי corresponds to
חרפּתם, and חגיונם to מחשׁבתם, [Lam
3:61](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#061); and the whole of [Lam
3:62](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#062) still depends on "Thou hearest,"
without any need for supplying היוּ, as Rosenmller does. Thenius and
Ngelsbach would combine [Lam 3:62](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#062) with
63, and make the former dependent on הבּיטה; but this is unsuitable, nor
do they consider that utterances or words are not seen (הבּיט), but
heard (שׁמע). With this proposed combination there falls to the ground
the further remark of Thenius, that "by lips, devising, sitting, rising
up, are meant the conversation and consultation of the enemies one with
another." Sitting and rising up have nothing in common with speaking
about any subject, but merely form a circumlocution for action
generally: cf. [Psa 139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002); [Deu
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007); [Deu
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#019); [Isa
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#028). The form מנגּינה for נגינה
occurs nowhere else: Ewald considers it a form that has been lengthened
for the purpose of designating a mocking song - "Sing-song." This
supposition has at least more to recommend it than the ingenious but
worthless idea of Bttcher, that מנגּינה is contracted from מה־נגינה,
"what a stringed instrument am I to them;" but it also is improbable.
מנגּינה is the subject of the נגינה, as words formed with מ often
express merely the subject of the idea contained in a noun or verb; cf.
Ewald, 160, b, 3. After this statement of the hostile treatment which
the speaker has to suffer, there follows the renewed and further
extended request that God may reward the foes according to their deeds.
תּשׁיב, "Thou shalt return," is a confident expression of the request
that God would do this; hence the optative תּתּן follows in [Lam
3:65](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#065). In [Lam
3:64](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#064) is condensed the substance of
what is contained in [Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004). מגנּת
לב, covering (veil) of the heart, - an expression analogous to the
κάλυμμα ἐπὶ τὴν καρδίαν, [Co2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015), -
is not obduration, or hardening, but blinding of the heart, which casts
into destruction; but it can scarcely signify "madness" (Delitzsch,
Bibl. Psychology, Clark's translation), since the Arabic majannat,
insania, furor, has probably received this meaning from jinn, genius,
daemon; cf. Gesenius, Thes. s. v., and Rosenmller, ad h. l. "Thy curse
to them!" is not to be viewed as dependent on "give," but to be
explained in accordance with Ps. 3:9, "Thy blessing \[be\] upon Thy
people!" - thus, "May Thy curse be their portion!" The curse of God is
followed by destruction. "Destroy them from under Jahveh's heaven!"
i.e., not merely ut non sint amplius sub caelis (C. B. Michaelis),
because יהוה is not considered in this latter rendering. The heaven of
Jahveh is the whole world, over which Jahveh's authority extends; the
meaning therefore is, "Exterminate them wholly from the sphere of Thy
dominion in the world," or, Thy kingdom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 4](lam004)

</div>
