<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev005)  [Next](lev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 6:0</span></span>

2\. Special Instructions Concerning the Sacrifices for the Priests -
Leviticus 6-7

The instructions contained in these two chapters were made known to
"Aaron and his sons" ([Lev 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009), [Lev
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020), [Lev
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025)), i.e., to the priests, and
relate to the duties and rights which devolved upon, and pertained to,
the priests in relation to the sacrifices. Although many of the
instructions are necessarily repeated from the general regulations, as
to the different kinds of sacrifice and the mode of presenting them;
most of them are new, and of great importance in relation to the
institution of sacrifice generally.

[Leviticus 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 6:1</span></span>

(Ch. 5:14-6:7)

(Note: In the original the division of verses in the Hebrew text is
followed; but we have thought it better to keep to the arrangement
adopted in our English version. - Tr.)

The Trespass-Offerings. - These were presented for special sins, by
which a person had contracted guilt, and therefore they are not included
in the general festal sacrifices. Three kinds of offences are mentioned
in this section as requiring trespass-offerings. The first is, "if a
soul commit a breach of trust, and sin in going wrong in the holy gifts
of Jehovah." מעל, lit., to cover, hence מעיל the cloak, over-coat,
signifies to act secretly, unfaithfully, especially against Jehovah,
either by falling away from Him into idolatry, by which the fitting
honour was withheld from Jehovah ([Lev
26:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#040); [Deu
32:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#051); [Jos
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016)), or by infringing upon His
rights, abstracting something that rightfully belonged to Him. Thus in
[Jos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001); [Jos
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020), it is applied to fraud in
relation to that which had been put under the ban; and in [Num
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#012), [Num
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#027),it is also applied to a married
woman's unfaithfulness to her husband: so that sin was called מעל, when
regarded as a violation of existing rights. "The holy things of Jehovah"
were the holy gifts, sacrifices, first-fruits, tithes, etc., which were
to be offered to Jehovah, and were assigned by Him to the priests for
their revenue (see [Lev 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#022)). חטא
with מן is constructio praegnans: to sin in anything by taking away from
Jehovah that which belonged to Him. בּשׁגגה, in error (see [Lev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002)): i.e., in a forgetful or
negligent way. Whoever sinned in this way was to offer to the Lord as
his guilt (see [Lev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006)) a ram from
the flock without blemish for a trespass-offering (lit.,
guilt-offering), according to the estimate of Moses, whose place was
afterwards taken by the officiating priest ([Lev
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#012); [Num
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#016)). שׁקלים כּסף "money of
shekels," i.e., several shekels in amount, which Abenezra and others
have explained, no doubt correctly, as meaning that the ram was to be
worth more than one shekel, two shekels at least. The expression is
probably kept indefinite, for the purpose of leaving some margin for the
valuation, so that there might be a certain proportion between the value
of the ram and the magnitude of the trespass committed (see Oehler ut
sup. p. 645). "In the holy shekel:" see [Exo
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013). At the same time, the culprit
was to make compensation for the fraud committed in the holy thing, and
add a fifth (of the value) over, as in the case of the redemption of the
first-born, of the vegetable tithe, or of what had been vowed to God
([Lev 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#027), [Lev
27:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#031), and [Lev
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#013), [Lev
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#015), [Lev
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#019)). The ceremony to be observed in
the offering of the ram is described in [Lev
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#001). It was the same as that of the
sin-offerings, whose blood was not brought into the holy place, except
with regard to the sprinkling of the blood, and in this the
trespass-offering resembled the burnt-offerings and peace-offerings.

The second case ([Lev 5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#017)), from
its very position between the other two, which both refer to the
violation of rights, must belong to the same category; although the sin
is introduced with the formula used in [Lev
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027) in connection with those sins
which were to be expiated by a sin-offering. But the violation of right
can only have consisted in an invasion of Jehovah's rights with regard
to Israel, and not, as Knobel supposes, in an invasion of the rights of
private Israelites, as distinguished from the priests; an antithesis of
which there is not the slightest indication. This is evident from the
fact, that the case before us is linked on to the previous one without
anything intervening; whereas the next case, which treats of the
violation of the rights of a neighbour, is separated by a special
introductory formula. The expression, "and wist it not," refers to
ignorance of the sin, and not of the divine commands; as may be clearly
seen from [Lev 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#018) : "the priest
shall make an atonement for him concerning his error, which he committed
without knowing it." The trespass-offering was the same as in the former
case, and was also to be valued by the priest; but no compensation is
mentioned, probably because the violation of right, which consisted in
the transgression of one of the commands of God, was of such a kind as
not to allow of material compensation. The third case ([Lev
6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)) is distinguished from the other
two by a new introductory formula. The sin and unfaithfulness to Jehovah
are manifested in this case in a violation of the rights of a neighbour.
"If a man deny to his neighbour (כּחשׁ with a double ב obj., to deny a
thing to a person) a pikkadon (i.e., a deposit, a thing entrusted to him
to keep, [Gen 41:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#036)), or יד תּשׂוּמת,
"a thing placed in his hand" (handed over to him as a pledge) "or גּזל,
a thing robbed" (i.e., the property of a neighbour unjustly
appropriated, whether a well, a field, or cattle, [Gen
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#025); [Mic
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#002); [Job
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#002)), "or if he have oppressed his
neighbour" (i.e., forced something from him or withheld it unjustly,
[Lev 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013); [Deu
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014); [Jos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#008); [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005)), "or have found a lost thing and
denies it, and thereby swears to his lie" (i.e., rests his oath upon a
lie), "on account of one of all that a man is accustomed to do to sin
therewith:" the false swearing here refers not merely to a denial of
what is found, but to all the crimes mentioned, which originated in
avarice and selfishness, but through the false swearing became frauds
against Jehovah, adding guilt towards God to the injustice done to the
neighbour, and requiring, therefore, not only that a material
restitution should be made to the neighbour, but that compensation
should be made to God as well. Whatever had been robbed, or taken by
force, or entrusted or found, and anything about which a man had sworn
falsely ([Lev 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004), [Lev
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005)), was to be restored "according to
its sum" (cf. [Exo 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012); [Num
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#002), etc.), i.e., in its full value;
beside which, he was to "add its fifths" (on the plural, see Ges. 87, 2;
Ew. 186 e), i.e., in every one of the things abstracted or withheld
unjustly the fifth part of the value was to be added to the full amount
(as in [Lev 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016)). "To him to whom it
(belongs), shall he give it" אשׁמתו בּיום: in the day when he makes
atonement for his trespass, i.e., offers his trespass-offering. The
trespass (guilt) against Jehovah was to be taken away by the
trespass-offering according to the valuation of the priest, as in [Lev
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015), [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016), and [Lev
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#018), that he might receive expiation
and forgiveness on account of what he had done.

If now, in order to obtain a clear view of the much canvassed difference
between the sin-offerings and trespass-offerings,

(Note: For the different views, see Bhr's Symbolik; Winer's bibl. R. W.;
Kurtz on Sacrificial Worship; Riehm, theol. Stud. und Krit. 1854, pp.
93ff.; Rinck, id. 1855, p. 369; Oehler in Herzog's Cycl.)

we look at once at the other cases, for which trespass-offerings were
commanded in the law; we find in [Num
5:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#005) not only a trespass against
Jehovah, but an unjust withdrawal of the property of a neighbour,
clearly mentioned as a crime, for which material compensation was to be
made with the addition of a fifth of its value, just as in [Lev
5:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002) of the present chapter. So also
the guilt of a man who had lain with the slave of another ([Lev
19:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#020)) did not come into the
ordinary category of adultery, but into that of an unjust invasion of
the domain of another's property; though in this case, as the crime
could not be estimated in money, instead of material compensation being
made, a civil punishment (viz., bodily scourging) was to be inflicted;
and for the same reason nothing is said about the valuation of the
sacrificial ram. Lastly, in the trespass-offerings for the cleansing of
a leper ([Lev 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#012).), or of a
Nazarite who had been defiled by a corpse ([Num
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#012)), it is true we cannot show in
what definite way the rights of Jehovah were violated (see the
explanation of these passages), but the sacrifices themselves served to
procure the restoration of the persons in question to certain covenant
rights which they had lost; so that even here the trespass-offering, for
which moreover only a male sheep was demanded, was to be regarded as a
compensation or equivalent for the rights to be restored. From all these
cases it is perfectly evident, that the idea of satisfaction for a
right, which had been violated but was about to be restored or
recovered, lay at the foundation of the trespass-offering,

(Note: Even in the case of the trespass-offering, which those who had
taken heathen wives offered at Ezra's instigation ([Ezr
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#018).), it had reference to a
trespass (cf. vv. 2 and 10), an act of unfaithfulness to Jehovah, which
demanded satisfaction. And so again the Philistines ([Sa1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#003).), when presenting gifts as a
trespass-offering for Jehovah, rendered satisfaction for the robbery
committed upon Him by the removal of the ark of the covenant.)

and the ritual also points to this. The animal sacrificed was always a
ram, except in the cases mentioned in [Lev
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#012). and [Num
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#012). This fact alone clearly
distinguishes the trespass-offerings from the sin-offerings, for which
all kinds of sacrifices were offered from an ox to a pigeon, the choice
of the animal being regulated by the position of the sinner and the
magnitude of his sin. But they are distinguished still more by the fact,
that in the case of all the sin-offerings the blood was to be put upon
the horns of the altar, or even taken into the sanctuary itself, whereas
the blood of the trespass-offerings, like that of the burnt and
peace-offerings, was merely swung against the wall of the altar ([Lev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#002)). Lastly, they were also
distinguished by the fact, that in the trespass-offering the ram was in
most instances to be valued by the priest, not for the purpose of
determining its actual value, which could not vary very materially in
rams of the same kind, but to fix upon it symbolically the value of the
trespass for which compensation was required. Hence there can be no
doubt, that as the idea of the expiation of sin, which was embodied in
the sprinkling of the blood, was most prominent in the sin-offering; so
the idea of satisfaction for the restoration of rights that had been
violated or disturbed came into the foreground in the trespass-offering.
This satisfaction was to be actually made, wherever the guilt admitted
of a material valuation, by means of payment or penance; and in addition
to this, the animal was raised by the priestly valuation into the
authorized bearer of the satisfaction to be rendered to the rights of
God, through the sacrifice of which the culprit could obtain the
expiation of his guilt.

[Leviticus 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 6:8</span></span>

(Heb. vv. 1-6). The Law of the Burnt-Offering commences the series, and
special reference is made to the daily burnt-offering ([Exo
29:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)).

[Lev 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)

"It, the burnt-offering, shall (burn) upon the hearth upon the altar the
whole night till the morning, and the fire of the altar be kept burning
with it." The verb תּוּקד is wanting in the first clause, and only
introduced in the second; but it belongs to the first clause as well.
The pronoun הוא at the opening of the sentence cannot stand for the verb
to be in the imperative. The passages, which Knobel adduces in support
of this, are of a totally different kind. The instructions apply
primarily to the burnt-offering, which was offered every evening, and
furnished the basis for all the burnt-offerings ([Exo
29:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038); [Num
33:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#003)).

[Lev 6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010)

In the morning of every day the priest was to put on his linen dress
(see [Exo 28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042)) and the white
drawers, and lift off, i.e., clear away, the ashes to which the fire had
consumed the burnt-offering upon the altar (אכל is construed with a
double accusative, to consume the sacrifice to ashes), and pour them
down beside the altar (see [Lev 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#016)).
The ו in מדּו is not to be regarded as the old form of the connecting
vowel, as in [Gen 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024) (Ewald, 211 b;
see Ges. 90, 3b), but as the suffix, as in [Sa2
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#008), although the use of the suffix
with the governing noun in the construct state can only be found in
other cases in the poetical writings (cf. Ges. 121 b; Ewald, 291 b). He
was then to take off his official dress, and having put on other
(ordinary) clothes, to take away the ashes from the court, and carry
them out of the camp to a clean place. The priest was only allowed to
approach the altar in his official dress; but he could not go out of the
camp with this.

[Leviticus 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 6:12</span></span>

The fire of the altar was also to be kept burning "with it" (בּו, viz.,
the burnt-offering) the whole day through without going out. For this
purpose the priest was to burn wood upon it (the altar-fire), and lay
the burnt-offering in order upon it, and cause the fat portions of the
peace-offerings to ascend in smoke, - that is to say, whenever
peace-offerings were brought, for they were not prescribed for every
day.

[Leviticus 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 6:13</span></span>

Fire was to be kept constantly burning upon the altar without going out,
not in order that the heavenly fire, which proceeded from Jehovah when
Aaron and his sons first entered upon the service of the altar after
their consecration, and consumed the burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings, might never be extinguished (see at [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024)); but that the burnt-offering
might never go out, because this was the divinely appointed symbol and
visible sign of the uninterrupted worship of Jehovah, which the covenant
nation could never suspend either day or night, without being unfaithful
to its calling. For the same reason other nations also kept perpetual
fire burning upon the altars of their principal gods. (For proofs, see
Rosenmller and Knobel ad h. l.)

[Leviticus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 6:14</span></span>

The Law of the Meat-Offering. - The regulations in [Lev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014), [Lev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015), are merely a repetition of [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002) and [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003); but in [Lev
6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016) the new instructions are
introduced with regard to what was left and had not been burned upon the
altar. The priests were to eat this as unleavened, i.e., to bake it
without leaven, and to eat it in a holy place, viz., in the court of the
tabernacle. תּאכל מצות in [Lev 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016) is
explained by "it shall not be baken with leaven" in [Lev
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#017). It was the priests' share of the
firings of Jehovah (see [Lev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009)), and
as such it was most holy (see [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003)), like the sin-offering and
trespass-offering ([Lev 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025), [Lev
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026); [Lev
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#006)), and only to be eaten by the male
members of the families of the priests. This was to be maintained as a
statute for ever (see at [Lev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017)).
Every one that touches them (the most holy offerings) becomes holy."
יקדּשׁ does not mean he shall be holy, or shall sanctify himself (lxx,
Vulg., Luth., a Lap., etc.), nor he is consecrated to the sanctuary and
is to perform service there (Theodor., Knobel, and others). In this
provision, which was equally applicable to the sin-offering ([Lev
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#027)), to the altar of the
burnt-offering ([Exo 29:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#037)), and to
the most holy vessels of the tabernacle ([Exo
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#029)), the word is not to be
interpreted by [Num 17:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#002), or [Deu
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009), or by the expression "shall be
holy" in [Lev 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#010), [Lev
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#021), and [Num
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#010), but by [Isa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005), "touch me not, for I am holy."
The idea is this, every layman who touched these most holy things became
holy through the contact, so that henceforth he had to guard against
defilement in the same manner as the sanctified priests ([Lev
21:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)), though without sharing the
priestly rights and prerogatives. This necessarily placed him in a
position which would involve many inconveniences in connection with
ordinary life.

[Leviticus 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 6:19</span></span>

The Meat-Offering of the Priests is introduced, as a new law, with a
special formula, and is inserted here in its proper place in the
sacrificial instructions given for the priests, as it would have been
altogether out of place among the general laws for the laity. In "the
day of his anointing" (המּשׁח, construed as a passive with the
accusative as in [Gen 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018)), Aaron and
his sons were to offer a corban as "a perpetual meat-offering" (minchah,
in the absolute instead of the construct state: cf. [Exo
29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042); [Num
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#006); see Ges. 116, 6, Note b); and
this was to be done in all future time by "the priest who was anointed
of his sons in his stead," that is to say, by every high priest at the
time of his consecration. "In the day of his anointing:" when the
anointing was finished, the seven were designated as "the day," like the
seven days of creation in [Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004).
This minchah was not offered during the seven days of the anointing
itself, but after the consecration was finished, i.e., in all
probability, as the Jewish tradition assumes, at the beginning of the
eighth day, when the high priest entered upon his office, viz., along
with the daily morning sacrifices ([Exo
29:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)), and before the offering
described in Lev 9. It then continued to be offered, as "a perpetual
minchah," every morning and evening during the whole term of his office,
according to the testimony of the book of Wis. (45:14, where we cannot
suppose the daily burnt-offering to be intended) and also of Josephus
(Ant. 3:10, 7).

(Note: Vid., Lundius, jd. Heiligthmer, B. 3, c 9, 17 and 19; Thalhofer
ut supra, p. 139; and Delitzsch on the Epistle to the Hebrews. The text
evidently enjoins the offering of this minchah upon Aaron alone; for
though Aaron and his sons are mentioned in [Lev
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013), as they were consecrated
together, in [Lev 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015) the priest
anointed of his sons in Aaron's stead, i.e., the successor of Aaron in
the high-priesthood, is commanded to offer it. Consequently the view
maintained by Maimonides, Abarbanel, and others, which did not become
general even among the Rabbins, viz., that every ordinary priest was
required to offer this meat-offering when entering upon his office, has
no solid foundation in the law (see Selden de success. in pontif. ii. c.
9; L' Empereur ad Middoth 1, 4, Not. 8; and Thalhofer, p. 150).)

It was to consist of the tenth of an ephah of fine flour, one half of
which was to be presented in the morning, the other in the evening; -
not as flour, however, but made in a pan with oil, "roasted" and פּתּים
מנחת ני תּפי ("broken pieces of a minchah of crumbs"), i.e., in broken
pieces, like a minchah composed of crumbs. מרבּכת ([Lev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014) and [Ch1
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#029)) is no doubt synonymous with
מרבּכת סלת, and to be understood as denoting fine flour sufficiently
burned or roasted in oil; the meaning mixed or mingled does not
harmonise with [Lev 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012), where the
mixing or kneading with oil is expressed by בּשּׁמן בּלוּלת. The hapax
legomenon תּפיני signifies either broken or baked, according as we
suppose the word to be derived from the Arabic 'afana diminuit, or, as
Gesenius and the Rabbins do, from אפה to bake, a point which can hardly
be decided with certainty. This minchah, which was also instituted as a
perpetual ordinance, was to be burnt entirely upon the altar, like every
meat-offering presented by a priest, because it belonged to the category
of the burnt-offerings, and of these meat-offerings the offerer himself
had no share ([Lev 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003), [Lev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#010)). Origen observes in his homil.
iv. in Levit.: In caeteris quidem praeceptis pontifex in offerendis
sacrificiis populo praebet officium, in hoc vero mandato quae propria
sunt curat et quod ad se spectat exequitur. It is also to be observed
that the high priest was to offer only a bloodless minchah for himself,
and not a bleeding sacrifice, which would have pointed to expiation. As
the sanctified of the Lord, he was to draw near to the Lord every day
with a sacrificial gift, which shadowed forth the fruits of
sanctification.

[Leviticus 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 6:24</span></span>

The Law of the Sin-Offering, which is introduced with a new introductory
formula on account of the interpolation of [Lev
6:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019), gives more precise
instructions, though chiefly with regard to the sin-offerings of the
laity, first as to the place of slaughtering, as in [Lev
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#024), and then as to the most holy
character of the flesh and blood of the sacrifices. The flesh of these
sin-offerings was to be eaten by the priest who officiated at a holy
place, in the fore-court (see [Lev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016)). Whoever touched it became holy
(see at [Lev 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018)); and if any one
sprinkled any of the blood upon his clothes, whatever the blood was
sprinkled upon was to be washed in a holy place, in order that the most
holy blood might not be carried out of the sanctuary into common life
along with the sprinkled clothes, and thereby be profaned. The words
"thou shalt wash" in [Lev 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020) are
addressed to the priest.

[Leviticus 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 6:28</span></span>

The flesh was equally holy. The vessel, in which it was boiled for the
priests to eat, was to be broken in pieces if it were of earthenware,
and scoured (מרק Pual) and overflowed with water, i.e., thoroughly
rinsed out, if it were of copper, lest any of the most holy flesh should
adhere to the vessel, and be desecrated by its being used in the
preparation of common food, or for other earthly purposes. It was
possible to prevent this desecration in the case of copper vessels by a
thorough cleansing; but not so with earthen vessels, which absorb the
fat, so that it cannot be removed by washing. The latter therefore were
to be broken in pieces, i.e., thoroughly destroyed. On the other hand,
earthen vessels that had been defiled were also ordered to be broken to
pieces, though for the very opposite reason (see [Lev
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#033), [Lev
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#035)).

[Leviticus 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 6:29</span></span>

The flesh of the sin-offering was to be eaten after it had been boiled,
like the meat-offering ([Lev 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016) and
[Lev 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018)), by the males among the
priests alone. But this only applied to the sin-offerings the laity (Lev
4:22-5:13). The flesh of the sin-offerings for the high priest and the
whole congregation (Lev 4:1-21), the blood of which was brought into the
tabernacle "to make atonement in the sanctuary," i.e., that the
expiation with the blood might be completed there, was not to be eaten,
but to be burned with fire ([Lev 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#012),
[Lev 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#021)). - On the signification of
this act of eating the flesh of the sin-offering, see at [Lev
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 7](lev007)

</div>
