<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev023)  [Next](lev025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#001)

[Leviticus 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 24:1</span></span>

The directions concerning the oil for the holy candlestick ([Lev
24:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#001)) and the preparation of the
shew-bread ([Lev 24:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005)) lose the
appearance of an interpolation, when we consider and rightly understand
on the one hand the manner in which the two are introduced in [Lev
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#002), and on the other their
significance in relation to the worship of God. The introductory
formula, "Command the children of Israel that they fetch (bring)," shows
that the command relates to an offering on the part of the congregation,
a sacrificial gift, with which Israel was to serve the Lord continually.
This service consisted in the fact, that in the oil of the lamps of the
seven-branched candlestick, which burned before Jehovah, the nation of
Israel manifested itself as a congregation which caused its light to
shine in the darkness of this world; and that in the shew-bread it
offered the fruits of its labour in the field of the kingdom of God, as
a spiritual sacrifice to Jehovah. The offering of oil, therefore, for
the preparation of the candlestick, and that of fine flour for making
the loaves to be placed before Jehovah, formed part of the service in
which Israel sanctified its life and labour to the Lord its God, not
only at the appointed festal periods, but every day; and the law is very
appropriately appended to the sanctification of the Sabbaths and
feast-days, prescribed in ch. 23. The first instructions in [Lev
24:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#002) are a verbal repetition of [Exo
27:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020), and have been explained
already. Their execution by Aaron is recorded at [Num
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001); and the candlestick itself was
set in order by Moses at the consecration of the tabernacle ([Exo
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#025)).

[Leviticus 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 24:5</span></span>

The preparation of the shew-bread and the use to be made of it are
described here for the first time; though it had already been offered by
the congregation at the consecration of the tabernacle, and placed by
Moses upon the table ([Exo 39:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#036); [Exo
40:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#023)). Twelve cakes (challoth, [Lev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004)) were to be made of fine flour, of
two-tenths of an ephah each, and placed in two rows, six in each row,
upon the golden table before Jehovah ([Exo
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023).). Pure incense was then to be
added to each row, which was to be (to serve) as a memorial (Azcarah,
see [Lev 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002)), as a firing for
Jehovah. על נתן to give upon, to add to, does not force us to the
conclusion that the incense was to be spread upon the cakes; but is
easily reconcilable with the Jewish tradition (Josephus, Ant. iii. 10,
7; Mishnah, Menach. xi. 7, 8), that the incense was placed in golden
saucers with each row of bread. The number twelve corresponded to the
number of the twelve tribes of Israel. The arrangement of the loaves in
rows of six each was in accordance with the shape of the table, just
like the division of the names of the twelve tribes upon the two
precious stones on Aaron's shoulder-dress ([Exo
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#010)). By the presentation or
preparation of them from the fine flour presented by the congregation,
and still more by the addition of incense, which was burned upon the
altar every Sabbath on the removal of the loaves as azcarah, i.e., as a
practical memento of the congregation before God, the laying out of
these loaves assumed the form of a bloodless sacrifice, in which the
congregation brought the fruit of its life and labour before the face of
the Lord, and presented itself to its God as a nation diligent in
sanctification to good works. If the shew-bread was a minchah, or
meat-offering, and even a most holy one, which only the priests were
allowed to eat in the holy place ([Lev
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#009), cf. [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003) and [Lev
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009)), it must naturally have been
unleavened, as the unanimous testimony of the Jewish tradition affirms
it to have been. And if as a rule no meat-offering could be leavened,
and of the loaves of first-fruits prepared for the feast of Pentecost,
which were actually leavened, none was allowed to be placed upon the
altar ([Lev 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011); [Lev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010)); still less could leavened bread
be brought into the sanctuary before Jehovah. The only ground,
therefore, on which Knobel can maintain that those loaves were leavened,
is on the supposition that they were intended to represent the daily
bread, which could no more fail in the house of Jehovah than in any
other well-appointed house (see Bhr, Symbolik i. p. 410). The process of
laying these loaves before Jehovah continually was to be "an everlasting
covenant" ([Lev 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#008)), i.e., a pledge
or sign of the everlasting covenant, just as circumcision, as the
covenant in the flesh, was to be an everlasting covenant ([Gen
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013)).

[Leviticus 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 24:10</span></span>

The account of the Punishment of a Blasphemer is introduced in the midst
of the laws, less because "it brings out to view by a clear example the
administration of the divine law in Israel, and also introduces and
furnishes the reason for several important laws" (Baumgarten), than
because the historical occurrence itself took place at the time when the
laws relating to sanctification of life before the Lord were given,
whilst the punishment denounced against the blasphemer exhibited in a
practical form, as a warning to the whole nation, the sanctification of
the Lord in the despisers of His name. The circumstances were the
following: - The son of an Israelitish woman named Shelomith, the
daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan, and of an Egyptian whom the
Israelitish woman had married, went out into the midst of the children
of Israel, i.e., went out of his tent or place of encampment among the
Israelites. As the son of an Egyptian, he belonged to the foreigners who
had gone out with Israel ([Exo 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038)),
and who probably had their tents somewhere apart from those of the
Israelites, who were encamped according to their tribes ([Num
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002)). Having got into a quarrel with
an Israelite, this man scoffed at the name (of Jehovah) and cursed. The
cause of the quarrel is not given, and cannot be determined. נקב: to
bore, hollow out, then to sting, metaphorically to separate, fix ([Gen
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#028)), hence to designate ([Num
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017), etc.), and to prick in malam
partem, to taunt, i.e., to blaspheme, curse, = קבב [Num
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#011), [Num
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#025), etc. That the word is used here
in a bad sense, is evident from the expression "and cursed," and from
the whole context of [Lev 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#015) and
[Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016). The Jews, on the other
hand, have taken the word נקב in this passage from time immemorial in
the sense of ἐπονομάζειν (lxx), and founded upon it the well-known law,
against even uttering the name Jehovah (see particularly [Lev
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016)). "The name" κατ ̓ ἐξ. is the
name "Jehovah" (cf. [Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016)), in
which God manifested His nature. It was this passage that gave rise to
the custom, so prevalent among the Rabbins, of using the expression
"name," or "the name," for Dominus, or Deus (see Buxtorf, lex. talmud.
pp. 2432ff.). The blasphemer was brought before Moses and then put into
confinement, "to determine for them (such blasphemers) according to the
mouth (command) of Jehovah." פּרשׁ: to separate, distinguish, then to
determine exactly, which is the sense both here and in [Num
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#034), where it occurs in a similar
connection.

[Leviticus 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 24:13</span></span>

Jehovah ordered the blasphemer to be taken out of the camp, and the
witnesses to lay their hands upon his head, and the whole congregation
to stone him; and published at the same time the general law, that
whoever cursed his God should bear (i.e., atone for) his sin (cf. [Exo
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027)), and whoever blasphemed the
name of Jehovah should be stoned, the native as well as the foreigner.
By laying (resting, cf. [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004))
their hands upon the head of the blasphemer, the hearers or witnesses
were to throw off from themselves the blasphemy which they had heard,
and return it upon the head of the blasphemer, for him to expiate. The
washing of hands in [Deu 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#006) is
analogous; but the reference made by Knobel to [Deu
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007), where the witnesses are
commanded to turn their hand against an idolater who had been condemned
to death, i.e., to stone him, is out of place.

[Leviticus 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 24:17</span></span>

The decision asked for from God concerning the crime of the blasphemer,
who was the son of an Egyptian, and therefore not a member of the
congregation of Jehovah, furnished the occasion for God to repeat those
laws respecting murder or personal injury inflicted upon a man, which
had hitherto been given for the Israelites alone ([Exo
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012).), and to proclaim their
validity in the case of the foreigner also ([Lev
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#017), [Lev
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#021), [Lev
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#022)). To these there are appended
the kindred commandments concerning the killing of cattle ([Lev
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#018), [Lev
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#021), [Lev
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#022)), which had not been given, it
is true, expressis verbis, but were contained implicite in the rights of
Israel ([Exo 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#033).), and are also
extended to foreigners. אדם נפשׁ הכּה, to smite the soul of a man, i.e.,
to put him to death; - the expression "soul of a beast," in [Lev
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#018), is to be understood in the same
sense.

[Leviticus 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 24:19</span></span>

"Cause a blemish," i.e., inflict a bodily injury. This is still further
defined in the cases mentioned (breach, eye, tooth), in which punishment
was to be inflicted according to the jus talionis (see at [Exo
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#023).).

[Leviticus 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 24:23</span></span>

After these laws had been issued, the punishment was inflicted upon the
blasphemer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 25](lev025)

</div>
