<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev011)  [Next](lev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 12:0</span></span>

Laws of Purification - Leviticus 12-15

The laws concerning defilement through eating unclean animals, or
through contact with those that had died a natural death, are followed
by rules relating to defilements proceeding from the human body, in
consequence of which persons contaminated by them were excluded for a
longer or shorter period from the fellowship of the sanctuary, and
sometimes even from intercourse with their fellow-countrymen, and which
had to be removed by washing, by significant lustrations, and by
expiatory sacrifices. They comprised the uncleanness of a woman in
consequence of child-bearing ([Lev
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001)), leprosy (ch. 13 and 14), and
both natural and diseased secretions from the sexual organs of either
male or female (emissio seminis and gonorrhaea, also menses and flux:
ch. 15); and to these there is added in [Num
19:11-22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011), defilement proceeding from a
human corpse. Involuntary emission defiled the man; voluntary emission,
in sexual intercourse, both the man and the woman and any clothes upon
which it might come, for an entire day, and this defilement was to be
removed in the evening by bathing the body, and by washing the clothes,
etc. ([Lev 15:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#016)). Secretions from
the sexual organs, whether of a normal kind, such as the menses and
those connected with child-birth, or the result of disease, rendered not
only the persons affected with them unclean, but even their couches and
seats, and any persons who might sit down upon them; and this
uncleanness was even communicated to persons who touched those who were
diseased, or to anything with which they had come in contact ([Lev
15:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#003), [Lev
15:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019)). In the case of the menses,
the uncleanness lasted seven days ([Lev
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019), [Lev
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#024)); in that of child-birth, either
seven or fourteen days, and then still further thirty-three or
sixty-six, according to circumstances ([Lev
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002), [Lev
12:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004)); and in that of a diseased
flux, as long as the disease itself lasted, and seven days afterwards
([Lev 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#013), [Lev
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#028)); but the uncleanness
communicated to others only lasted till the evening. In all these cases
the purification consisted in the bathing of the body and washing of the
clothes and other objects. But if the uncleanness lasted more than seven
days, on the day after the purification with water a sin-offering and a
burnt-offering were to be offered, that the priest might pronounce the
person clean, or receive him once more into the fellowship of the holy
God ([Lev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006), [Lev
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008); [Lev
15:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#014), [Lev
15:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#029)). Leprosy made those who were
affected with it so unclean, that they were excluded from all
intercourse with the clean ([Lev
13:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045)): and on their recovery they
were to be cleansed by a solemn lustration, and received again with
sacrifices into the congregation of the Lord (Lev 14:1-32). There are no
express instructions as to the communicability of leprosy; but this is
implied in the separation of the leper from the clean ([Lev
13:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045)), as well as from the fact
that a house affected by the leprosy rendered all who entered it, or
slept in it, unclean ([Lev 14:46-47](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#046)).
The defilement caused by a death was apparently greater still. Not only
the corpse of a person who had died a natural death, as well as of one
who had been killed by violence, but a dead body or grave defiled, for a
period of seven days, both those who touched them, and (in the case of
the corpse) the house in which the man had died, all the persons who
were in it or might enter it, and all the open vessels that were there
([Num 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011), [Num
19:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014)). Uncleanness of this kind
could only be removed by sprinkling water prepared from running water
and the ashes of a sin-offering ([Num
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#012), [Num
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017).), and would even spread from
the persons defiled to persons and things with which they came in
contact, so as to render them unclean till the evening ([Num
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#022)); whereas the defilement caused
by contact with a dead animal lasted only a day, and then, like every
other kind of uncleanness that only lasted till the evening, could be
removed by bathing the persons or washing the things ([Lev
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#025).).

But whilst, according to this, generation and birth as well as death
were affected with uncleanness; generation and death, the coming into
being and the going out of being, were not defiling in themselves, or
regarded as the two poles which bound, determine, and enclose the finite
existence, so as to warrant us in tracing the principle which lay at the
foundation of the laws of purification, as Bhr supposes, "to the
antithesis between the infinite and the finite being, which falls into
the sphere of the sinful when regarded ethically as the opposite to the
absolutely holy." Finite existence was created by God, quite as much as
the corporeality of man; and both came forth from His hand pure and
good. Moreover it is not begetting, giving birth, and dying, that are
said to defile; but the secretions connected with generation and
child-bearing, and the corpses of those who had died. In the
decomposition which follows death, the effect of sin, of which death is
the wages, is made manifest in the body. Decomposition, as the
embodiment of the unholy nature of sin, is uncleanness κατ ̓ ἐξοχξήν;
and this the Israelite, who was called to sanctification in fellowship
with God, was to avoid and abhor. Hence the human corpse produced the
greatest amount of defilement; so great, in fact, that to remove it a
sprinkling water was necessary, which had been strengthened by the ashes
of a sin-offering into a kind of sacred alkali. Next to the corpse,
there came on the one hand leprosy, that bodily image of death which
produced all the symptoms of decomposition even in the living body, and
on the other hand the offensive secretions from the organs of
generation, which resemble the putrid secretions that are the signs in
the corpse of the internal dissolution of the bodily organs and the
commencement of decomposition. From the fact that the impurities, for
which special rites of purification were enjoined, are restricted to
these three forms of manifestation in the human body, it is very evident
that the laws of purification laid down in the O.T. were not regulations
for the promotion of cleanliness or of good morals and decency, that is
to say, were not police regulations for the protection of the life of
the body from contagious diseases and other things injurious to health;
but that their simple object was "to impress upon the mind a deep horror
of everything that is and is called death in the creature, and thereby
to foster an utter abhorrence of everything that is or is called sin,
and also, to the constant humiliation of fallen man, to remind him in
all the leading processes of the natural life-generation, birth, eating,
disease, death - how everything, even his own bodily nature, lies under
the curse of sin ([Gen 3:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)), that
so the law might become a 'schoolmaster to bring unto Christ,' and
awaken and sustain the longing for a Redeemer from the curse which had
fallen upon his body also (see [Gal
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024); [Rom
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024); [Rom
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019).; [Phi
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021))." Leyrer.

[Leviticus 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 12:1</span></span>

Uncleanness and Purification after Child-Birth. - [Lev
12:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002). "If a woman bring forth
(תּזריע) seed and bear a boy, she shall be unclean seven days as in the
days of the uncleanness of her (monthly) sickness." נדּה, from נדד to
flow, lit., that which is to flow, is applied more especially to the
uncleanness of a woman's secretions ([Lev
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019)). דּותהּ, inf. of דּוה, to be
sickly or ill, is applied here and in [Lev
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#033); [Lev
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018), to the suffering connected with
an issue of blood.

[Leviticus 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 12:3</span></span>

After the expiration of this period, on the eighth day, the boy was to
be circumcised (see at Gen 17). She was then to sit, i.e., remain at
home, thirty-three days in the blood of purification, without touching
anything holy or coming to the sanctuary (she was not to take any part,
therefore, in the sacrificial meals, the Passover, etc.), until the days
of her purification were full, i.e., had expired.

[Leviticus 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 12:5</span></span>

But if she had given birth to a girl, she was to be unclean two weeks
(14 days), as in her menstruation, and then after that to remain at home
66 days. The distinction between the seven (or fourteen) days of the
"separation for her infirmity," and the thirty-three (or sixty-six) days
of the "blood of her purifying," had a natural ground in the bodily
secretions connected with child-birth, which are stronger and have more
blood in them in the first week (lochia rubra) than the more watery
discharge of the lochia alba, which may last as much as five weeks, so
that the normal state may not be restored till about six weeks after the
birth of the child. The prolongation of the period, in connection with
the birth of a girl, was also founded upon the notion, which was very
common in antiquity, that the bleeding and watery discharge continued
longer after the birth of a girl than after that of a boy (Hippocr. Opp.
ed. Khn. i. p. 393; Aristot. h. an. 6, 22; 7, 3, cf. Burdach,
Physiologie iii. p. 34). But the extension of the period to 40 and 80
days can only be accounted for from the significance of the numbers,
which we meet with repeatedly, more especially the number forty (see at
[Exo 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018)).

[Leviticus 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 12:6</span></span>

After the expiration of the days of her purification "with regard to a
son or a daughter," i.e., according as she had given birth to a son or a
daughter (not for the son or daughter, for the woman needed purification
for herself, and not for the child to which she had given birth, and it
was the woman, not the child, that was unclean), she was to bring to the
priest a yearling lamb for a burnt-offering, and a young pigeon or
turtle-dove for a sin-offering, that he might make atonement for her
before Jehovah and she might become clean from the course of her issue.
שׁנתו בּן, lit., son of his year, which is a year old (cf. [Lev
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#012); [Num
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#012), [Num
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#014); [Num
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015), [Num
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#021), etc.), is used interchangeably
with שׁנה בּן ([Exo 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005)), and with
שׁנה בּני in the plural ([Lev
23:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#018); [Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038); [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017), [Num
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#023), [Num
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#029)). דּמים דּמור, fountain of
bleeding (see at [Gen 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)),
equivalent to hemorrhage (cf. [Lev
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018)). The purification by bathing
and washing is not specially mentioned, as being a matter of course; nor
is anything stated with reference to the communication of her
uncleanness to persons who touched either her or her couch, since the
instructions with regard to the period of menstruation no doubt applied
to the first seven and fourteen days respectively. For her restoration
to the Lord and His sanctuary, she was to come and be cleansed with a
sin-offering and a burnt-offering, on account of the uncleanness in
which the sin of nature had manifested itself; because she had been
obliged to absent herself in consequence for a whole week from the
sanctuary and fellowship of the Lord. But as this purification had
reference, not to any special moral guilt, but only to sin which had
been indirectly manifested in her bodily condition, a pigeon was
sufficient for the sin-offering, that is to say, the smallest of the
bleeding sacrifices; whereas a yearling lamb was required for a
burnt-offering, to express the importance and strength of her surrender
of herself to the Lord after so long a separation from Him. But in cases
of great poverty a pigeon might be substituted for the lamb ([Lev
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008), cf. [Lev
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007), [Lev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 13](lev013)

</div>
