<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev000)  [Next](lev002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

I. Laws and Ordinances Determining the Covenant Fellowship Between the
Lord and Israel - Leviticus 1-16

The Laws of Sacrifice - Leviticus 1-7

When the glory of the Lord had entered the tabernacle in a cloud, God
revealed Himself to Moses from this place of His gracious presence,
according to His promise in [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022), to make known His sacred will
through him to the people ([Lev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)).
The first of these revelations related to the sacrifices, in which the
Israelites were to draw near to Him, that they might become partakers of
His grace.

(Note: Works relating to the sacrifices: Guil. Outram de sacrificiis
libri duo, Amst. 1688; Bhr, Symbolik des mos. Cultus ii. pp. 189ff.;
Kurtz on the Sacrificial Worship of the Old Testament (Clark, 1863); and
Oehler, in Herzog's Cyclopaedia. The rabbinical traditions are to be
found in the two talmudical tractates Sebachim and Menachoth, and a
brief summary of them is given in Otho lex. rabbin. philol. pp. 631ff.)

The patriarchs, when sojourning in Canaan, had already worshipped the
God who revealed Himself to them, with both burnt-offerings and
slain-offerings. Whether their descendants, the children of Israel, had
offered sacrifices to the God of their fathers during their stay in the
foreign land of Egypt, we cannot tell, as there is no allusion whatever
to the subject in the short account of these 430 years. So much,
however, is certain, that they had not forgotten to regard the
sacrifices as a leading part of the worship of God, and were ready to
follow Moses into the desert, to serve the God of their fathers there by
a solemn act of sacrificial worship ([Exo
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001), compared with [Lev
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#031); [Lev
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#004), etc.); and also, that after the
exodus from Egypt, not only did Jethro offer burnt-offerings and
slain-offerings to God in the camp of the Israelites, and prepare a
sacrificial meal in which the elders of Israel took part along with
Moses and Aaron ([Exo 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#012)), but
young men offered burnt-offerings and slain-offerings by the command of
Moses at the conclusion of the covenant ([Exo
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#005)). Consequently the sacrificial
laws of these chapters presuppose the presentation of burnt-offerings,
meat-offerings, and slain-offerings as a custom well known to the
people, and a necessity demanded by their religious feelings ([Lev
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002), [Lev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010), [Lev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014); [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), [Lev
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004), [Lev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014); [Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001), [Lev
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#006), [Lev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011)). They were not introduced among
the Israelites for the first time by Moses, as Knobel affirms, who also
maintains that the feast of the Passover was the first animal sacrifice,
and in fact a very imperfect one. Even animal sacrifices date from the
earliest period of our race. Not only did Noah offer burnt-offerings of
all clean animals and birds ([Gen
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)), but Abel brought of the
firstlings of his flock an offering to the Lord ([Gen
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004)).

(Note: When Knobel, in his Commentary on Leviticus (p. 347), endeavours
to set aside the validity of these proofs, by affirming that sacrificial
worship in the earliest times is merely a fancy of the Jehovist; apart
altogether from the untenable character of the Elohistic and Jehovistic
hypothesis, there is a sufficient proof that this subterfuge is
worthless, in the fact that the so-called Elohist, instead of
pronouncing Moses the originator of the sacrificial worship of the
Hebrews, introduces his laws of sacrifice with this formula, "If any man
of you bring an offering of cattle unto the Lord," and thus stamps the
presentation of animal sacrifice as a traditional custom. Knobel cannot
adduce any historical testimony in support of his assertion, that,
according to the opinion of the ancients, there were no animal
sacrifices offered to the gods in the earliest times, but only meal,
honey, vegetables, and flowers, roots, leaves, and fruit; all that he
does is to quote a few passages from Plato, Plutarch, and Porphyry, in
which these philosophers, who were much too young to answer the
question, express their ideas and conjectures respecting the rise and
progress of sacrificial worship among the nations.)

The object of the sacrificial laws in this book was neither to enforce
sacrificial worship upon the Israelites, nor to apply "a theory
concerning the Hebrew sacrifices" (Knobel), but simply to organize and
expand the sacrificial worship of the Israelites into an institution in
harmony with the covenant between the Lord and His people, and adapted
to promote the end for which it was established.

But although sacrifice in general reaches up to the earliest times of
man's history, and is met with in every nation, it was not enjoined upon
the human race by any positive command of God, but sprang out of a
religious necessity for fellowship with God, the author, protector, and
preserver of life, which was as innate in man as the consciousness of
God itself, though it assumed very different forms in different tribes
and nations, in consequence of their estrangement from God, and their
growing loss of all true knowledge of Him, inasmuch as their ideas of
the Divine Being so completely regulated the nature, object, and
signification of the sacrifices they offered, that they were quite as
subservient to the worship of idols as to that of the one true God. To
discover the fundamental idea, which was common to all the sacrifices,
we must bear in mind, on the one hand, that the first sacrifices were
presented after the fall, and on the other hand, that we never meet with
any allusion to expiation in the pre-Mosaic sacrifices of the Old
Testament. Before the fall, man lived in blessed unity with God. This
unity was destroyed by sin, and the fellowship between God and man was
disturbed, though not entirely abolished. In the punishment which God
inflicted upon the sinners, He did not withdraw His mercy from men; and
before driving them out of paradise, He gave them clothes to cover the
nakedness of their shame, by which they had first of all become
conscious of their sin. Even after their expulsion He still manifested
Himself to them, so that they were able once more to draw near to Him
and enter into fellowship with Him. This fellowship they sought through
the medium of sacrifices, in which they gave a visible expression not
only to their gratitude towards God for His blessing and His grace, but
also to their supplication for the further continuance of His divine
favour. It was in this sense that both Cain and Abel offered sacrifice,
though not with the same motives, or in the same state of heart towards
God. In this sense Noah also offered sacrifice after his deliverance
from the flood; the only apparent difference being this, that the sons
of Adam offered their sacrifices to God from the fruit of their labour,
in the tilling of the ground and the keeping of sheep, whereas Noah
presented his burnt-offerings from the clean cattle and birds that had
been shut up with him in the ark, i.e., from those animals which at any
rate from that time forward were assigned to man as food ([Gen
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003)). Noah was probably led to make
this selection by the command of God to take with him into the ark not
one or more pairs, but seven of every kind of clean beasts, as he may
have discerned in this an indication of the divine will, that the
seventh animal of every description of clean beast and bird should be
offered in sacrifice to the Lord, for His gracious protection from
destruction by the flood. Moses also received a still further intimation
as to the meaning of the animal sacrifices, in the prohibition which God
appended to the permission to make use of animals as well as green herbs
for food; viz., "flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood
thereof, shall ye not eat" ([Gen
9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)), that is to say, flesh which
still contained the blood as the animal's soul. In this there was
already an intimation, that in the bleeding sacrifice the soul of the
animals was given up to God with the blood; and therefore, that by
virtue of its blood, as the vehicle of the soul, animal sacrifice was
the most fitting means of representing the surrender of the human soul
to God. This truth may possibly have been only dimly surmised by Noah
and his sons; but it must have been clearly revealed to the patriarch
Abraham, when God demanded the sacrifice of his only son, with whom his
whole heart was bound up, as a proof of his obedience of faith, and
then, after he had attested his faith in his readiness to offer this
sacrifice, supplied him with a ram to offer as a burnt-offering instead
of his son (Gen 22). In this the truth was practically revealed to him,
that the true God did not require human sacrifice from His worshippers,
but the surrender of the heart and the denial of the natural life, even
though it should amount to a submission to death itself, and also that
this act of surrender was to be perfected in the animal sacrifice; and
that it was only when presented with these motives that sacrifice could
be well-pleasing to God. Even before this, however, God had given His
sanction to the choice of clean or edible beasts and birds for
sacrifice, in the command to Abram to offer such animals, as the
sacrificial substratum for the covenant to be concluded with him (Gen
15).

Now, though nothing has been handed down concerning the sacrifices of
the patriarchs, with the exception of [Gen
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)., there can be no doubt that they
offered burnt-offerings upon the altars which they built to the Lord,
who appeared to them in different places in Canaan ([Gen
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007); [Gen
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#004), [Gen
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#018); [Gen
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#025); [Gen
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020); [Gen
35:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001)), and embodied in these their
solemn invocation of the name of God in prayer; since the close
connection between sacrifice and prayer is clearly proved by such
passages as [Hos 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003); [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015), and is universally admitted.

(Note: Outram (l. c. p. 213) draws the following conclusion from [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003) : "Prayer was a certain kind of
sacrifice, and sacrifice a certain kind of prayer. Prayers were, so to
speak, spiritual sacrifices, and sacrifices symbolical prayers.")

To the burnt-offering there was added, in the course of time, the
slain-offering, which is mentioned for the first time in [Gen
31:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#054), where Jacob seals the covenant,
which has been concluded with Laban and sworn to by God, with a covenant
meal. Whilst the burnt-offering, which was given wholly up to God and
entirely consumed upon the altar, and which ascended to heaven in the
smoke, set forth the self-surrender of man to God, the slain-offering,
which culminated in the sacrificial meal, served as a seal of the
covenant fellowship, and represented the living fellowship of man with
God. Thus, when Jacob-Israel went down with his house to Egypt, he
sacrificed at Beersheba, on the border of the promised land, to the God
of his father Isaac, not burnt-offerings, but slain-offerings ([Gen
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)), through which he presented his
prayer to the Lord for preservation in covenant fellowship even in a
foreign land, and in consequence of which he received the promise from
God in a nocturnal vision, that He, the God of his father, would go with
him to Egypt and bring him up again to Canaan, and so maintain the
covenant which He had made with his fathers, and assuredly fulfil it in
due time. The expiatory offerings, properly so called, viz., the sin and
trespass-offerings, were altogether unknown before the economy of the
Sinaitic law; and even if an expiatory element was included in the
burnt-offerings, so far as they embodied self-surrender to God, and thus
involved the need of union and reconciliation with Him, so little
prominence is given to this in the pre-Mosaic sacrifices, that, as we
have already stated, no reference is made to expiation in connection
with them.

(Note: The notion, which is still very widely spread, that the
burnt-offerings of Abel, Noah, and the patriarchs were expiatory
sacrifices, in which the slaying of the sacrificial animals set forth
the fact, that the sinner was deserving of death in the presence of the
holy God, not only cannot be proved from the Scriptures, but is
irreconcilable with the attitude of a Noah, an Abraham and other
patriarchs, towards the Lord God. And even Kahnis's explanation, "The
man felt that his own ipse must die, before it could enter into union
with the Holy One, but he had also his surmises, that another life might
possibly bear this death for him, and in this obscure feeling he took
away the life of an animal that was physically clean," is only true and
to the point so far as the deeper forms of the development of the
heathen consciousness of God are concerned, and not in the sphere of
revealed religion, in which the expiatory sacrifices did not originate
in any dim consciousness on the part of the sinner that he was deserving
of death, but were appointed for the first time by God at Sinai, for the
purpose of awakening and sharpening this feeling. There is no historical
foundation for the arguments adduced by Hoffmann in support of the
opinion, that there were sin-offerings before the Mosaic law; and the
assertion, that sin-offerings and trespass-offerings were not really
introduced by the law, but were presupposed as already well known, just
as much as the burnt-offerings and thank-offerings, is obviously at
variance with Lev 4 and 5.)

The reason for this striking fact is to be found in the circumstance,
that godly men of the primeval age offered their sacrifices to a God who
had drawn near to them in revelations of love. It is true that in former
times God had made known His holy justice in the destruction of the
wicked and the deliverance of the righteous ([Gen
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013)., [Lev
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#016).), and had commanded Abraham to
walk blamelessly before Him ([Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)); but He had only manifested
Himself to the patriarchs in His condescending love and mercy, whereas
He had made known His holiness in His very first revelation to Moses in
the words, "Draw not nigh hither; put off thy shoes," etc. ([Exo
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)), and unfolded it more and more in
all subsequent revelations, especially at Sinai. After Jehovah had there
declared to the people of Israel, whom He had redeemed out of Egypt,
that they were to be a holy nation to Him ([Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)), He appeared upon the mountain
in the terrible glory of His holy nature, to conclude His covenant of
grace with them by the blood of burnt-offerings and slain-offerings, so
that the people trembled and were afraid of death if the Lord should
speak to them any more ([Exo 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018).).
These facts preceded the laws of sacrifice, and not only prepared the
way for them, but furnished the key to their true interpretation, by
showing that it was only by sacrifice that the sinful nation could enter
into fellowship with the holy God.

The laws of sacrifice in ch. 1-7 are divisible into two groups. The
first (ch. 1-5) contains the general instructions, which were applicable
both to the community as a whole and also the individual Israelites. Ch.
1-3 contain an account of the animals and vegetables which could be used
for the three kinds of offerings that were already common among them,
viz., the burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, and slain-offerings; and
precise rules are laid down for the mode in which they were to be
offered. In ch. 4 and 5 the occasions are described on which
sin-offerings and trespass-offerings were to be presented; and
directions are given as to the sacrifices to be offered, and the mode of
presentation on each separate occasion. The second group (ch. 6 and 7)
contains special rules for the priests, with reference to their duties
in connection with the different sacrifices, and the portions they were
to receive; together with several supplementary laws, for example, with
regard to the meat-offering of the priests, and the various kinds of
slain or peace-offering. All these laws relate exclusively to the
sacrifices to be offered spontaneously, either by individuals or by the
whole community, the consciousness and confession of sin or debt being
presupposed, even in the case of the sin and trespass-offerings, and
their presentation being made to depend upon the free-will of those who
had sinned. This is a sufficient explanation of the fact, that they
contain no rules respecting either the time for presenting them, or the
order in which they were to follow one another, when two or more were
offered together. At the same time, the different rules laid down with
regard to the ritual to be observed, applied not only to the private
sacrifices, but also to those of the congregation, which were prescribed
by special laws for every day, and for the annual festivals, as well as
to the sacrifices of purification and consecration, for which no
separate ritual is enjoined.

1\. General Rules for the Sacrifices - Leviticus 1-5

The common term for sacrifices of every kind was Corban (presentation;
see at [Lev 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002)). It is not only
applied to the burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, and slain or
peace-offerings, in [Lev 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002), [Lev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010), [Lev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014); [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), [Lev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004)., [Lev
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001), etc., but also to the
sin-offerings and trespass-offerings in [Lev
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#023), [Lev
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#028), [Lev
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#032); [Lev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011); [Num
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015), etc., as being holy gifts ([Exo
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038) cf. [Num
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#009)) with which Israel was to appear
before the face of the Lord ([Exo
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015); [Deu
16:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016)). These sacrificial gifts
consisted partly of clean tame animals and birds, and partly of
vegetable productions; and hence the division into the two classes of
bleeding and bloodless (bloody and unbloody) sacrifices. The animals
prescribed in the law are those of the herd, and the flock, the latter
including both sheep and goats ([Lev
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002), [Lev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010); [Lev
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#021); [Num
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#003)), two collective terms, for which
ox and sheep, or goat (ox, sheep and goat) were the nomina usitatis
([Lev 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#023); [Lev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003); [Lev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019), [Lev
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027); [Num
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#011); [Deu
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004)), that is to say, none but tame
animals whose flesh was eaten ([Lev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003); [Deu
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004)); whereas unclean animals, though
tame, such as asses, camels, and swine, were inadmissible; and game,
though edible, e.g., the hare, the stag, the roebuck, and gazelle ([Deu
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#005)). Both male and female were
offered in sacrifice, from the herd as well as the flock ([Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)), and young as well as old, though
not under eighty days old ([Lev 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027);
[Exo 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)); so that the ox was
offered either as calf ([Lev 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#002); [Gen
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009); [Sa1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#002)) or as bullock, i.e., as young
steer or heifer ([Lev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003)), or as
full-grown cattle. Every sacrificial animal was to be without blemish,
i.e., free from bodily faults ([Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003), [Lev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010); [Lev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019).). The only birds that were
offered were turtle-doves and young pigeons ([Lev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014)), which were presented either by
poor people as burnt-offerings, and as a substitute for the larger
animals ordinarily required as sin-offerings and trespass-offerings
([Lev 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007); [Lev
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008); [Lev
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#022), [Lev
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#031)), or as sin and burnt-offerings,
for defilements of a less serious kind ([Lev
12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006); [Lev
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#014), [Lev
15:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#029); [Num
6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#010)). The vegetable sacrifices
consisted of meal, for the most part of fine flour ([Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)), of cakes of different kinds
([Lev 2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004)), and of toasted ears or
grains of corn ([Lev 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014)), to which
there were generally added oil and incense, but never leaven or honey
([Lev 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011)); and also of wine for a
drink-offering ([Num 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#005).).

The bleeding sacrifices were divided into four classes: viz., (1)
burnt-offerings (Lev 1), for which a male animal or pigeon only was
admissible; (2) peace-offerings (slain-offerings of peace, Lev 3), which
were divisible again into praise-offerings, vow-offerings, and
freewill-offerings ([Lev 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012), [Lev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016)), and consisted of both male and
female animals, but never of pigeons; (3) sin-offerings (Lev 4:1-5:13);
and (4) trespass-offerings ([Lev
5:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014)). Both male and female animals
might be taken for the sin-offerings; and doves also could be used,
sometimes independently, sometimes as substitutes for larger animals;
and in cases of extreme poverty meal alone might be used ([Lev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011)). But for the trespass-offerings
either a ram ([Lev 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015), [Lev
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#018); [Lev
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#021)) or a lamb had to be sacrificed
([Lev 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#012); [Num
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#012)). All the sacrificial animals
were to be brought "before Jehovah," i.e., before the altar of
burnt-offering, in the court of the tabernacle ([Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003), [Lev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005), [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011); [Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001), [Lev
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#007), [Lev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012); [Lev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004)). There the offerer was to rest
his hand upon the head of the animal ([Lev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)), and then to slaughter it, flay
it, cut it in pieces, and prepare it for a sacrificial offering; after
which the priest would attend to the sprinkling of the blood and the
burning upon the altar fire ([Lev
1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005); [Lev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002)., [Lev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006)). In the case of the
burnt-offerings, peace-offerings, and trespass-offerings, the blood was
swung all round against the walls of the altar ([Lev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005), [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011); [Lev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002), [Lev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008), [Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013); [Lev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#002)); in that of the sin-offerings a
portion was placed upon the horns of the altar of burnt-offering, and in
certain circumstances it was smeared upon the horns of the altar of
incense, or sprinkled upon the ark of the covenant in the most holy
place, and the remainder poured out at the foot of the altar of
burnt-offering ([Lev 4:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#005), [Lev
4:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#016), [Lev
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#025), [Lev
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#030)). In the case of the
burnt-offering, the flesh was all burned upon the altar, together with
the head and entrails, the latter having been previously cleansed ([Lev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#008), [Lev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#013)); in that of the peace-offerings,
sin-offerings, and trespass-offerings, the fat portions only were burned
upon the altar, viz., the larger and smaller caul, the fat upon the
entrails and inner muscles of the loins, and the kidneys with their fat
([Lev 3:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009), [Lev
3:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#014); [Lev
4:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#008), [Lev
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#019), [Lev
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#026), [Lev
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#031), [Lev
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#035); [Lev
7:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#003)). When a peace-offering was
presented, the breast piece and right leg were given to Jehovah for the
priests, and the rest of the flesh was used and consumed by the offerer
in a sacrificial meal ([Lev 7:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#015),
[Lev 7:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#030)). But the flesh of the
trespass-offerings and sin-offerings of the laity was boiled and eaten
by the priests in a holy place, i.e., in the court of the tabernacle
([Lev 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019), [Lev
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022); [Lev
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#006)). In the sin-offerings presented
for the high priest and the whole congregation the animal was all burnt
in a clean place outside the camp, including even the skin, the
entrails, and the ordure ([Lev
4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#011), [Lev
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#021)). When the sacrifice consisted of
pigeons, the priest let the blood flow down the wall of the altar, or
sprinkled it against it; and then, if the pigeon was brought as a
burnt-offering, he burnt it upon the altar after taking away the crop
and faeces; but if it was brought for a sin-offering, he probably
followed the rule laid down in [Lev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015) and [Lev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008).

The bloodless gifts were employed as meat and drink-offerings. The
meat-offering (minchah) was presented sometimes by itself, at other
times in connection with burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. The
independence of the meat-offering, which has been denied by Bhr and
Kurtz on insufficient grounds, is placed beyond all doubt, not only by
the meat-offering of the priests ([Lev
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013).) and the so-called
jealousy-offering ([Num 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015).), but
also by the position in which it is placed in the laws of sacrifice,
between the burnt and peace-offerings. From the instructions in Num
15:1-16, to offer a meat-offering mixed with oil and a drink-offering of
wine with every burnt-offering and peace-offering, the quantity to be
regulated by the size of the animal, it by no means follows that all the
meat-offerings were simply accompaniments to the bleeding sacrifices,
and were only to be offered in connection with them. On the contrary,
inasmuch as these very instructions prescribe only a meat-offering of
meal with oil, together with a drink-offering of wine, as the
accompaniment to the burnt and peace-offerings, without mentioning
incense at all, they rather prove that the meat-offerings mentioned in
Lev 2, which might consist not only of meal and oil, with which incense
had to be used, but also of cakes of different kinds and roasted corn,
are to be distinguished from the mere accompaniments mentioned in Num
15. In addition to this, it is to be observed that pastry, in the form
of cakes of different kinds, was offered with the praise-offerings,
according to [Lev 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012)., and probably
with the two other species of peace-offerings as well; so that we should
introduce an irreconcilable discrepancy between Num 15 and Lev 2, if we
were to restrict all the meat-offerings to the accompaniments mentioned
in Num 15, or reduce them to merely dependent additions to the burnt and
peace-offerings. Only a portion of the independent meat-offerings was
burnt by the priest upon the altar ([Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002), [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009), [Lev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#016)); the rest was to be baked
without leaven, and eaten by the priests in the court, as being most
holy ([Lev 6:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)): it was only the
meat-offering of the priests that was all burned upon the altar ([Lev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016)). - The law contains no
directions as to what was to be done with the drink-offering; but the
wine was no doubt poured round the foot of the altar (Ecclus. l. 15.
Josephus, Ant. iii. 9, 4).

The great importance of the sacrifices prescribed by the law may be
inferred to a great extent, apart from the fact that sacrifice in
general was founded upon the dependence of man upon God, and his desire
for the restoration of that living fellowship with Him which had been
disturbed by sin, from the circumstantiality and care with which both
the choice of the sacrifices and the mode of presenting them are most
minutely prescribed. But their special meaning and importance in
relation to the economy of the Old Covenant are placed beyond all
question by the position they assumed in the ritual of the Israelites,
forming as they did the centre of all their worship, so that scarcely
any sacred action was performed without sacrifice, whilst they were also
the medium through which forgiveness of sin and reconciliation with the
Lord were obtained, either by each individual Israelite, or by the
congregation as a whole. This significance, which was deeply rooted in
the spiritual life of Israel, is entirely destroyed by those who lay
exclusive stress upon the notion of presentation or gift, and can see
nothing more in the sacrifices than a "renunciation of one's own
property," for the purpose of "expressing reverence and devotion, love
and gratitude to God by such a surrender, and at the same time of
earning and securing His favour."

(Note: This is the view expressed by Knobel in his Commentary on
Leviticus, p. 346, where the idea is carried out in the following
manner: in the dedication of animals they preferred to give the offering
the form of a meal, which was provided for God, and of which flesh
formed the principal part, though bread and wine could not be omitted.
These meals of animal food were prepared every day in the daily
burnt-offerings, just as the more respectable classes in the East eat
animal food every day, and give the preference to food of this kind; and
the daily offering of incense corresponded to the oriental custom of
fumigating rooms, and burning perfumes in honour of a guest. At the same
time Knobel also explains, that the Hebrews hardly attributed any wants
of a sensual kind of Jehovah; or, at any rate, that the educated did not
look upon the sacrifice as food for Jehovah, or regard the festal
sacrifices as festal meals for Him, but may simply have thought of the
fact that Jehovah was to be worshipped at all times, and more especially
at the feasts, and that in this the prevailing and traditional custom
was to be observed.)

The true significance of the legal sacrifices cannot be correctly and
fully deduced from the term corban, which was common to them all, or
from such names as were used to denote the different varieties of
sacrifice, or even from the materials employed and the ritual observed,
but only from all these combined, and from an examination of them in
connection with the nature and design of the Old Testament economy.

Regarded as offerings or gifts, the sacrifices were only means by which
Israel was to seek and sustain communion with its God. These gifts were
to be brought by the Israelites from the blessing which God had bestowed
upon the labour of their hands ([Deu
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#017)), that is to say, from the fruit
of their regular occupations, viz., agriculture and the rearing of
cattle; in other words, from the cattle they had reared, or the produce
of the land they had cultivated, which constituted their principal
articles of food (viz., edible animals and pigeons, corn, oil, and
wine), in order that in these sacrificial gifts they might consecrate to
the Lord their God, not only their property and food, but also the fruit
of their ordinary avocations. In this light the sacrifices are
frequently called "food (bread) of firing for Jehovah" ([Lev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011), [Lev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016)) and "bread of God" ([Lev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006), [Lev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#008), [Lev
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017)); by which we are not to suppose
that food offered to God for His own nourishment is intended, but food
produced by the labour of man, and then caused to ascend as a firing to
his God, for an odour of satisfaction (vid., [Lev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011)).

In the clean animals, which he had obtained by his own training and
care, and which constituted his ordinary live-stock, and in the produce
obtained through the labour of his hands in the field and vineyard, from
which he derived his ordinary support, the Israelite offered not his
victus as a symbolum vitae, but the food which he procured in the
exercise of his God-appointed calling, as a symbol of the spiritual food
which endureth unto everlasting life ([Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027), cf. [Lev
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#034)), and which nourishes both soul
and body for imperishable life in fellowship with God, that in these
sacrificial gifts he might give up to the Lord, who had adopted him as
His own possession, not so much the substance of his life, or that which
sustained and preserved it, as the agens of his life, or his labour and
toil, and all the powers he possessed, and might receive sanctification
from the Lord in return. In this way the sacrificial gifts acquire a
representative character, and denote the self-surrender of a man, with
all his labour and productions, to God. But the idea of representation
received a distinct form and sacrificial character for the first time in
the animal sacrifice, which was raised by the covenant revelation and
the giving of the law into the very centre and soul of the whole
institution of sacrifice, and primarily by the simple fact, that in the
animal a life, a "living soul," was given up to death and offered to
God, to be the medium of vital fellowship to the man who had been made a
"living soul" by the inspiration of the breath of God; but still more by
the fact, that God had appointed the blood of the sacrificial animal, as
the vehicle of its soul, to be the medium of expiation for the souls of
men ([Lev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)).

The verb "to expiate" (כּפּר, from כּפר to cover, construed with על htiw
d objecti; see [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)) "does not
signify to cause a sin not to have occurred, for that is impossible, nor
to represent it as not existing, for that would be opposed to the
stringency of the law, nor to pay or make compensation for it through
the performance of any action; but to cover it over before God, i.e., to
take away its power of coming in between God and ourselves" (Kahnis,
Dogmatik, i. p. 271). But whilst this is perfectly true, the object
primarily expiated, or to be expiated, according to the laws of
sacrifice, is not the sin, but rather the man, or the soul of the
offerer. God gave the Israelites the blood of the sacrifices upon the
altar to cover their souls ([Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)) The end it answered was "to
cover him" (the offerer, [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004));
and even in the case of the sin-offering the only object was to cover
him who had sinned, as concerning his sin ([Lev
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#026), [Lev
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#035), etc.). But the offerer of the
sacrifice was covered, on account of his unholiness, from before the
holy God, or, speaking more precisely, from the wrath of God and the
manifestation of that wrath; that is to say, from the punishment which
his sin had deserved, as we may clearly see from [Gen
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#020), and still more clearly from
[Exo 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030). In the former case Jacob's
object is to reconcile (כּפּר) the face of his brother Esau by means of
a present, that is to say, to modify the wrath of his brother, which he
has drawn upon himself by taking away the blessing of the first-born. In
the latter, Moses endeavours by means of his intercession to expiate the
sin of the people, over whom the wrath of God is about to burn to
destroy them ([Exo 32:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009)); in other
words, to protect the people from the destruction which threatens them
in consequence of the wrath of God (see also [Num
17:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#011); [Num
25:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011)). The power to make
expiation, i.e., to cover an unholy man from before the holy God, or to
cover the sinner from the wrath of God, is attributed to the blood of
the sacrificial animal, only so far as the soul lives in the blood, and
the soul of the animal when sacrificed takes the place of the human
soul. This substitution is no doubt incongruous, since the animal and
man differ essentially the one from the other; inasmuch as the animal
follows an involuntary instinct, and its soul being constrained by the
necessities of its nature is not accountable, and it is only in this
respect that it can be regarded as sinless; whilst man, on the contrary,
is endowed with freedom of will, and his soul, by virtue of the
indwelling of his spirit, is not only capable of accountability, but can
contract both sin and guilt. When God, therefore, said, "I have given it
to you upon the altar to make atonement for your souls" ([Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)), and thus attributed to the
blood of the sacrificial animals a significance which it could not
naturally possess; this was done in anticipation of the true and perfect
sacrifice which Christ, the Son of man and God, would offer in the
fulness of time through the holy and eternal Spirit, for the
reconciliation of the whole world ([Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)). This secret of the unfathomable
love of the triune God was hidden from the Israelites in the law, but it
formed the real background for the divine sanction of the animal
sacrifices, whereby they acquired a typical signification, so that they
set forth in shadow that reconciliation, which God from all eternity had
determined to effect by giving up His only-begotten Son to death, as a
sacrifice for the sin of the whole world.

But however firmly the truth is established that the blood of the
sacrifice intervened as a third object between the sinful man and the
holy God, it was not the blood of the animal in itself which actually
took the place of the man, nor was it the shedding of the blood in
itself which was able to make expiation for the sinful man, in such a
sense that the slaying of the animal had a judicial and penal character
and the offering of sacrifice was an act of judgment instead of an
ordinance of grace, as the juridical theory maintains. It was simply the
blood as the vehicle of the soul, when sprinkled or poured out upon the
altar, that is to say, it was the surrender of an innocent life to
death, and through death to God, that was the medium of expiation. Even
in the sacrifice of Christ it was not by the shedding of blood, or
simply by the act of dying, that His death effected reconciliation, but
by the surrender of His life to death, in which He not only shed His
blood for us, but His body also was broken for us, to redeem us from sin
and reconcile us to God. And even the suffering and death of Christ
effect our reconciliation not simply by themselves, but as the
completion of His sinless, holy life, in which, through doing and
suffering, He was obedient even to the death of the cross, and through
that obedience fulfilled the law as the holy will of God for us, and
bore and suffered the punishment of our transgression. Through His
obedientia activa et passiva in life and death Christ rendered to the
holy justice of God that satisfactio et poena vicaria, by virtue of
which we receive forgiveness of sin, righteousness before God,
reconciliation, grace, salvation, and eternal life. But these blessings
of grace and salvation, which we owe to the sacrificial death of Christ,
do not really become ours through the simple fact that Christ has
procured them for man. We have still to appropriate them in faith, by
dying spiritually with Christ, and rising with Him to a new life in God.
This was also the case with the sacrifices of the Old Testament. They
too only answered their end, when the Israelites, relying upon the word
and promise of God, grasped and employed by faith the means of grace
afforded them in the animal sacrifices; i.e., when in these sacrifices
they offered themselves, or their personal life, as a sacrifice
well-pleasing to God. The symbolical meaning of the sacrifices, which is
involved in this, is not excluded or destroyed by the idea of
representation, or representative mediation between sinful man and the
holy God, which was essential to them. It is rather demanded as their
complement, inasmuch as, without this, the sacrificial worship would
degenerate into a soulless opus operatum, and would even lose its
typical character. This symbolical significance is strikingly expressed
in the instructions relating to the nature of the sacrificial gifts, and
the ritual connected with their presentation; and in the law it comes
into the foreground just in proportion as the typical character of the
sacrifices was concealed at the time in the wise economy of God, and was
only unfolded to the spiritual vision of the prophets (Isa 43) with the
progressive unfolding of the divine plan of salvation.

The leading features of the symbolical and typical meaning of the
sacrifices are in their general outline the following. Every animal
offered in sacrifice was to be תּמים, ἄμωμος, free from faults; not
merely on the ground that only a faultless and perfect gift could be an
offering fit for the Holy and Perfect One, but chiefly because moral
faults were reflected in those of the body, and to prefigure the
sinlessness and holiness of the true sacrifice, and warn the offerer
that the sanctification of all his members was indispensable to a
self-surrender to God, the Holy One, and to life in fellowship with Him.
In connection with the act of sacrifice, it was required that the
offerer should bring to the tabernacle the animal appointed for
sacrifice, and there present it before Jehovah ([Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)), because it was there that
Jehovah dwelt among His people, and it was from His holy dwelling that
He would reveal Himself to His people as their God. There the offerer
was to lay his hand upon the head of the animal, that the sacrifice
might be acceptable for him, to make expiation for him ([Lev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)), and then to slay the animal and
prepare it for a sacrificial gift. By the laying on of his hand he not
only set apart the sacrificial animal for the purpose for which he had
come to the sanctuary, but transferred the feelings of his heart, which
impelled him to offer the sacrifice, or the intention with which he
brought the gift, to the sacrificial animal, so that his own head
passed, as it were, to the head of the animal, and the latter became his
substitute (see my Archologie i. 206; Oehler, p. 267; Kahnis, i. p.
270). By the slaughter of the animal he gave it up to death, not merely
for the double purpose of procuring the blood, in which was the life of
the animal, as an expiation for his own soul, and its flesh as fire-food
for Jehovah, - for if the act of dying was profoundly significant in the
case of the perfect sacrifice, it cannot have been without symbolical
significance in the case of the typical sacrifice, - but to devote his
own life to God in the death of the sacrificial animal which was
appointed as his substitute, and to set forth not only his willingness
to die, but the necessity for the old man to die, that he might attain
to life in fellowship with God. After this self-surrender the priestly
mediation commenced, the priest sprinkling the blood upon the altar, or
its horns, and in one instance before Jehovah's throne of grace, and
then burning the flesh or fat of the sacrifice upon the altar. The altar
was the spot where God had promised to meet with His people ([Exo
29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042)), to reconcile them to Himself,
and bestow His grace upon them. Through this act of sprinkling the blood
of the animal that had been given up to death upon the altar, the soul
of the offerer was covered over before the holy God; and by virtue of
this covering it was placed within the sphere of divine grace, which
forgave the sin and filled the soul with power for new life. Fire was
constantly burning upon the altar, which was prepared and kept up by the
priest ([Lev 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005)). Fire, from its
inherent power to annihilate what is perishable, ignoble, and corrupt,
is a symbol in the Scriptures, sometimes of purification, and sometimes
of torment and destruction. That which has an imperishable kernel within
it is purified by the fire, the perishable materials which have adhered
to it or penetrated within it being burned out and destroyed, and the
imperishable and nobler substance being thereby purified from all dross;
whilst, on the other hand, in cases where the imperishable is completely
swallowed up in the perishable, no purification ensues, but total
destruction by the fire ([Co1
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)). Hence fire is employed as a
symbol and vehicle of the Holy Spirit ([Act
2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)), and the fire burning upon the
altar was a symbolical representation of the working of the purifying
Spirit of God; so that the burning of the flesh of the sacrifice upon
the altar "represented the purification of the man, who had been
reconciled to God, through the fire of the Holy Spirit, which consumes
what is flesh, to pervade what is spirit with light and life, and thus
to transmute it into the blessedness of fellowship with God" (Kahnis, p.
272).

It follows from this, that the relation which the sprinkling of the
blood and the burning of the flesh of the sacrifice upon the altar bore
to one another was that of justification and sanctification, those two
indispensable conditions, without which sinful man could not attain to
reconciliation with God and life in God. But as the sinner could neither
justify himself before God nor sanctify himself by his own power, the
sprinkling of blood and the burning of the portions of the sacrifice
upon the altar were to be effected, not by the offerer himself, but only
by the priest, as the mediator whom God had chosen and sanctified, not
only that the soul which had been covered by the sacrificial blood might
thereby be brought to God and received into His favour, but also that
the bodily members, of which the flesh of the sacrifice was a symbol,
might be given up to the fire of the Holy Spirit, to be purified and
sanctified from the dross of sin, and raised in a glorified state to
God; just as the sacrificial gift was consumed in the altar fire, so
that, whilst its earthly perishable elements were turned into ashes and
left behind, its true essence ascended towards heaven, where God is
enthroned, in the most ethereal and glorified of material forms, as a
sweet-smelling savour, i.e., as an acceptable offering. These two
priestly acts, however, were variously modified according to the
different objects of the several kinds of sacrifice. In the sin-offering
the expiation of the sinner is brought into the greatest prominence; in
the burnt-offering this falls into the background behind the idea of the
self-surrender of a man to God for the sanctification of all his
members, through the grace of God; and lastly, the peace-offering
culminated in the peace of living communion with the Lord. (See the
explanation of the several laws.)

The materials and ritual of the bloodless sacrifices, and also their
meaning and purpose, are much more simple. The meat and drink-offerings
were not means of expiation, nor did they include the idea of
representation. They were simply gifts, in which the Israelites offered
bread, oil, and wine, as fruits of the labour of their hands in the
field and vineyard of the inheritance they had received from the Lord,
and embodied in these earthly gifts the fruits of their spiritual labour
in the kingdom of God (see at Lev 2).

[Leviticus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 1:1</span></span>

The Burnt-Offering. - [Lev 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002). "If
any one of you present an offering to Jehovah of cattle, ye shall
present your offering from the herd and from the flock." קרבּן (Corban,
from הקריב to cause to draw near, to bring near, or present, an
offering) is applied not only to the sacrifices, which were burned
either in whole or in part upon the altar ([Lev
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#038); [Num
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#009); [Num
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#002), etc.), but to the first-fruits
([Lev 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012)), and dedicatory offerings,
which were presented to the Lord for His sanctuary and His service
without being laid upon the altar ([Num
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#003), [Num
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#010)., [Num
31:50](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050)). The word is only used in
Leviticus and Numbers, and two passages in Ezekiel ([Eze
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#028); [Eze
40:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#043)), where it is taken from the
books of Moses, and is invariably rendered δῶρον in the lxx (cf. [Mar
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#011) "Corban, that is to say a gift").
הבּהמה מן (from the cattle) belongs to the first clause, though it is
separated from it by the Athnach; and the apodosis begins with הבּקר מן
(from the herd). The actual antithesis to "the cattle" is "the fowl" in
[Lev 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014); though grammatically the
latter is connected with [Lev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010),
rather than [Lev 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002). The fowls
(pigeons) cannot be included in the behemah, for this is used to denote,
not domesticated animals generally, but the larger domesticated
quadrupeds, or tame cattle (cf. [Gen
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#025)).

[Leviticus 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 1:3</span></span>

Ceremonial connected with the offering of an ox as a burnt-offering. עלה
(vid., [Gen 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)) is generally
rendered by the lxx ὁλοκαύτωμα or ὁλοκαύτωσις, sometimes ὁλοκάρπωμα or
ὁλοκάρπωσις, in the Vulgate holocaustum, because the animal was all
consumed upon the altar. The ox was to be a male without blemish
(ἄμωμος, integer; i.e., free from bodily faults, see [Lev
22:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)), and to be presented "at the
door of the tabernacle," - i.e., near to the altar of burnt-offering
([Exo 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#006)), where all the offerings
were to be presented ([Lev 17:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008)), -
"for good pleasure for him (the offerer) before Jehovah," i.e., that the
sacrifice might secure to him the good pleasure of God ([Exo
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038)).

[Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)

"he (the offerer) shall lay his hand upon the head of the
burnt-offering." The laying on of hands, by which, to judge from the
verb סמך to lean upon, we are to understand a forcible pressure of the
hand upon the head of the victim, took place in connection with all the
slain-offerings (the offering of pigeons perhaps excepted), and is
expressly enjoined in the laws for the burnt-offerings, the
peace-offerings ([Lev 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002), [Lev
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#007), [Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013)), and the sin-offerings ([Lev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004), [Lev
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015), [Lev
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#024), [Lev
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#029), [Lev
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#033)), that is to say, in every case
in which the details of the ceremonial are minutely described. But if
the description is condensed, then no allusion is made to it: e.g., in
the burnt-offering of sheep and goats ([Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011)), the sin-offering ([Lev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006)), and the trespass-offering ([Lev
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015), [Lev
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#018), 25). This ceremony was not a
sign of the removal of something from his own power and possession, or
the surrender and dedication of it to God, as Rosenmller and Knobel

(Note: Hence Knobel's assertion (at [Lev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#002)), that the laying on of the hand
upon the head of the animal, which is prescribed in the case of all the
other sacrifices, was omitted in that of the trespass-offering alone,
needs correction, and there is no foundation for the conclusion, that it
did not take place in connection with the trespass-offering.)

affirm; nor an indication of ownership and of a readiness to give up his
own to Jehovah, as Bhr maintains; nor a symbol of the imputation of sin,
as Kurtz supposes:

(Note: This was the view held by some of the Rabbins and of the earlier
theologians, e.g., Calovius, bibl. ill. ad Lev. i. 4, Lundius and
others, but by no means by "most of the Rabbins, some of the fathers,
and most of the earlier archaeologists and doctrinal writers," as is
affirmed by Bhr (ii. p. 336), who supports his assertion by passages
from Outram, which refer to the sin-offering only, but which Bhr
transfers without reserve to all the bleeding sacrifices, thus
confounding substitution with the imputation of sin, in his antipathy to
the orthodox doctrine of satisfaction. Outram's general view of this
ceremony is expressed clearly enough in the following passages: "ritus
erat ea notandi ac designandi, quae vel morti devota erant, vel Dei
gratiae commendata, vel denique gravi alicui muneri usuique sacro
destinata. Eique ritui semper adhiberi solebant verba aliqua explicata,
quae rei susceptae rationi maxime congruere viderentur" (l.c. 8 and 9).
With reference to the words which explained the imposition of hands he
observes: "ita ut sacris piacularibus culparum potissimum confessiones
cum poenae deprecatione junctas, voluntariis bonorum precationes,
eucharisticus autem et votivis post res prosperas impetratas periculave
depulsa factis laudes et gratiarum actiones, omnique denique victimarum
generi ejusmodi preces adjunctas putem, quae cuique maxime conveniebant"
(c. 9).)

but the symbol of a transfer of the feelings and intentions by which the
offerer was actuated in presenting his sacrifice, whereby he set apart
the animal as a sacrifice, representing his own person in one particular
aspect. Now, so far as the burnt-offering expressed the intention of the
offerer to consecrate his life and labour to the Lord, and his desire to
obtain the expiation of the sin which still clung to all his works and
desires, in order that they might become well-pleasing to God, he
transferred the consciousness of his sinfulness to the victim by the
laying on of hands, even in the case of the burnt-offering. But this was
not all: he also transferred the desire to walk before God in holiness
and righteousness, which he could not do without the grace of God. This,
and no more than this, is contained in the words, "that it may become
well-pleasing to him, to make atonement for him." כּפּר with Seghol
(Ges. 52), to expiate (from the Kal כּפר, which is not met with in
Hebrew, the word in [Gen 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#014) being
merely a denom. verb, but which signifies texit in Arabic), is generally
construed with על like verbs of covering, and in the laws of sacrifice
with the person as the object ("for him," [Lev
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#026), [Lev
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#031), [Lev
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#035); [Lev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006), [Lev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010)., [Lev
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#020), [Lev
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#029), etc.; "for them," [Lev
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#020); [Lev
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017); "for her," [Lev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#007); for a soul, [Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011); [Exo
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#015), cf. [Num
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#012)), and in the case of the
sin-offerings with a second object governed either by על or מן (חטּאתו
על עליו [Lev 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#035); [Lev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#013), [Lev
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#018), or מחטּאתו עליו [Lev
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#026); [Lev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006), etc., to expiate him over or on
account of his sin); also, though not so frequently, with בּעד pers.,
ἐξιλάζεσθαι περὶ αὐτοῦ ([Lev 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#006),
[Lev 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#024); [Ch2
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018)), and חטּאת בּעד, ἐξιλάζεσθαι
περὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας ([Exo 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030)), and
with ל pers., to permit expiation to be made ([Deu
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#008); [Eze
16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063)); also with the accusative of
the object, though in prose only in connection with the expiation of
inanimate objects defiled by sin ([Lev
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#033)).

The expiation was always made or completed by the priest, as the
sanctified mediator between Jehovah and the people, or, previous to the
institution of the Aaronic priesthood, by Moses, the chosen mediator of
the covenant, not by "Jehovah from whom the expiation proceeded," as Bhr
supposes. For although all expiation has its ultimate foundation in the
grace of God, which desires not the death of the sinner, but his
redemption and salvation, and to this end has opened a way of salvation,
and sanctified sacrifice as the means of expiation and mercy; it is not
Jehovah who makes the expiation, but this is invariably the office or
work of a mediator, who intervenes between the holy God and sinful man,
and by means of expiation averts the wrath of God from the sinner, and
brings the grace of God to bear upon him. It is only in cases where the
word is used in the secondary sense of pardoning sin, or showing mercy,
that God is mentioned as the subject (e.g., [Deu
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#008); [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004); [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038); [Jer
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#023)).

(Note: The meaning "to make atonement" lies at the foundation in every
passage in which the word is used metaphorically, such as [Gen
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#021), where Jacob seeks to expiate
the face of his angry brother, i.e., to appease his wrath, with a
present; or [Pro 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#014), "the wrath of
a king is as messengers of death, but a wise man expiates it, i.e.,
softens, pacifies it;" [Isa 47:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#011),
"Mischief (destruction) will fall upon thee, thou will not be able to
expiate it," that is to say, to avert the wrath of God, which has burst
upon thee in the calamity, by means of an expiatory sacrifice. Even in
[Isa 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018), "and your covenant with
death is disannulled" (annihilated) (וכפּר), the use of the word כפר is
to be explained from the fact that the guilt, which brought the judgment
in its train, could be cancelled by a sacrificial expiation (cf. [Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007) and [Isa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#014)); so that there is no necessity
to resort to a meaning which is altogether foreign to the word, viz.,
that of covering up by blotting over. When Hoffmann therefore maintains
that there is no other way of explaining the use of the word in these
passages, than by the supposition that, in addition to the verb כפר to
cover, there was another denominative verb, founded upon the word כּפר a
covering, or payment, the stumblingblock in the use of the word lies
simply this, that Hoffmann has taken a one-sided view of the idea of
expiation, through overlooking the fact, that the expiation had
reference to the wrath of God which hung over the sinner and had to be
averted from him by means of expiation, as is clearly proved by [Exo
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030) as compared with [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010) and [Exo
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#022). The meaning of expiation which
properly belongs to the verb כּפּר is not only retained in the nouns
cippurim and capporeth, but lies at the root of the word copher, which
is formed from the Kal, as we may clearly see from [Exo
30:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012), where the Israelites are
ordered to pay a copher at the census, to expiate their souls, i.e., to
cover their souls from the death which threatens the unholy, when he
draws near without expiation to a holy God. Vid., Oehler in Herzog's
Cycl.)

The medium of expiation in the case of the sacrifice was chiefly the
blood of the sacrificial animal that was sprinkled upon the altar ([Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)); in addition to which, the
eating of the flesh of the sin-offering by the priests is also called
bearing the iniquity of the congregation to make atonement for them
([Lev 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017)). In other cases it was
the intercession of Moses ([Exo
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030)); also the fumigation with holy
incense, which was a symbol of priestly intercession ([Num
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#011)). On one occasion it was the
zeal of Phinehas, when he stabbed the Israelite with a spear for
committing fornication with a Midianite ([Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008), [Num
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013)). In the case of a murder
committed by an unknown hand, it was the slaying of an animal in the
place of the murderer who remained undiscovered ([Deu
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)); whereas in other cases
blood-guiltiness (murder) could not be expiated in any other way than by
the blood of the person by whom it had been shed ([Num
35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033)). In [Isa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009), a divine judgment, by which the
nation was punished, is so described, as serving to avert the complete
destruction which threatened it. And lastly, it was in some cases a
כּפר, such, for example, as the atonement-money paid at the numbering of
the people ([Exo 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012).), and the
payment made in the case referred to in [Exo
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#030).

If, therefore, the idea of satisfaction unquestionably lay at the
foundation of the atonement that was made, in all those cases in which
it was effected by a penal judgment, or judicial poena; the intercession
of the priest, or the fumigation which embodied it, cannot possibly be
regarded as a satisfaction rendered to the justice of God, so that we
cannot attribute the idea of satisfaction to every kind of sacrificial
expiation. Still less can it be discerned in the slaying of the animal,
when simply regarded as the shedding of blood. To this we may add, that
in the laws for the sin-offering there is no reference at all to
expiation; and in the case of the burnt-offering, the laying on of hands
is described as the act by which it was to become well-pleasing to God,
and to expiate the offerer. Now, if the laying on of hands was
accompanied with a prayer, as the Jewish tradition affirms, and as we
may most certainly infer from [Deu
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#013), apart altogether from [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021), although no prayer is expressly
enjoined; then in the case of the burnt-offerings and peace-offerings,
it is in this prayer, or the imposition of hands which symbolized it,
and by which the offerer substituted the sacrifice for himself and
penetrated it with his spirit, that we must seek for the condition upon
which the well-pleased acceptance of the sacrifice on the part of Fog
depended, and in consequence of which it became an atonement for him; in
other words, was fitted to cover him in the presence of the holiness of
God.

[Lev 1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005)

The laying on of hands was followed by the slaughtering (שׁחט, never
המית to put to death), which was performed by the offerer himself in the
case of the private sacrifices, and by the priests and Levites in that
of the national and festal offerings ([Ch2
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#022), [Ch2
29:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#024), [Ch2
29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034)). The slaughtering took place
"before Jehovah" (see [Lev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)), or,
according to the more precise account in [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011), on the side of the altar
northward, for which the expression "before the door of the tabernacle"
is sometimes used ([Lev 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002), [Lev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008), [Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013), etc.). בּקר בּן (a young ox) is
applied to a calf (עגל) in [Lev 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#002),
and a mature young bull (פּר) in [Lev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003), [Lev
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#014). But the animal of one year old
is called עגל in [Lev 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#002), and the
mature ox of seven years old is called פּר in [Jdg
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#025). At the slaughtering the blood
was caught by the priests ([Ch2
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#022)), and sprinkled upon the altar.
When the sacrifices were very numerous, as at the yearly feasts, the
Levites helped to catch the blood ([Ch2
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#016)); but the sprinkling upon the
altar was always performed by the priests alone. In the case of the
burnt-offerings, the blood was swung "against the altar round about,"
i.e., against all four sides (walls) of the altar (not "over the surface
of the altar"); i.e., it was poured out of the vessel against the walls
of the altar with a swinging motion. This was also done when
peace-offerings ([Lev 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002), [Lev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008), [Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013); [Lev
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#018)) and trespass-offerings ([Lev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#002)) were sacrificed; but it was not
so with the sin-offering (see at [Lev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#005)).

[Lev 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006)

The offerer was then to flay the slaughtered animal, to cut it (נתּח
generally rendered μελίζειν in the lxx) into its pieces, - i.e., to cut
it up into the different pieces, into which an animal that has been
killed is generally divided, namely, according to the separate joints,
or "according to the bones" ([Jdg
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#029)), - that he might boil its flesh
in pots ([Eze 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#004), [Eze
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#006)). He was also to wash its
intestines and the lower part of its legs ([Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009)). קרב, the inner part of the body,
or the contents of the inner part of the body, signifies the viscera;
not including those of the breast, however, such as the lungs, heart,
and liver, to which the term is also applied in other cases (for in the
case of the peace-offerings, when the fat which envelopes the
intestines, the kidneys, and the liver-lobes was to be placed upon the
altar, there is no washing spoken of), but the intestines of the abdomen
or belly, such as the stomach and bowels, which would necessarily have
to be thoroughly cleansed, even when they were about to be used as food.
כּרעים, which is only found in the dual, and always in connection either
with oxen and sheep, or with the springing legs of locusts ([Lev
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021)), denotes the shin, or calf
below the knee, or the leg from the knee down to the foot.

[Lev 1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#007)

It was the duty of the sons of Aaron, i.e., of the priests, to offer the
sacrifice upon the altar. To this end they were to "put fire upon the
altar" (of course this only applies to the first burnt-offering
presented after the erection of the altar, as the fire was to be
constantly burning upon the altar after that, without being allowed to
go out, [Lev 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006)), and to lay "wood in
order upon the fire" (ערך to lay in regular order), and then to "lay the
parts, the head and the fat, in order upon the wood on the fire," and
thus to cause the whole to ascend in smoke. פּדר, which is only used in
connection with the burnt-offering ([Lev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#008), [Lev
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#012), and [Lev
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#020)), signifies, according to the
ancient versions (lxx στέαρ) and the rabbinical writers, the fat,
probably those portions of fat which were separated from the entrails
and taken out to wash. Bochart's explanation is adeps a carne sejunctus.
The head and fat are specially mentioned along with the pieces of flesh,
partly because they are both separated from the flesh when animals are
slaughtered, and partly also to point out distinctly that the whole of
the animal ("all," [Lev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009)) was to be
burned upon the altar, with the exception of the skin, which was given
to the officiating priest ([Lev 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#008)),
and the contents of the intestines. הקטיר, to cause to ascend in smoke
and steam ([Exo 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007)), which is
frequently construed with המּזבּחה towards the altar (ה local, so used
as to include position in a place; vid., [Lev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#013), [Lev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015), [Lev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017); [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002), [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009), etc.), or with המּזבּח ([Lev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)), or על־המּזבּח ([Lev
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#013), [Lev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#017)), was the technical expression
for burning the sacrifice upon the altar, and showed that the intention
was not simply to burn those portions of the sacrifice which were placed
in the fire, i.e., to destroy, or turn them into ashes, but by this
process of burning to cause the odour which was eliminated to ascend to
heaven as the ethereal essence of the sacrifice, for a "firing of a
sweet savour unto Jehovah." אשּׁה, firing ("an offering made by fire,"
Eng. Ver.), is the general expression used to denote the sacrifices,
which ascended in fire upon the altar, whether animal or vegetable ([Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002), [Lev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011), [Lev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#016)), and is also applied to the
incense laid upon the shew-bread ([Lev
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#007)); and hence the shew-bread itself
([Lev 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#007)), and even those portions
of the sacrifices which Jehovah assigned to the priests for them to eat
([Deu 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001) cf. [Jos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#014)), came also to be included in
the firings for Jehovah. The word does not occur out of the Pentateuch,
except in [Jos 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#014) and [Sa1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#028). In the laws of sacrifice it is
generally associated with the expression, "a sweet savour unto Jehovah"
(ὀσμὴ εὐωδίας: lxx): an anthropomorphic description of the divine
satisfaction with the sacrifices offered, or the gracious acceptance of
them on the part of God (see [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)), which is used in connection
with all the sacrifices, even the expiatory or sin-offerings ([Lev
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#031)), and with the drink-offering
also ([Num 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#007), [Num
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#010)).

[Leviticus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 1:10</span></span>

With regard to the mode of sacrificing, the instructions already given
for the oxen applied to the flock (i.e., to the sheep and goats) as
well, so that the leading points are repeated here, together with a more
precise description of the place for slaughtering, viz., "by the side of
the altar towards the north," i.e., on the north side of the altar. This
was the rule with all the slain-offerings; although it is only in
connection with the burnt-offerings, sin-offerings, and
trespass-offerings ([Lev 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#024), [Lev
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#029), [Lev
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#033); [Lev
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018); [Lev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#002); [Lev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#013)) that it is expressly mentioned,
whilst the indefinite expression "at the door (in front) of the
tabernacle" is applied to the peace-offerings in [Lev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002), [Lev
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008), [Lev
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013), as it is to the
trespass-offerings in [Lev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004), from
which the Rabbins have inferred, though hardly upon good ground, that
the peace-offerings could be slaughtered in any part of the court. The
northern side of the altar was appointed as the place of slaughtering,
however, not from the idea that the Deity dwelt in the north (Ewald),
for such an idea is altogether foreign to Mosaism, but, as Knobel
supposes, probably because the table of shew-bread, with the continual
meat-offering, stood on the north side in the holy place. Moreover, the
eastern side of the altar in the court was the place for the refuse, or
heap of ashes ([Lev 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#016)); the ascent
to the altar was probably on the south side, as Josephus affirms that it
was in the second temple (J. de bell. jud. v. 5, 6); and the western
side, or the space between the altar and the entrance to the holy place,
would unquestionably have been the most unsuitable of all for the
slaughtering. In [Lev 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#012) וגו
ואת־ראשׁו is to be connected per zeugma with לנתחיו htiw amguez , "let
him cut it up according to its parts, and (sever) its head and its fat."

[Leviticus 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 1:14</span></span>

The burnt-offering of fowls was to consist of turtle-doves or young
pigeons. The Israelites have reared pigeons and kept dovecots from time
immemorial ([Isa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008), cf. [Kg2
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#025)); and the rearing of pigeons
continued to be a favourite pursuit with the later Jews (Josephus, de
bell. jud. v. 4, 4), so that they might very well be reckoned among the
domesticated animals. There are also turtle-doves and wild pigeons in
Palestine in such abundance, that they could easily furnish the ordinary
animal food of the poorer classes, and serve as sacrifices in the place
of the larger animals. The directions for sacrificing these, were that
the priest was to bring the bird to the altar, to hip off its head, and
cause it to ascend in smoke upon the altar. מלק, which only occurs in
[Lev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015) and [Lev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008), signifies undoubtedly to pinch
off, and not merely to pinch; for otherwise the words in [Lev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008), "and shall not divide it
asunder," would be superfluous. We have therefore to think of it as a
severance of the head, as the lxx (ἀποκνίζειν) and Rabbins have done,
and not merely a wringing of the neck and incision in the skin by which
the head was left hanging to the body; partly because the words, "and
not divide it asunder," are wanting here, and partly also because of the
words, "and burn it upon the altar," which immediately follow, and which
must refer to the head, and can only mean that, after the head had been
pinched off, it was to be put at once into the burning altar-fire. For
it is obviously unnatural to regard these words as anticipatory, and
refer them to the burning of the whole dove; not only from the
construction itself, but still more on account of the clause which
follows: "and the blood thereof shall be pressed out against the wall of
the altar." The small quantity that there was of the blood prevented it
from being caught in a vessel, and swung from it against the altar.

[Leviticus 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 1:16</span></span>

He then took out בּנצתהּ את־מראתו, i.e., according to the probable
explanation of these obscure words, "its crop in (with) the foeces
thereof,"

(Note: This is the rendering adopted by Onkelos. The lxx, on the
contrary, render it ἀφελεῖ τὸν πρόλοβον σὺν τοῖς πτεροῖς, and this
rendering is followed by Luther (and the English Version, Tr.), "its
crop with its feathers." But the Hebrew for this would have been ונצתו.
In Mishnah, Sebach. vi. 5, the instructions are the following: "et
removet ingluviem et pennas et viscera egredentia cum illa." This
interpretation may be substantially correct, although the reference of
בנוצתה to the feathers of the pigeon cannot be sustained on the ground
assigned. For if the bird's crop was taken out, the intestines with
their contents would unquestionably come out along with it. The plucking
off of the feathers, however, follows from the analogy of the flaying of
the animal. Only, in the text neither intestines nor feathers are
mentioned; they are passed over as subordinate matters, that could
readily be understood from the analogy of the other instructions.)

and threw it "at the side of the altar eastwards," i.e., on the eastern
side of the altar, "on the ash-place," where the ashes were thrown when
taken from the altar ([Lev 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003)). He
then made an incision in the wings of the pigeon, but without severing
them, and burned them on the altar-fire ([Lev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017), cf. [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009)).

The burnt-offerings all culminated in the presentation of the whole
sacrifice upon the altar, that it might ascend to heaven, transformed
into smoke and fragrance. Hence it is not only called עלה, the ascending
(see [Gen 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)), but כּליל, a
whole-offering ([Deu 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010); Ps. 51:21;
[Sa1 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009)). If the burning and sending
up in the altar-fire shadowed forth the self-surrender of the offerer to
the purifying fire of the Holy Ghost; the burnt-offering was an
embodiment of the idea of the consecration and self-surrender of the
whole man to the Lord, to be pervaded by the refining and sanctifying
power of divine grace. This self-surrender was to be vigorous and
energetic in its character; and this was embodied in the instructions to
choose male animals for the burnt-offering, the male sex being stronger
and more vigorous than the female. To render the self-sacrifice perfect,
it was necessary that the offerer should spiritually die, and that
through the mediator of his salvation he should put his soul into a
living fellowship with the Lord by sinking it as it were into the death
of the sacrifice that had died for him, and should also bring his bodily
members within the operations of the gracious Spirit of God, that thus
he might be renewed and sanctified both body and soul, and enter into
union with God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 2](lev002)

</div>
