<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal000)  [Next](mal002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

God's Love, and the Contempt of His NameMalachi 1:1-2:9

The Lord has shown love to Israel ([Mal
1:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002)), but Israel refuses Him the
gratitude which is due, since the priests despise His name by offering
bad sacrifices, and thereby cherish the delusion that God cannot do
without the sacrifices ([Mal 1:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)).
The people are therefore punished with adversity, and the priesthood
with desecration ([Mal 2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)).

[Malachi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 1:1</span></span>

The first verse contains the heading (see the introduction), "The burden
of the word of the Lord," as in [Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001) and [Zac
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001). On massa' (burden), see [Nah
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001). The prophet commences his address
in [Mal 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002), by showing the love for
which Israel has to thank its God, in order that on the ground of this
fact he may bring to the light the ingratitude of the people towards
their God. [Mal 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002). "I have loved
you, saith Jehovah; and ye say, Wherein hast Thou loved us? Is not Esau
a brother of Jacob? is the saying of Jehovah: and I loved Jacob, [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003). And I hated Esau, and made his
mountains a waste, and his inheritance for jackals of the desert. [Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004). If Edom says, We are dashed to
pieces, but will build up the ruins again, thus saith Jehovah of hosts:
They will build, but I will pull down: and men will call them territory
of wickedness, and the people with whom Jehovah is angry for ever. [Mal
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#005). And your eyes will see it; and ye
will say, Great is Jehovah over the border of Israel." These four verses
form neither an independent address, nor merely the first member of the
following address, but the introduction and foundation of the whole
book. The love which God has shown to Israel ought to form the motive
and model for the conduct of Israel towards its God. אהב denotes love in
its expression or practical manifestation. The question asked by the
people, "Wherein hast Thou shown us love?" may be explained from the
peculiarities of Malachi's style, and is the turn he regularly gives to
his address, by way of introducing the discussion of the matter in hand,
so that we are not to see in it any intention to disclose the hypocrisy
of the people. The prophet proves the love of Jehovah towards Israel,
from the attitude of God towards Israel and towards Edom. Jacob and
Esau, the tribe-fathers of both nations, were twin brothers. It would
therefore have been supposed that the posterity of both the Israelites
and the Edomites would be treated alike by God. But this is not the
case. Even before their birth Jacob was the chosen one; and Esau or Edom
was the inferior, who was to serve his brother ([Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023), cf. [Rom
9:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)). Accordingly Jacob became the
heir of the promise, and Esau lost this blessing. This attitude on the
part of God towards Jacob and Esau, and towards the nations springing
from them, is described by Malachi in these words: I (Jehovah) have
loved Jacob, and hated Esau. The verbs אהב, to love, and שׂנא, to hate,
must not be weakened down into loving more and loving less, to avoid the
danger of falling into the doctrine of predestination. שׂנא, to hate, is
the opposite of love. And this meaning must be retained here; only we
must bear in mind, that with God anything arbitrary is inconceivable,
and that no explanation is given here of the reasons which determined
the actions of God. Malachi does not expressly state in what the love of
God to Jacob (i.e., Israel) showed itself; but this is indirectly
indicated in what is stated concerning the hatred towards Edom. The
complete desolation of the Edomitish territory is quoted as a proof of
this hatred. [Mal 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003) does not refer
to the assignment of a barren land, as Rashi, Ewald, and Umbreit
suppose, but to the devastation of the land, which was only utterly
waste on the western mountains; whereas it was by no means barren on the
eastern slopes and valleys (see at [Gen
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039)). Tannōth is a feminine plural
form of tan = tannı̄m ([Mic 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008); [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022), etc.), by which, according to
the Syrio-Aramaean version, we are to understand the jackal. The meaning
dwelling-places, which Gesenius and others have given to tannōth, after
the lxx and Peshito, rests upon a very uncertain derivation (see
Roediger at Ges. Thes. p. 1511). "For jackals of the desert:" i.e., as a
dwelling-place for these beasts of the desert (see [Isa
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013)). It is a disputed point when
this devastation took place, and from what people it proceeded. Jahn,
Hitzig, and Koehler are of opinion that it is only of the most recent
date, because otherwise the Edomites would long ago have repaired the
injury, which, according to [Mal 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004),
does not appear to have been done. [Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004), however, simply implies that the
Edomites would not succeed in the attempt to repair the injury. On the
other hand, [Mal 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002), [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003) evidently contain the thought,
that whereas Jacob had recovered, in consequence of the love of Jehovah,
from the blow which had fallen upon it (through the Chaldaeans), Esau's
territory was still lying in ruins from the same blow, in consequence of
Jehovah's hatred (Caspari, Obad. p. 143). It follows from this, that the
devastation of Idumaea emanated from the Chaldaeans. On the other hand,
the objection that the Edomites appear to have submitted voluntarily to
the Babylonians, and to have formed an alliance with them, does not say
much, since neither the one nor the other can be raised even into a
position of probability; but, on the contrary, we may infer with the
greatest probability from [Jer 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007).,
as compared with [Jer 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009), [Jer
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#021), that the Edomites were also
subjugated by Nebuchadnezzar. Maurer's assumption, that Idumaea was
devastated by the Egyptians, Ammonites, and Moabites, against whom
Nebuchadnezzar marched in the fifth year after the destruction of
Jerusalem, is perfectly visionary. The threat in [Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004), that if Edom attempts to rebuild
its ruins, the Lord will again destroy that which is built, is
equivalent to a declaration that Edom will never recover its former
prosperity and power. This was soon fulfilled, the independence of the
Edomites being destroyed, and their land made an eternal desert,
especially from the times of the Maccabees onwards. The construction of
אדום as a feminine with תּאמר may be explained on the ground that the
land is regarded as the mother of its inhabitants, and stands
synecdochically for the population. Men will call them (להן, the
Edomites) גּבוּל רשׁעה, territory, land of wickedness, - namely,
inasmuch as they will look upon the permanent devastation, and the
failure of every attempt on the part of the nation to rise up again, as
a practical proof that the wrath of God is resting for ever upon both
people and land on account of Edom's sins.

[Mal 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#005)

These ineffectual attempts on the part of Edom to recover its standing
again will Israel see with its eyes, and then acknowledge that Jehovah
is showing Himself to be great above the land of Israel. מעל לגבוּל does
not mean "beyond the border of Israel" (Drus., Hitzig, Ewald, and
others). מעל ל does not mean this, but simply over, above (cf. [Neh
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#028); [Ecc
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007)). יגדּל is not a wish, "Let Him be
great, i.e., be praised," as in [Psa
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#027); [Psa
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017), etc. The expression מעל לגבוּל
י does not suit this rendering; for it is an unnatural assumption to
take this as an apposition to יהוה, in the sense of: Jehovah, who is
enthroned or rules over the border of Israel. Jehovah is great, when He
makes known His greatness to men, by His acts of power or grace.

[Malachi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 1:6</span></span>

The condemnation of that contempt of the Lord which the priests
displayed by offering bad or blemished animals in sacrifices, commences
with the following verse. [Mal 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006). "A
son honoureth the father, and a servant his master. And if I am a
father, where is my honour? and if I am a master, where is my fear?
saith Jehovah of hosts to you, ye priests who despise my name, and yet
say, Wherein have we despised Thy name? [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007). Ye who offer polluted bread upon
my altar, and yet say, Wherewith have we polluted thee? In that ye say,
The table of Jehovah, it is despised. V.8. And if ye offer what is blind
for sacrifice, it is no wickedness; and if ye offer what is lame and
diseased, it is no wickedness. Offer it, now, to thy governor: will he
be gracious to thee, or accept thy person? saith Jehovah of hosts. [Mal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#009). And now, supplicate the face of
God, that He may have compassion upon us: of your hand has this
occurred: will He look upon a person on your account? saith Jehovah of
hosts." This reproof is simply directed against the priests, but it
applies to the whole nation; for in the times after the captivity the
priests formed the soul of the national life. In order to make an
impression with his reproof, the prophet commences with a generally
acknowledged truth, by which both priests and people could and ought to
measure their attitude towards the Lord. The statement, that the son
honours the father and the servant his master, is not to be taken as a
moral demand. יכבּד is not jussive (Targ., Luth., etc.); for this would
only weaken the prophet's argument. The imperfect expresses what
generally occurs, individual exceptions which are sometimes met with
being overlooked. Malachi does not even appeal to the law in [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012), which enjoins upon children
reverence towards their parents, and in which reverence on the part of a
servant towards his master is also implied, but simply lays it down as a
truth which no one will call in question. To this he appends the further
truth, which will also be admitted without contradiction, that Jehovah
is the Father and Lord of Israel. Jehovah is called the Father of Israel
in the song of Moses ([Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)),
inasmuch as He created and trained Israel to be His covenant nation;
compare [Isa 63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016), where Jehovah is
called the Father of Israel as being its Redeemer (also [Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009) and [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)). As Father, God is also Lord
('ădōnı̄m: plur. majest.) of the nation, which He has made His
possession. But if He is a Father, the honour which a son owes to his
father is due to Him; and if a Lord, the fear which a servant owes to
his lord is also due to Him. The suffixes attached to כּבודי and מוראי
are used in an objective sense, as in [Gen
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002); [Exo
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017), etc. In order now to say to the
priests in the most striking manner that they do the opposite of this,
the prophet calls them in his address despisers of the name of Jehovah,
and fortifies this against their reply by proving that they exhibit this
contempt in their performance of the altar service. With regard to the
construction of the clauses in the last members of [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006), and also in [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007), the participle מגּישׁים is
parallel to בּוזי שׁמי, and the reply of the priests to the charge
brought against them is attached to these two participial clauses by
"and ye say;" and the antithesis is exhibited more clearly by the choice
of the finite tense, than it would have been by the continuation of the
participle.

[Mal 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007) is not an answer to the
question of the priests, "Wherein have we despised Thy name?" for the
answer could not be given in the participle; but though the clause
commencing with maggı̄shı̄m does explain the previous rebuke, viz., that
they despise the name of Jehovah, and will not even admit that this is
true, it is not in the form of an answer to the reply of the opponents,
but by a simple reference to the conduct of the priests. The answer is
appended by בּאמרכם in [Mal 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007) to the
reply made to this charge also; and this answer is explained in [Mal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008) by an allusion to the nature of
the sacrificial animals, without being followed by a fresh reply on the
part of the priests, because this fact cannot be denied. The contempt on
the part of the priests of the name of Jehovah, i.e., of the glory in
which God manifested Himself in Israel, was seen in the fact that they
offered polluted bread upon the altar of Jehovah. Lechem, bread or food,
does not refer to the shew-bread, for that was not offered upon the
altar, but is the sacrificial flesh, which is called in [Lev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006), [Lev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#008), [Lev
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017), the food (lechem) of God (on
the application of this epithet to the sacrifices, see the remarks in
our comm. on [Lev 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011), [Lev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016)). The prophet calls this food
מגאל, polluted, blemished, not so much with reference to the fact, that
the priests offered the sacrifices in a hypocritical or impure state of
mind (Ewald), as because, according to [Mal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008), the sacrificial animals were
affected with blemishes (mūm), or had something corrupt (moshchâth)
about them ([Lev 22:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#020)). The reply,
"Wherewith have we defiled Thee?" is to be explained from the idea that
either touching or eating anything unclean would defile a person. In
this sense they regard the offering of defiled food to God as defiling
God Himself. The prophet answers: In that ye represent the table of
Jehovah as something contemptible. The table of Jehovah is the altar,
upon which the sacrifices (i.e., the food of God) were laid. נבזה has
the force of an adjective here: contemptible. They represent the altar
as contemptible not so much in words or speeches, as in their practice,
viz., by offering up bad, despicable sacrificial animals, which had
blemishes, being either blind, lame, or diseased, and which were unfit
for sacrifices on account of these blemishes, according to the law in
[Lev 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#020). Thus they violated both
reverence for the altar and also reverence for Jehovah. The words אין רע
are not to be taken as a question, but are used by the prophet in the
sense of the priests, and thus assume the form of bitter irony. רע, bad,
evil, as a calumniation of Jehovah. In order to disclose to them their
wrong in the most striking manner, the prophet asks them whether the
governor (פּחה: see at [Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)) would
accept such presents; and then in [Mal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#009) draws this conclusion, that God
also would not hear the prayers of the priests for the people. He
clothes this conclusion in the form of a challenge to supplicate the
face of Jehovah (חלּה פני: see at [Zac
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#002)), that God would have compassion
upon the nation; but at the same time he intimates by the question,
whether God would take any notice of this, that under the existing
circumstances such intercession would be fruitless. פּני אל is selected
in the place of פּני יהוה, to lay the greater emphasis upon the
antithesis between God and man (the governor). If the governor would not
accept worthless gifts graciously, how could they expect a gracious
answer to their prayers from God when they offered such gifts to Him?
The suffix in יחנּנוּ refers to the people, in which the prophet
includes himself. The clause "from your hand has זאת (this: viz., the
offering of such reprehensible sacrifices) proceeded" (cf. [Isa
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011)), is inserted between the
summons to pray to God and the intimation of the certain failure of such
intercession, to give still further prominence to the unlawfulness of
such an act. The question הישּׂא וגו is appended to the principal clause
חלּוּ־נא , and מכּם פּנים does not stand for פּניכם: will He lift up
your face, i.e., show you favour? but מכּם is causal, "on your account"
(Koehler): "will He regard a person, that is to say, will He show favour
to any one, on your account, viz., because ye pray to Him for
compassion, when these are the actions ye perform?" The view of Jerome,
Grotius, and Hitzig, that the challenge to seek the face of God is an
earnest call to repentance or to penitential prayer, is at variance with
the context. What follows, for example, is opposed to this, where the
prophet says it would be better if the temple were closed, since God
does not need sacrifices.

[Malachi 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 1:10</span></span>

[Mal 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010). "O that there were one
among you, who would shut the doors, that ye might not light mine altar
to no purpose! I have no pleasure in you, saith Jehovah of hosts, and
sacrificial offering does not please me from your hand. [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011). For from the rising of the sun
to the setting thereof my name is great among the nations, and in every
place incense is burned and sacrifice offered, and indeed a pure
sacrifice to my name; for my name is great among the nations, saith
Jehovah of hosts. [Mal 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012). And ye
desecrate it with your saying: the table of Jehovah, it is defiled, and
its fruit - contemptible is its food. [Mal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013). And ye say: behold what a
plague! and ye blow upon it, saith Jehovah of hosts, and ye bring hither
what is robbed and the lame and the sick, and thus ye bring the
sacrificial gift; shall I take pleasure in this from your hand? saith
Jehovah." The construction מי בכם ויסגּר is to be explained in
accordance with [Job 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023) : "Who is
among you and he would shut," for "who is there who would shut?" and the
question is to be taken as the expression of a wish, as in [Sa2
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#004); [Psa
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007), etc.: "would that some one among
you would shut!" The thought is sharpened by gam, which not only belongs
to בּכם, but to the whole of the clause: "O that some one would shut,"
etc. The doors, the shutting of which is to be desired, are the folding
doors of the inner court, in which the altar of burnt-offering stood;
and the object of the wish is that the altar might no more be lighted
up, not "by lights which burned by the side of the altar" (Ewald), but
by the shining of the sacrificial fire which burned upon the altar.
חנּם, in vain, i.e., without any object or use, for Jehovah had no
pleasure in such priests or such worthless sacrifices. Minchâh here is
not the meat-offering as distinguished from the slain-offering, but
sacrifice generally, as in [Sa1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#017);
[Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013); [Zep
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010), etc. Such sacrifices God does
not desire, for His name proves itself to be great among all the nations
of the earth, so that pure sacrifices are offered to Him in every place.
This is the simple connection between [Mal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010), [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011), and one in perfect harmony with
the words. Koehler's objection, that such a line of argument apparently
presupposes that God needs sacrifices on the part of man for His own
sake, and is only in a condition to despise the sacrifices of His nation
when another nation offers Him better ones, has no force, because the
expression "for His own sake," in the sense of "for His sustenance or to
render the perpetuation of His being possible," with the conclusion
drawn from it, is neither to be found in the words of the text, nor in
the explanation referred to. God does indeed need no sacrifices for the
maintenance of His existence, and He does not demand them for this
purpose, but He demands them as signs of the dependence of men upon Him,
or of the recognition on the part of men that they are indebted to God
for life and every other blessing, and owe Him honour, praise, and
thanksgiving in return. In this sense God needs sacrifices, because
otherwise He would not be God to men on earth; and from this point of
view the argument that God did not want to receive the reprehensible
sacrifices of the Israelitish priests, because sacrifices were offered
to Him by the nations of the earth in all places, and therefore His name
was and remained great notwithstanding the desecration of it on the part
of Israel, was a very proper one for attacking the delusion, that God
needs sacrifices for His own sustenance; a delusion which the
Israelitish priests, against whom Malachi was contending, really
cherished, if not in thesi, at all events in praxi, when they thought
any sacrificial animal good enough for God. Koehler's assumption, that
[Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011) contains a subordinate
parenthetical thought, and that the reason for the assertion in [Mal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010) is not given till [Mal
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012), [Mal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013), is opposed to the structure of
the sentences, since it necessitates the insertion of "although" after
כּי in [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011).

It is must more difficult to decide the question whether [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011) treats of what was already
occurring at the time of the prophet himself, as Hitzig, Maurer, and
Koehler suppose (after the lxx, Ephr., Theod. Mops., etc.), or of that
which would take place in the future through the reception of the
heathen into the kingdom of God in the place of Israel, which would be
rejected for a time (Cyr., Theod., Jerome, Luther, Calvin, and others,
down to Hengstenberg and Schmieder). Both of these explanations are
admissible on grammatical grounds; for such passages as [Gen
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014) and [Joe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004) show very clearly that the
participle is also used for the future. If we take the words as
referring to the present, they can only mean that the heathen, with the
worship and sacrifices which they offer to the gods, do worship, though
ignorantly yet in the deepest sense, the true and living God (Koehler).
But this thought is not even expressed by the Apostle Paul in so
definite or general a form, either in [Rom
1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019), where he teaches that the
heathen can discern the invisible being of God from His works, or in
[Act 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023). in his address at Athens,
where he infers from the inscription upon an altar, "to the unknown
God," that the unknown God, whom the Athenians worshipped, is the true
God who made heaven and earth. Still less is this thought contained in
our verse. Malachi does not speak of an "unknown God," whom all nations
from the rising to the setting of the sun, i.e., over all the earth,
worshipped, but says that Jehovah's name is great among the nations of
the whole earth. And the name of God is only great among the Gentiles,
when Jehovah has proved Himself to them to be a great God, so that they
have discerned the greatness of the living God from His marvellous works
and thus have learned to fear Him (cf. [Zep
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011); [Psa
46:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009); [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011), [Exo
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014)). This experience of the
greatness of God forms the substratum for the offering of sacrifices in
every place, since this offering is not mentioned merely as the
consequence of the fact that the name of Jehovah is great among the
nations; but in the clause before the last, "the latter is also
expressly placed towards the former in the relation of cause to effect"
(Koehler). The idea, therefore, that the statement, that incense is
burned and sacrifice offered to the name of Jehovah in every place,
refers to the sacrifices which the heathen offered to their gods, is
quite inadmissible. At the time of Malachi the name of Jehovah was not
great from the rising to the setting of the sun, nor were incense and
sacrifice offered to Him in every place, and therefore even Hitzig looks
upon the expression בּכל־מקום as "saying too much." Consequently we must
understand the words prophetically as relating to that spread of the
kingdom of God among all nations, with which the worship of the true God
would commence "in every place." בּכל־מקום forms an antithesis to the
one place, in the temple at Jerusalem, to which the worship of God was
limited during the time of the old covenant ([Deu
12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)). מקטר is not a partic.
nominasc., incense, suffimentum, for this could not signify the
burnt-offering or slain-offering as distinguished from the meat-offering
(minchâh), but it is a partic. verbale, and denotes not the kindling of
the sacrificial flesh upon the altar, but the kindling of the incense
(suffitur); for otherwise מגּשׁ would necessarily stand before מקטר,
since the presentation preceded the burning upon the altar. The two
participles are connected together asyndetos and without any definite
subject (see Ewald, 295, a). It is true that minchâh tehōrâh does
actually belong to muggâsh as the subject, but it is attached by Vav
explic. in the form of an explanatory apposition: offering is presented
to my name, and indeed a sacrificial gift (minchâh covering every
sacrifice, as in [Mal 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)). The
emphasis rests upon tehōrâh, pure, i.e., according to the requirements
of the law, in contrast to sacrifices polluted by faulty animals, such
as the priests of that day were accustomed to offer.

(Note: In [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011) the Romish Church
finds a biblical foundation for its doctrine of the bloodless sacrifice
of the New Testament, i.e., the holy sacrifice of the mass (see Canones
et decreta concil. Trident. sess. 22), understanding by minchâh the
meat-offering as distinguished from the bloody sacrifices. But even if
there were any ground for this explanation of the word, which there is
not, it would furnish no support to the sacrifice of the mass, since
apart from the fact that the sacrifice of the mass has a totally
different meaning from the meat-offering of the Old Testament, the
literal interpretation of the word is precluded by the parallel "burning
incense" or "frankincense." If burning incense was a symbol of prayer,
as even Reincke admits, the "sacrificial offering" can only have denoted
the spiritual surrender of a man to God ([Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)).)

In the allusion to the worship, which would be paid by all nations to
the name of the Lord, there is an intimation that the kingdom of God
will be taken from the Jews who despise the Lord, and given to the
heathen who seek God. This intimation forms the basis for the curse
pronounced in [Mal 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014) upon the
despisers of God, and shows "that the kingdom of God will not perish,
when the Lord comes and smites the land with the curse ([Mal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)), but that this apparent death is
the way to true life" (Hengstenberg).

To this allusion to the attitude which the heathen will assume towards
Jehovah when He reveals His name to them, the prophet appends as an
antithesis in [Mal 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012), [Mal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013) a repetition of the reproof, that
the priests of Israel desecrate the name of the Lord by that contempt of
His name, which they display by offering faulty animals in sacrifice.
[Mal 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012) is only a repetition of the
rebuke in v.7. חלּל is really equivalent to בּזה שׁם and גּאל in [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006) and [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007), and מגאל to נבזה in [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007), which occurs in the last clause
of [Mal 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012) as synonymous with it.
The additional words וניבו וגו serve to strengthen the opinion expressed
by the priests concerning the table of the Lord. ניבו is placed at the
head absolutely, and is substantially resumed in אכלו. ניב, proventus,
produce, income; the suffix refers to shulchan Yehōvâh (the table of the
Lord). The revenue of the table of the Lord, i.e., of the altar,
consisted of the sacrifices offered upon it, which are also called its
food. The assumption is an erroneous one, that the sentence contains any
such thought as the following: "The revenue drawn by the priests from
the altar, i.e., the sacrificial flesh which fell to their share, was
contemptible;" according to which the priests would be represented as
declaring, that they themselves could not eat the flesh of the
sacrifices offered without disgust; for they could not possibly speak in
this way, since it was they themselves who admitted the faulty animals.
If the flesh of blind, lame, or diseased animals had been too bad for
food in their estimation, they would not have admitted such animals or
offered them in sacrifice (Koehler). Even in [Mal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013) this thought is not implied.
מתּלאה is a contraction of מה־תּלאה (cf. Ges. 20, 2, a): What a
weariness it is! The object, which the priests declare to be a
burdensome and troublesome affair, can only be inferred from the
following expression, vehippachtem 'ōthō. Hippēăch signifies here to
blow away, like הפיח ב in [Psa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005),
which is radically connected with it, i.e., to treat contemptuously. The
suffix אותו does not refer to אכלו, but to שׁלחן יי. The table of
Jehovah (i.e., the altar) they treat contemptuously. Consequently the
service at the altar is a burden or a trouble to them, whereas this
service ought to be regarded as an honour and a privilege. Jerome thinks
that instead of אותו, we might read אותי, which is found in a good
number of codices; and according to the Masora, אותו has found its way
into the text as Tikkune Sopherim (compare the remarks at [Hab
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012) on the Tikkune Sopherim). But in
this case also the reading in the text is evidently original and
correct. They manifest their contempt of the altar by offering in
sacrifice that which has been stolen, etc. (cf. [Mal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008)). The first הבאתם is to be
understood as referring to the bringing of the animals upon the altar;
and והבאתם את־המּנחה is to be interpreted thus: "And having brought such
worthless animals to the slaughter, ye then offer the sacrificial gift."
There is indeed no express prohibition in the law against offering
gâzūl, or that which has been stolen; but it was shut out from the class
of admissible sacrifices by the simple fact, that robbery was to be
visited with punishment as a crime. The reproof closes with the
question, which is repeated from [Mal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008) (cf. [Mal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)), whether God can accept such
sacrifices with pleasure. The prophet then utters the curse in the name
of God upon all who offer bad and unsuitable sacrifices.

[Malachi 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 1:14</span></span>

"And cursed is he who deceives whilst there is in his flock a male
animal, and he who vows and sacrifices to the Lord that which is
corrupt; for I am a great King, saith Jehovah of hosts, and my name is
feared among the nations." This verse is not attached adversatively to
[Mal 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013), but Vav is the simple
copula, for the question in [Mal 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013)
has a negative sense, or is to be answered by "No." To this answer there
is attached the curse upon all the Israelites who offer such sacrifices
to God as have not the characteristics required by the law. Two cases
are mentioned. In the first place, that when according to the law a male
animal ought to have been sacrificed, the person offering the sacrifice
offered a female, i.e., one of less value, under the pretence that he
did not possess or could not procure a male. The prophet calls this
nâkhal, cheating. The second case refers to votive sacrifices; for which
as zebhach shelâmı̄m ([Lev 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#021)) both
male and female animals could be used, though only such as were free
from faults, inasmuch as animals having any moshchâth are declared in
[Lev 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#025) to be not acceptable.
Moshchâth, according to the Masoretic pointing, is the feminine of the
hophal participle for משׁחתתּ, like משׁרת for משׁרתת in [Kg1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#015) (cf. Ewald, 188, b, and
Olshausen, p. 393), according to which we should have to think of a
female animal in bad condition. This pointing, however, is probably
connected with the view still defended by Ewald, Maurer, and Hitzig,
that the words ונדר וזבח are a continuation of the circumstantial clause
וישׁ וגו, and that [Mal 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014) only
refers to votive sacrifices: Cursed is the deceiver who has in his flock
a male, but vows and sacrifices a corrupt female. This view, however, is
evidently opposed to the meaning of the words. If לונדר were a
circumstantial clause, we should expect והוּא נדר. Moreover, since even
female animals were admissible for votive sacrifices, the vowing and
offering of a female animal could not be blamed in itself, and therefore
what was reprehensible was not that a female animal was vowed and
offered in sacrifice by any one, but that, instead of offering a
faultless animal (tâmı̄m), he presented a blemished one. We must
therefore follow the ancient translators and many commentators, who read
moshchâth (masc.), according to which the curse is pronounced upon any
one who vowed a sacrifice and afterwards redeemed his vow with a faulty
and unsuitable animal. An animal was moshchâth, corrupt, when it had any
fault, which rendered it unsuitable for sacrifice. The reason for the
curse is explained by reminding them of the greatness of God. Because
Jehovah is a great King and His name is feared among the nations, to
offer a corrupt animal in sacrifice is an offence against His majesty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 2](mal002)

</div>
