<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic003)  [Next](mic005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 4:0</span></span>

Glorification of the House of the Lord, and Restoration of the Dominion
of Zion - [Mic 4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)

Zion will eventually be exalted from the deepest degradation to the
highest glory. This fundamental thought of the announcement of salvation
contained in [Mic 4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001) and [Mic
5:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001) is carried out thus far in [Mic
4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001) : the first section ([Mic
4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)) depicts the glorification of
the temple mountain by the streaming of the heathen nations to it to
hear the law of the Lord, and the blessing which Israel and the nations
will derive therefrom; and the second section ([Mic
4:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008)) describes the restoration of
the dominion of Zion from its fallen condition through the redemption of
the nation out of Babel, and its victorious conflict with the nations of
the world.

[Micah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 4:1</span></span>

The promise of salvation opens, in closest connection with the
destruction of Jerusalem and of the temple, with a picture of the glory
awaiting in the remotest future the temple mountain, which has now
become a wild forest-height. [Mic 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001).
"And it comes to pass at the end of the days, that the mountain of
Jehovah's house will be established on the head of the mountains, and it
will be exalted above the hills, and nations stream to it. [Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002). And many nations go, and say, Up,
let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, and to the house of the God of
Jacob, that He may teach us of His ways, and we may walk in His paths:
for from Zion will law go forth, and the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
[Mic 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003). And He will judge between
many nations, and pronounce sentence on strong nations afar off; and
they forge their swords into coulters, and their spears into
pruning-hooks: nation will not lift up sword against nation, nor will
they learn war any more. [Mic 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004). And
they will sit, every one under his vine, and under his fig-tree, and no
one will make them afraid: for the mouth of Jehovah of hosts hath spoken
it."

(Note: This promise is placed by Isaiah ([Isa
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)) at the head of his prophecy of
Zion's way through judgment from the false glory to the true. The
originality of the passage in Micah is open to no question. Delitzsch
acknowledges this, and has given the principal arguments in its favour
in the Commentary on Isaiah. For still more elaborate proofs, see
Caspari's Micha, pp. 444-5.)

By the phrase "at the end of the days," which always denotes the
Messianic era when used by the prophets (see at [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)), the predicted exaltation of the
temple mountain is assigned to the period of the completion of the
kingdom of God. The mountain of the house of Jehovah is the temple
mountain, strictly speaking, Moriah, as the distinction made between the
mountain of the house and Zion in [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012) clearly shows; but as a
subordinate peak of Zion, it is embraced along with Zion in what follows
(compare [Mic 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002) with [Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007)) as the seat of Jehovah's rule,
from which the law proceeds. נכון does not mean placed or set up, but
established, founded. By connecting the participle with יהיה, the
founding is designated as a permanent one. בּראשׁ ההרים, upon (not at)
the top of the mountains, as in [Jdg
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007); [Sa1
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#013); [Psa
72:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#016); whereas such passages as [Mic
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013); [Amo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#007), and [Kg1
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#009) are of a different character, and
have no bearing upon the point. The temple mountain, or Zion, will be so
exalted above all the mountains and hills, that it will appear to be
founded upon the top of the mountains. This exaltation is of course not
a physical one, as Hofmann, Drechsler, and several of the Rabbins
suppose, but a spiritual (ethical) elevation above all the mountains.
This is obvious from [Mic 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002),
according to which Zion will tower above all the mountains, because the
law of the Lord issues from it. The assumption of a physical elevation
cannot be established from [Eze 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#002)
and [Rev 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010), for in the visions
described in both these passages the earthly elevation is a symbol of a
spiritual one. "Through a new revelation of the Lord, which is made upon
it, and which leaves the older revelations far behind, whether made upon
Sinai or upon itself, Zion becomes the greatest and loftiest mountain in
the world" (Caspari), and the mountain seen from afar, to which
"nations" stream, and not merely the one nation of Israel.

עמּים is more precisely defined in [Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002) as גּוים רבּים. The attractive
power which this mountain exerts upon the nations, so that they call
upon one another to go up to it ([Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)), does not reside in its height,
which towers above that of all other mountains, but in the fact that the
house of the God of Jacob stands upon it, i.e., that Jehovah is
enthroned there, and teacher how to walk in His ways. הורה מן, to teach
out of the ways, so that the ways of God form the material from which
they derive continual instruction. The desire for salvation, therefore,
is the motive which prompts them to this pilgrimage; for they desire
instruction in the ways of the Lord, that they may walk in them. The
ways of Jehovah are the ways which God takes in His dealing with men,
and by which men are led by Him; in reality, therefore, the ordinances
of salvation which He has revealed in His word, the knowledge and
observance of which secure life and blessedness. The words "for the law
goes forth from Zion," etc., are words spoken not by the nations, but by
the prophet, and assign the reason why the heathen go with such zeal to
the mountain of Jehovah. The accent is laid upon מצּיון (from Zion),
which stands at the head, and מירוּשׁלם (from Jerusalem), which is
parallel to it. Thence does tōrâh, i.e., instruction in the ways of God,
proceed, - in other words, the law as the rule of a godly life, and
debhar Yehōvâh (the word of Jehovah), or the word of revelation as the
source of salvation. It is evident from this that the mountain of the
house of God is not thought of here as the place of worship, but as the
scene of divine revelation, the centre of the kingdom of God. Zion is
the source of the law and word of the Lord, from which the nations draw
instruction how to walk in the ways of God, to make it their own, take
it to their homes, and walk according to it. The fruit of this adoption
of the word of the Lord will be, that they will not longer fight out
their disputes with weapons of war, but let Jehovah judge and settle
them, and thus acknowledge Him as their King and Judge. שׁפם signifies
to act as judge; הוכיה (lit., to set right), to settle and put a stop to
a dispute. "Many nations," in contrast with the one nation, which
formerly was alone in acknowledge Jehovah as its King and Judge. This is
strengthened still further by the parallel "strong, mighty nations afar
off." In consequence of this they will turn their weapons into
instruments of peaceful agriculture, and wage no more war; in fact, they
will learn war no more, no longer exercise themselves in the use of
arms. For the words וכתּתוּ וגו compare [Joe
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010), where the summons to the nations
to a decisive conflict with the kingdom of God is described as turning
the instruments of agriculture into weapons of war. With the cessation
of war, universal peace will ensue, and Israel will have no further
enemies to fear, so that every one will have undisturbed enjoyment of
the blessings of peace, of which Israel had had a foretaste during the
peaceful reign of Solomon. The words "sit under his vine" are taken from
[Kg1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#005) (cf. [Zac
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#010)), and אין מחריד from the promise
in [Lev 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006). All this, however
incredible it might appear, not only for the Israel of that time, but
even now under the Christian dispensation, will assuredly take place,
for the mouth of Jehovah the true God has spoken it.

[Micah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 4:5</span></span>

It will not be through any general humanitarian ideas and efforts,
however, that the human race will reach this goal, but solely through
the omnipotence and faithfulness of the Lord. The reason assigned for
the promise points to this. [Mic 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005).
"For all nations walk every man in the name of his God, but we walk in
the name of Jehovah our God for ever and ever." This verse does not
contain an exhortation, or a resolution to walk in the name of God,
which involves an exhortation, in the sense of "if all nations walk,
etc., then we will," etc.; for an admonition or a resolution neither
suits the connection, in the midst of simple promises, nor the words
themselves, since we should at any rate expect נלכה instead of נלך. The
sameness in the form of the verbs ילכוּ and נלך requires that they
should be understood in the same way. Walking in the name of God does
not mean regulating the conduct according to the name of a God, i.e.,
according to the nature which expresses itself in the name, or
worshipping him in a manner corresponding to his nature (Caspari), but
walking in the strength of God, in which the nature of this God is
displayed. This is the meaning of the phrase in [Sa1
17:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#045) and [Zac
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#012), where "I strengthen them in
Jehovah" forms the basis of "and in His name will they walk" (compare
[Pro 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010), "The name of the Lord is a
strong tower"). But the gods of all the nations, i.e., of all the
heathen, are worthless beings, without life, without strength. Jehovah,
on the contrary, is the only true God, the almighty Creator and Governor
of the world. And the heathen, with their worthless gods, can do nothing
to Him and the nation which walks in His name, his strength. If,
therefore, Israel rejoices for ever and ever in the strength of its God,
the heathen nations cannot disturb the peace which He will create for
Israel and all who accept His word. In this way is the promise in [Mic
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003) and [Mic
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004) explained in [Mic
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005). But this explanation assumes
that, even at the time when many nations stream to the mountain of the
Lord, there will still be nations that do not seek Jehovah and His word,
- a thought which is still further expanded in v. [Mic
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004)., and involves this consolation,
that such opponents of the people of God as shall be still in existence
will not be able to interfere with the salvation which has been prepared
for it by its God.

[Micah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 4:6</span></span>

From this salvation even the Israel that may be in misery or scattered
abroad will not be excluded. [Mic 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006).
"In that day, is the saying of Jehovah, will I assemble that which
limps, and gather together that which has been thrust out, and which I
have afflicted. [Mic 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007). And I will
make that which limps into a remnant, and that which is far removed into
a strong nation; and Jehovah will rule over them from henceforth, even
for ever." "In that day" points back to the end of the days in [Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001). At the time when many nations
shall go on pilgrimage to the highly exalted mountain of the Lord, and
therefore Zion-Jerusalem will not only be restored, but greatly
glorified, the Lord will assemble that which limps and is scattered
abroad. The feminines הצּלעה and הנּדּחה are neuters, and to be
understood collectively. Limping denotes the miserable condition into
which the dispersed have been brought (cf. [Psa
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015); [Psa
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018)). And this misery is inflicted
by God. The limping and dispersed are those whom Jehovah has afflicted,
whom He has punished for their sins. The gathering together of the
nation has already been promised in [Mic
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012); but there the assembling of all
Israel was foretold, whereas here it is merely the assembling of the
miserable, and of those who are scattered far and wide. There is no
discrepancy in these two promises. The difference may easily be
explained from the different tendencies of the two addressed. "All
Jacob" referred to the two separate kingdoms into which the nation was
divided in the time of the prophet, viz., Israel and Judah, and it was
distinctly mentioned there, because the banishment of both had been
foretold. This antithesis falls into the background here; and, on the
other hand, prominence is given, in connection with what precedes, to
the idea of happiness in the enjoyment of the blessings of the holy
land. The gathering together involves reinstatement in the possession
and enjoyment of these blessings. Hence only the miserable and dispersed
are mentioned, to express the thought that no one is to be excluded from
the salvation which the Lord will bestow upon His people in the future,
though now he may be pining in the misery of the exile inflicted upon
them. But just as the whole of the nation of Israel to be gathered
together, according to [Mic 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012),
consists of the remnant of the nation only, so does the gathering
together referred to here point only to the restoration of the remnant,
which is to become a strong nation, over which Jehovah reigns as King in
Zion. מלך is emphatic, expressing the setting up of the perfected
monarchy, as it has never yet existed, either in the present or the
past.

(Note: "Micah does not mention the descendants of David here, but
Jehovah Himself, not to exclude the kingdom of David, but to show that
God will prove that He was the author of that kingdom, and that all the
power is His. For although God governed the ancient people by the hand
of David, and by the hand of Josiah and Hezekiah, yet there was as it
were a cloud interposed, so that God then reigned obscurely. The prophet
therefore indicates a certain difference here between that shadowy
kingdom and the new kingdom which God will openly manifest at the advent
of the Messiah." - Calvin.)

This dominion will never be interrupted again, as it formerly was, by
the banishment of the nation into exile on account of its sins, but will
endure מעתּה (henceforth), i.e., from the future, which is regarded as
present, even for ever.

So far as the realization of this exceedingly glorious promise is
concerned, the expression standing at the head, be'achărı̄th hayyâmı̄m (at
the end of the days), already points to the Messianic times: and the
substance of the promise itself points to the times of the completion of
the Messianic kingdom, i.e., to the establishment of the kingdom of
glory ([Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)). The temple
mountain is a type of the kingdom of God in its New Testament form,
which is described by all the prophets after the forms of the Old
Testament kingdom of God. Accordingly, the going of the nations to the
mountain of the house of Jehovah is, as a matter of fact, the entrance
of the heathen who have been brought to the faith into the kingdom of
Christ. This commenced with the spread of the gospel among the Gentiles,
and has been continued through all the ages of the Christian church. But
however many nations have hitherto entered into the Christian church,
the time has not yet come for them to be so entirely pervaded with the
spirit of Christ, as to allow their disputes to be settled by the Lord
as their King, or to renounce war, and live in everlasting peace. Even
for Israel the time has not yet come for the limping and exiled to be
gathered together and made into a strong nation, however many individual
Jews have already found salvation and peace within the bosom of the
Christian church. The cessation of war and establishment of eternal
peace can only take place after the destruction of all the ungodly
powers on earth, at the return of Christ to judgment and for the
perfecting of His kingdom. But even then, when, according to [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)., the pleroma of the Gentiles
shall have entered into the kingdom of God, and Israel as a nation (πᾶς
Ἰσραήλ = יעקב כּלּו in [Mic 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012))
shall have turned to its Redeemer, and shall be assembled or saved, no
physical elevation of the mountain of Zion will ensue, nor any
restoration of the temple in Jerusalem, or return of the dispersed of
Israel to Palestine. The kingdom of glory will be set up on the new
earth, in the Jerusalem which was shown to the holy seer on Patmos in
the Spirit, on a great and lofty mountain ([Rev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010)). In this holy city of God there
will be no temple, "for the Lord, the Almighty God, and the Lamb, are
the temple thereof" ([Rev 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022)). The
word of the Lord to the Samaritan woman concerning the time when men
would neither worship God on this mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem, but
worship Him in spirit and in truth ([Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021), [Joh
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023)), applies not only to the kingdom
of God in its temporal development into the Christian church, but also
to the time of the completion of the kingdom of God in glory.

[Micah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 4:8</span></span>

The prophecy turns from the highest glorification of Zion to the throne
of Zion, which had been founded by David, and swept away with the
destruction of Jerusalem ([Mic 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012)),
and predicts its restoration in the future. Consequently the reign of
Jehovah upon Mount Zion, promised in [Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007), is still further defined as
effected through the medium of the Davidico-Messianic dominion. [Mic
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008). "And thou flock-tower, hill of
the daughter Zion, to thee will the former dominion reach and come, the
reign over the daughter Jerusalem." This announcement is attached
primarily to [Mic 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006) and [Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007). As the remnant of Israel gathered
together out of the dispersion will become a strong nation, so shall the
reign of the daughter Zion be also restored. The address to the
flock-tower, the hill of the daughter Zion, shows that these two notions
express the same thing, looked at from two sides, or with two different
bearings, so that the flock-tower is more precisely defined as the "hill
of the daughter Zion." Now, as the daughter Zion is the city of Zion
personified as a virgin, the hill of the daughter Zion might be
understood as denoting the hill upon which the city stood, i.e., Mount
Zion. But this is precluded by [Isa
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#014), where hill and watch-tower
(‛ōphel vâbhachan) are mentioned in parallelism with the palace
('armōn), as places or buildings which are to serve as dens for ever.
From this it is obvious that ‛ōphel was a place either at the side or at
the top of Zion. If we compare with this [Ch2
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003) and [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014), according to which Jotham built
much against the wall of the Ophel (hâ‛ōphel), and Manasseh encircled
the Ophel with a wall, and made it very high, Ophel must have been a
hill, possibly a bastion, on the south-eastern border of Zion, the
fortification of which was of great importance as a defence to the city
of Zion against hostile attacks.

(Note: The opinion that Ophel is the whole of the southern steep rocky
promontory of Moriah, from the southern end of the temple ground to its
extreme point (Robinson, Schultz, Williams), viz., the Ophla or Ophlas
of Josephus, as Arnold (Herzog's Cycl.) and Winer (Bibl. R.W.) suppose,
would be in perfect harmony with this. At the same time, all that can be
inferred with any certainty from the passages from Josephus which as
cited in support of it (viz., Wars of the Jews, v. 6, 1; cf. vi. 6, 3
and v. 4, 2) is, that the place called Ophla was in the neighbourhood of
the valley of Kidron and of the temple mountain. The question then
arises, whether the Ophla of Josephus is identical with the Ophel of the
Old Testament, since Josephus does not mention the Ophel in his list of
the hills of Jerusalem, but simply mentions Ophla as a special locality
(see Reland, Pal. p. 855). And lastly, the situation of the Ophel, upon
which the Nethinim dwelt ([Neh 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026)),
is still a matter of dispute, Bertheau supposing it to be the habitable
space to the east of the eastern side of the temple area.)

Consequently migdal-‛ēder cannot be the flock-tower in the neighbourhood
of Bethlehem, which is mentioned in [Gen
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021), but can only be a (or rather
the) tower of the Davidic palace, or royal castle upon Zion, namely the
town mentioned in [Neh 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025), which
stood out against the upper king's house, by the court of the prison
(cf. [Neh 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026)). For the prison, which
also belonged to the king's house, according to [Jer
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002), formed a portion of the royal
castle, according to the custom of the East. And that it had a lofty
tower, is evident from [Sol 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004) : "Thy
neck is like David's tower, built for an armoury: a thousand shields
hang thereon, all heroes' weapons;" according to which the tower of the
royal castle was ornamented with the weapons or shields of David's
heroes ([Ch1 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001)). And the tower of
the king's castle was so far specially adapted to represent the
sovereignty of David, "that by its exaltation above Zion and Jerusalem,
by the fact that it ruled the whole city, it symbolized the Davidic
family, and its rule over the city and all Israel" (Caspari). This
tower, which is most likely the one called bachan (the watch-tower) in
Isaiah (l.c.), is called by Micah the flock-tower, probably as a play
upon the flock-tower by which the patriarch Jacob once pitched his tent,
because David, the ancestor of the divinely-chosen royal house, had been
called from being the shepherd of a flock to be the shepherd of the
nation of Israel, the flock of Jehovah ([Jer
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017); cf. [Sa2
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#008); [Psa
78:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070)). This epithet was a very
natural one for the prophet to employ, as he not only describes the
Messiah as a shepherd in [Mic 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003), but
also represents Israel as the sheep of Jehovah's inheritance in [Mic
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014), and the flock-tower is the place
where the shepherd takes up his position to see whether any danger
threatens his flock (cf. [Ch2 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#010);
[Ch2 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#004)). עדיך תאהת, "unto thee
shall it come."

(Note: Luther's rendering, "thy golden rose will come," arose from his
confounding עדיך (from עד, unto) with עדיך, thine ornament.)

עדיך affirms more than אליך, to thee: expressing the conquest of every
obstacle that blocks up the way to the goal. תּאהת is separated from
what follows, and exhibited as independent not only by the athnach, but
also by the change of tense occurring in בּאה: "to thee will it come,"
sc. what the prophet has in his mind and mentions in the next clause,
but brings into special prominence in וּבאה. הם הראשׁנה, the former
(first) reign, is the splendid rule of David and Solomon. This predicate
presupposes that the sovereignty has departed from Zion, i.e., has been
withdrawn from the Davidic family, and points back to the destruction of
Jerusalem predicted in [Mic 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012). This
sovereignty is still more precisely defined as kingship over the
daughter of Jerusalem (ל before בת is a periphrasis of the gen. obj.).
Jerusalem, the capital of the kingdom, represents as the object
sovereignty over the whole kingdom. This is to be restored to the hill
of Zion, i.e., to the royal castle upon the top of it.

[Micah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 4:9</span></span>

But before this takes place, the daughter Zion will lose her king, and
wander into captivity to Babylon; but there she will be redeemed by the
Lord out of the power of her enemies. [Mic
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009). "Now why dost thou cry a cry? Is
there no king in thee, or is thy counsellor perished, that pangs have
seized thee like the woman in labour? [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010). Writhe and break forth, O
daughter Zion, like a woman in labour! For how wilt thou go out of the
city and dwell in the field, and come to Babel? there wilt thou be
rescued; there will Jehovah redeem thee out of the hand of thine
enemies." From this glorious future the prophet now turns his eye to the
immediate future, to proclaim to the people what will precede this
glorification, viz., first of all, the loss of the royal government, and
the deportation of the people to Babylon. If Micah, after announcing the
devastation of Zion in [Mic 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012), has
offered to the faithful a firm ground of hope in the approaching
calamities, by pointing to the highest glory as awaiting it in the
future, he now guards against the abuse which might be made of this view
by the careless body of the people, who might either fancy that the
threat of punishment was not meant so seriously after all, or that the
time of adversity would very speedily give place to a much more glorious
state of prosperity, by depicting the grievous times that are still
before them. Beholding in spirit the approaching time of distress as
already present, he hears a loud cry, like that of a woman in labour,
and inquires the cause of this lamentation, and whether it refers to the
loss of her king. The words are addressed to the daughter Zion, and the
meaning of the rhetorical question is simply this: Zion will lose her
king, and be thrown into the deepest mourning in consequence. The loss
of the king was a much more painful thing for Israel than for any other
nation, because such glorious promises were attached to the throne, the
king being the visible representative of the grace of God, and his
removal a sign of the wrath of God and of the abolition of all the
blessings of salvation which were promised to the nation in his person.
Compare [Lam 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020), where Israel calls
the king its vital breath (Hengstenberg). יועץ (counsellor) is also the
king; and this epithet simply gives prominence to that which the Davidic
king had been to Zion (cf. [Isa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005),
where the Messiah is designated as "Counsellor" par excellence). But
Zion must experience this pain: writhe and break forth. Gōchı̄ is
strengthened by chūlı̄, and is used intransitively, to break forth,
describing the pain connected with the birth as being as it were a
bursting of the whole nature (cf. [Jer
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#031)). It is not used transitively in
the sense of "drive forth," as Hitzig and others suppose; for the
determination that Jerusalem would submit, and the people be carried
away, could not properly be represented as a birth or as a
reorganization of things. With the words כּי עתּה וגו the prophet leaves
the figure, and predicts in literal terms the catastrophe awaiting the
nation. עתּה (now), repeated from [Lam
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#009), is the ideal present, which the
prophet sees in spirit, but which is in reality the near or more remote
future. קריה, without an article, is a kind of proper name, like urbs
for Rome (Caspari). In order to set forth the certainty of the
threatened judgment, and at the same time the greatness of the calamity
in the most impressive manner, Micah fills up the details of the drama:
viz., going out of the city, dwelling in the field, without shelter,
delivered up to all the chances of weather, and coming to Babel, carried
thither without delay. Going out of the city presupposes the conquest of
the city by the enemy; since going out to surrender themselves to the
enemy ([Kg2 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012); [Sa1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#003)) does not fit in with the
prophetic description, which is not a historical description in detail.
Nevertheless Israel shall not perish. There (shâm, i.e., even in Babel)
will the Lord its God deliver it out of the hand of its foes.

The prediction that the daughter Zion, i.e., the nation of Israel which
was governed from Zion, and had its centre in Zion - the covenant nation
which, since the destruction of the kingdom of the ten tribes, existed
in Judah only - should be carried away to Babylon, and that at a time
when Assyria was in the field as the chief enemy of Israel and the
representative of the imperial power, goes so far beyond the bounds of
the political horizon of Micah's time, that it cannot be accounted for
from any natural presentiment. It is true that it has an analogon in
[Isa 34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006), where Isaiah predicts to
king Hezekiah in the most literal terms the carrying away of all his
treasures, and of his sons (descendants), to Babylon. At the same time,
this analogy is not sufficient to explain the prediction before us; for
Isaiah's prophecy was uttered during the period immediately following
the destruction of the Assyrian forces in front of Jerusalem and the
arrival of Babylonian ambassadors in Jerusalem, and had a point of
connection in these events, which indicated the destruction of the
Assyrian empire and the rise of Babylon in its stead, at all events in
the germ; whereas no such connecting link exists in the case of Micah's
prophecy, which was unquestionably uttered before these events. It has
therefore been thought, that in [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012) Micah predicts the destruction of
Jerusalem, and here in [Mic 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010) the
carrying away of Judah to Babylon by the Assyrians; and this opinion,
that Micah expected the judgment upon Jerusalem and Judah to be executed
by the Assyrians, and not by the Babylonians, has been supported partly
by such passages as [Mic 5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004), and
[Jer 26:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018), and partly by the
circumstance that Micah threatens his own corrupt contemporaries with
the judgment which he predicts on account of their sins; whereas in his
time the Assyrians were the only possible executors of a judgment upon
Israel who were then standing on the stage of history (Caspari). But
these arguments are not decisive. All that can be inferred from [Mic
5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004), where Asshur is mentioned as
the representative of all the enemies of Israel, and of the power of the
world in its hostility to the people of God in the Messianic times, is
that at the time of Micah the imperial power in its hostility to the
kingdom of God was represented by Assyria; but it by no means follows
that Assyria would always remain the imperial power, so that it could
only be from her that Micah could expect the destruction of Jerusalem,
and the carrying away of Judah to Babylon. Again, [Jer
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018), [Jer
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#019) - where the chief men of Judah,
in order to defend the prophet Jeremiah, quote Micah's prophecy, with
the remark that king Hezekiah did not put him to death in consequence,
but feared the Lord and besought His face, so that the Lord repented of
the evil which He had spoken concerning Jerusalem - simply proves that
these chief men referred Micah's words to the Assyrians, and attributed
the non-fulfilment of the threatened judgment by the Assyrians to
Hezekiah's penitence and prayer, and that this was favoured by the
circumstance that the Lord answered the prayer of the king, by assuring
him that the Assyrian army should be destroyed ([Isa
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#021).). But whether the opinion of
these chief men as to the meaning and fulfilment of Micah's prophecy
([Mic 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012)) was the correct one or
not, cannot be decided from the passage quoted. Its correctness is
apparently favoured, indeed, by the circumstance that Micah threatened
the people of his own time with the judgment (for your sakes shall Zion
be ploughed into a field, etc.). Now, if he had been speaking of a
judgment upon Judah through the medium of the Babylonians, "he would (so
Caspari thinks) not only have threatened his contemporaries with a
judgment which could not fall upon them, since it was not possible till
after their time, inasmuch as the Assyrians were on the stage in his
day; but he would also have been most incomprehensibly silent as to the
approaching Assyrian judgment, of which Isaiah spoke again and again."
This argument falls to the ground with the untenable assumptions upon
which it is founded. Micah neither mentions the Assyrians nor the
Babylonians as executing the judgment, nor does he say a word concerning
the time when the predicted devastation or destruction of Jerusalem will
occur. In the expression בּגללכם, for your sakes ([Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012)), it is by no means affirmed that
it will take place in his time through the medium of the Assyrians. The
persons addressed are the scandalous leaders of the house of Israel,
i.e., of the covenant nation, and primarily those living in his own
time, though by no means those only, but all who share their character
and ungodliness, so that the words apply to succeeding generations quite
as much as to his contemporaries. The only thing that would warrant our
restricting the prophecy to Micah's own times, would be a precise
definition by Micah himself of the period when Jerusalem would be
destroyed, or his expressly distinguishing his own contemporaries from
their sons and descendants. But as he has done neither the one nor the
other, it cannot be said that, inasmuch as the destruction of Jerusalem
and the carrying away of the people was not effected by the Assyrians,
but by the Babylonians (Chaldaeans), he would have been altogether
silent as to the approaching Assyrian judgment, and only threatened them
with the Chaldaean catastrophe, which did not take place till a long
time afterwards. His words refer to all the judgments, which took place
from his own time onwards till the utter destruction of Jerusalem and
the carrying away of the people to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar. The
one-sided reference of the prophecy to the Assyrians is simply based
upon an incorrect idea of the nature of prophecy, and its relation to
the fulfilment, and involves the prophet Micah in an irreconcilable
discrepancy between himself and his contemporary the prophet Isaiah, who
does indeed predict the severe oppression of Judah by the Assyrians, but
at the same time foretels the failure of the plans of these foes to the
people of Jehovah, and the total destruction of their army.

This contradiction, with the consequence to which it would inevitably
lead, - namely, that if one of the prophets predicted the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Assyrians, whereas the other prophesied that it would
not be destroyed by them, the two contemporary prophets would
necessarily lead the people astray, and render both the truth of their
contradictory utterances and their own divine mission doubtful, - cannot
be removed by the assumption that Isaiah uttered the prophecies in ch.
28-32 at a somewhat later period, after Micah had published his book,
and the terribly severe words of Micah in [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012) had produced repentance. For
Isaiah had predicted that the Assyrian would not conquer Jerusalem, but
that his army would be destroyed under its walls, not only in Isaiah
28-32, at the time when the Assyrians are approaching with threatening
aspect under Shalmaneser or Sennacherib, but much earlier than that, -
namely, in the time of Ahaz, in Isaiah 10:5-12:6. Moreover, in Isaiah
28-32 there is not a single trace that Micah's terrible threatening had
produced such repentance, that the Lord was able to withdraw His threat
in consequence, and predict through Isaiah the rescue of Jerusalem from
the Assyrian. On the contrary, Isaiah scourges the evil judges and false
prophets quite as severely in [Isa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007). and [Isa
29:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009) as Micah does in [Mic
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001) and [Mic
3:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005). And lastly, although the
distinction between conditional prophecies and those uttered
unconditionally is, generally speaking, correct enough, and is placed
beyond all doubt by [Jer 18:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007);
there is nothing in the addresses and threatenings of the two prophets
to indicate that Micah uttered his threats conditionally, i.e., in case
there should be no repentance, whereas Isaiah uttered his
unconditionally. Moreover, such an explanation is proved to be untenable
by the fact, that in Micah the threat of the destruction of Jerusalem
and of the desolation of the temple mountain ([Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012)) stands in the closest connection
with the promise, that at the end of the days the mountain of God's
house will be exalted above all mountains, and Jehovah reign on Zion as
king for ever ([Mic 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001) and [Mic
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)). If this threat were only
conditional, the promise would also have only a conditional validity;
and the final glorification of the kingdom of God would be dependent
upon the penitence of the great mass of the people of Israel, - a view
which is diametrically opposed to the real nature of the prophecies of
both, yea, of all the prophets. The only difference between Isaiah and
Micah in this respect consists in the fact that Isaiah, in his elaborate
addresses, brings out more distinctly the attitude of the imperial power
of Assyria towards the kingdom of God in Israel, and predicts not only
that Israel will be hard pressed by the Assyrians, but also that the
latter will not overcome the people of God, but will be wrecked upon the
foundation-stone laid by Jehovah in Zion; whereas Micah simply threatens
the sinners with judgment, and after the judgment predicts the
glorification of Zion in grand general terms, without entering more
minutely into the attitude of the Assyrians towards Israel.

In the main, however, Micah goes hand in hand with his contemporary
Isaiah. In [Isa 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#014), Isaiah also
foretels the devastation, or rather the destruction, of Jerusalem,
notwithstanding the fact that he has more than once announced the
deliverance of the city of God from Asshur, and that without getting
into contradiction with himself. For this double announcement may be
very simply explained from the fact that the judgments which Israel had
yet to endure, and the period of glory to follow, lay, like a long, deep
diorama, before the prophet's mental eye; and that in his threatenings
he plunged sometimes more, sometimes less, deeply into those judgments
which lay in perspective before him (see Delitzsch on Isaiah, at [Isa
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020)). The same thing applies to
Micah, who goes to a great depth both in his threats and promises, not
only predicting the judgment in all its extremity, - namely, the utter
destruction of Jerusalem, and the carrying away of the people to Babel,
- but also the salvation in its ultimate perfection, viz., the
glorification of Zion. We must therefore not restrict his threats in
[Mic 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012) and [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010) even to the Chaldaean
catastrophe, nor the promise of Israel's deliverance in Babel out of the
hands of its foes to the liberation of the Jews from Babylon, which was
effected by Cyrus, and their return to Palestine under Zerubbabel and
Ezra; but must also extend the threat of punishment to the destruction
of Jerusalem by the Romans and the attendant dispersion of the Jews over
all the world, and the redemption out of Babel promised in [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010) to that deliverance of Israel
which, in the main, is in the future still. These two judgments and
these two deliverances are comprehended in an undivided unity in the
words of the prophet, Babel being regarded not only in its historical
character, but also in its typical significance, as the beginning and
the hearth of the kingdom of the world. Babel has this double
significance in the Scriptures from the very commencement. Even the
building of the city with a tower intended to reach to heaven was a work
of human pride, and an ungodly display of power ([Gen
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004).); and after its erection Babel
was made by Nimrod the beginning of the empire of the world ([Gen
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)). It was from these two facts
that Babel became the type of the imperial power, and not because the
division of the human race into nations with different languages, and
their dispersion over the whole earth, had their origin there (see A.
ch. Lmmert, Babel, das Thier und der falsche Prophet. Goth. 1862, p.
36ff.); and it is in this typical significance of Babel that we have to
seek not only for the reason for the divine purpose to banish the people
of God to Babel, when they were given up to the power of the kingdom of
the world, but also for a point of connection for the prophetic
announcement when this purpose had been communicated to the prophet's
mind. Micah accordingly predicts the carrying away of the daughter Zion
to Babel, and her deliverance there out of the power of her enemies, not
because Babel along with Nineveh was the metropolis of the world-empire
of his time, or a chief city of that empire, but because Babel, from its
very origin, was a type and symbol of the imperial power. That the words
of Micah, in their deepest sense, should be so interpreted, is not only
warranted, but necessitated, by the announcement which follows in [Mic
4:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011) of the victorious conflict of
Zion with many nations, which points far beyond the conflicts of the
Jews in the times succeeding the captivity.

[Micah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 4:11</span></span>

The daughter Zion, when rescued from Babel, overcomes all hostile powers
in the strength of her God. [Mic 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011).
"And now many nations have assembled together against thee, who say, Let
her be profaned, and let our eyes look upon Zion. [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012). But they know not the thoughts
of Jehovah, and understand not His counsel; for He has gathered them
together like sheaves for the threshing-floor. [Mic
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013). Rise up and thresh, O daughter
Zion: for I make thy horn iron, and I make thy hoofs brass; and thou
wilt crush many nations: and I ban their gain to Jehovah, and their
substance to the Lord of the whole earth." With ועתּה, corresponding to
עתּה in [Mic 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009), there commences a
new scene, which opens to the prophet's mental eye. Many nations have
assembled together against the daughter Zion (עליך pointing back to בּת
ציּון in [Mic 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010)), with the
intention of profaning her, and feasting their eyes upon the profaned
one. It is the holiness of Zion, therefore, which drives the nations to
attack her. תּחנף, let her be or become profaned: not by the sins or
bloodguiltiness of her inhabitants ([Jer
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002); [Isa
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#005)), for this is not appropriate in
the mouths of heathen; but through devastation or destruction let her
holiness be taken from her. They want to show that there is nothing in
her holiness, and to feast their eyes upon the city thus profaned. חזה
with ב, to look upon a thing with interest, here with malicious
pleasure. On the singular tachaz, followed by the subject in the plural,
see Ewald 317, a. To this design on the part of the heathen, the prophet
([Mic 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012)) opposes the counsel of the
Lord. Whilst the heathen assemble together against Zion, with the
intention of profaning her by devastation, the Lord has resolved to
destroy them in front of Zion. The destruction which they would prepare
for Zion will fall upon themselves, for the Lord gathers them together
like sheaves upon the threshing-floor, to thresh, i.e., destroy, them.
כּי does not mean "that," but "for." The sentence explains the assertion
that they do not understand the counsel of the Lord. כּעמיר, with the
generic article, equivalent to "like sheaves." This judgment Zion is to
execute upon the heathen. The figurative expression, "Rise up, and
thresh," etc., rests upon the oriental custom of threshing out corn with
oxen, i.e., of having it trodden out with their hoofs (see Paulsen,
Ackerbau der Morgenlnder, 41). In this, of course, only the strength of
the hoofs was considered. But as the horn of the ox is a figure
frequently used for destructive power (see [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Kg1
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011); [Amo
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#013), etc.), the prophet combines this
figure, to strengthen the idea of crushing power, and express the
thought that the Lord will equip Zion perfectly with the strength
requisite to destroy the nations. והחרמתּי is the first person, and must
not be altered into or regarded as the second, as it has been in the lxx
and Syriac, and by Jerome. The prophet does not speak in the name of the
theocratic nation, as Jerome supposes, but continues to represent
Jehovah as speaking, as in אשׂים, with which, however, instead of לי,
the noun ליהוה is used, to give greater clearness to the thought that it
is Jehovah, the God and Lord of the whole earth, who will destroy the
nations that have rebelled against Him and His kingdom, wresting their
possessions from them, and taking them back to Himself. For everything
laid under the ban belonged to the Lord, as being most holy ([Lev
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028)). חיל, property, wealth, the sum
and substance of the possessions. Israel is not to enrich itself by
plundering the defeated foe, but Jehovah will sanctify the possessions
of the heathen to Himself, to whom they belong as Lord of the whole
earth, by laying them under the ban: that is to say, He will apply them
to the glorification of His kingdom.

There has been a diversity of opinion as to the historical allusion, or
the fulfilment of these verses. So much, however, is obvious at the very
outset, namely, that they cannot be made to refer to the same event as
[Mic 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009), that is to say, to the siege
of Jerusalem by the Assyrians, without bringing the prophet into the
most striking contradiction to himself. For, since [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010) predicts not a partial
deportation, but the complete carrying away of Israel to Babel, and [Mic
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013) the perfect deliverance of
Jerusalem, the people wandering out of Jerusalem into captivity ([Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010)) cannot possibly be the enemies
who lead it away, beating it utterly before Jerusalem, and banning their
possessions to the Lord. There is more to favour the allusion to the
victorious conflicts of the Maccabees with the Syrians, for which
Theodoret, Calvin, Hengstenberg, and others decide, since these
conflicts occurred in the period intervening between the return of the
Jews from the Babylonian captivity ([Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010)) and the coming of the Messiah
([Mic 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#012)). But even this allusion
corresponds far too little to the words of the promise for us to be able
to regard it as correct. Although, for example, the war of the Maccabees
was a religious war in the strict sense of the word, since the Syrians,
and with them the small neighbouring nations of the Jews, set themselves
to attack Judah as the nation of God, and to exterminate Judaism, the
gōyı̄m rabbı̄m who have assembled against Zion, and whom the Lord gathers
together thither ([Mic 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011), [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012)), point to a much greater even
than the attacks made by the Syrians and the surrounding tribes upon
Jerusalem in the time of the Maccabees. Gōyı̄, rabbı̄m (many nations)
points back to gōyı̄m rabbı̄m and ‛ammı̄m rabbı̄m in [Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002) and [Mic
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003), so that, both here and there, all
the nations of the world that are hostile to God are included. Again,
the defeat which they suffer before Jerusalem is much greater than the
victory which the Maccabees achieved over their enemies. On the other
hand, the circumstance that the Babylonian captivity is predicted in
[Mic 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010), and the birth of the
Messiah in [Mic 5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001), and that the
victorious conflicts of the Maccabees with the Syrians and the heathen
neighbours of the Jews lie in the interim between these events,
furnishes no sufficient proof that these conflicts must be referred to
in [Mic 4:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011), simply because the
assumption that, in [Mic 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009) -14, the
attacks of the Chaldaeans, the Graeco-Syrians, and the Romans upon Zion
are foretold in the order in which they followed one another in history,
has no firm basis in the threefold recurrence of ‛attâh (now) in [Mic
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009), [Mic
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011), and [Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001). As an event is introduced with
‛attâh in [Mic 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#009), which does not
follow the one predicted in [Mic 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#008)
in chronological sequence, but, on the contrary, the prophet comes back
in ve‛attâh from the more remote to the more immediate future, it cannot
be inferred from the ‛attâh in [Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001) that the oppression mentioned
there must follow the victory over many nations predicted in [Mic
4:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011) in chronological order, or
that the siege and capture of Jerusalem by the Romans are referred to in
[Rom 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001). Moreover, the proclamation
in [Rom 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010) already goes beyond the
Chaldaean catastrophe, and the liberation of the Jews from the Chaldaean
exile, so that if the ve‛attâh in [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012) announces a conflict with Zion
which will follow the events predicted in [Rom
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009) and [Rom
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010), we must not restrict the
conflict to the wars of the Maccabees. We must therefore understand
these verses as referring to the events already predicted by Joel (ch.
3), and afterwards by Ezekiel (Ezekiel 38, 39) and Zechariah ([Zac
12:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001)), and in [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008).: i.e., to the last great attack
which the nations of the world will make upon the church of the Lord,
that has been redeemed from Babel and sanctified, with the design of
exterminating the holy city of God from the face of the earth, and to
which the attacks of the Syrians, and the rest of the nations
surrounding Judah, upon the covenant nation in the times of the
Maccabees, furnished but a feeble prelude. This view is favoured by the
unmistakeable similarity between our verses and both Joel and Ezekiel.

The נאספוּ עליך גּויים רבּים in [Mic
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011), compared with קבּצם in [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012), points clearly back to וקבּצתּי
את־הגּוים in [Joe 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002), compared with
ונקבּצוּ in [Mic 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011); and the figure
in [Mic 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012), of the gathering
together of the nations like sheaves for the threshing-floor, to the
similar figures of the ripening of the harvest and the treading of the
full wine-press in [Joe 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013). And the
use of gōyı̄m rabbı̄m in Micah is no reason for supposing that it differs
in meaning from the kol-haggōyı̄m of Joel, since Micah uses gōyı̄m rabbı̄m
in [Mic 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002) and [Mic
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003) for the totality of the nations of
the world. Ezekiel, also, simply speaks of gōyı̄m rabbı̄m as assembling
together with Gog to attack the mountains of Israel ([Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006), [Eze
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009), [Eze
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#015)); and in his case also, this
attack of the nations upon Jerusalem is appended to the redemption of
Israel effected at Babel. Again, the issue of this attack is the same in
Micah as in Joel, Ezekiel, and Zechariah, - namely, the complete
overthrow of the hostile nations by the people of Israel, who fight in
the strength of the Lord, by which Jehovah manifests Himself to all
nations as Lord of the whole earth, and proves Himself to be the Holy
One (compare [Mic 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013) with [Joe
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012), and [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016); [Eze
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#003).). Lastly, a decisive proof of
the correctness of this allusion is to be found in the circumstance,
that the attack of the nations is directed against Zion, which has now
become holy, that it proceeds from hatred and enmity to His holiness,
and has for its object the desecration of the city of God. This feature
is by no means applicable to Jerusalem and Judah in the time of the
Maccabees, but can only apply to the time when Israel, redeemed from
Babel, forms a holy church of God, i.e., to the last period of the
development of the kingdom of God, which began with Christ, but has not
yet reached its fullest manifestation. "From the fact, however, that
Zion, when sanctified, is to be delivered out of much greater danger
than that from which it will not be delivered in the immediate future,
and also that the refined and sanctified Zion will conquer and destroy
an incomparably greater hostile force than that to which it will now
soon succumb, it follows, in the clearest and most conclusive way, that
in the nearest future it must be given up to the power of the world,
because it is now unholy" (Caspari). This thought prepares the way for
the transition to [Mic 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001), where the
prophecy returns to the oppression foretold in [Mic
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009) and [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 5](mic005)

</div>
