<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh011)  [Next](neh013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 12:0</span></span>

Lists of Priests and Levites. Dedication of the Wall of Jerusalem -
Nehemiah 12:1-43

The list of the inhabitants of the province, Neh 11, is followed by
lists of the priests and Levites (Neh 12:1-26). These different lists
are, in point of fact, all connected with the genealogical register of
the Israelite population of the whole province, taken by Nehemiah ([Neh
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#005)) for the purpose of enlarging the
population of Jerusalem, though the lists of the orders of priests and
Levites in the present chapter were made partly at an earlier, and
partly at a subsequent period. It is because of this actual connection
that they are inserted in the history of the building of the wall of
Jerusalem, which terminates with the narrative of the solemn dedication
of the completed wall in vv. 27-43.

Lists of the orders of priests and Levites. - [Neh
12:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001) contain a list of the heads of
the priests and Levites who returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel and
Joshua. The high priests during five generations are next mentioned by
name, [Neh 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#010), [Neh
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#011). Then follow the names of the
heads of the priestly houses in the days of Joiakim the high priest; and
finally, [Neh 12:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022), the names of
the heads of the Levites at the same period, with titles and
subscriptions.

[Nehemiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 12:1</span></span>

[Neh 12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001)

[Neh 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001) contains the title of the
first list, [Neh 12:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001). "These are
the priests and Levites who went up with Zerubbabel ... and Joshua;"
comp. [Ezr 2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001). Then follow, [Neh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001), the names of the priests, with
the subscription: "These are the heads of the priests and of their
brethren, in the days of Joshua." ואחיהם still depends on ראשׁי. The
brethren of the priests are the Levites, as being their fellow-tribesmen
and assistants. Two-and-twenty names of such heads are enumerated, and
these reappear, with but slight variations attributable to clerical
errors, as names of priestly houses in [Neh
12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012), where they are given in
conjunction with the names of those priests who, in the days of Joiakim,
either represented these houses, or occupied as heads the first position
in them. The greater number, viz., 15, of these have already been
mentioned as among those who, together with Nehemiah, sealed as heads of
their respective houses the agreement to observe the law, Neh 10. Hence
the present chapter appears to be the most appropriate place for
comparing with each other the several statements given in the books of
Nehemiah and Ezra, concerning the divisions or orders of priests in the
period immediately following the return from the captivity, and for
discussing the question how the heads and houses of priests enumerated
in Neh 10 and 12 stand related on the one hand to the list of the
priestly races who returned with Zerubbabel and Joshua, and on the other
to the twenty-four orders of priests instituted by David. For the
purpose of giving an intelligible answer to this question, we first
place in juxtaposition the three lists given in Nehemiah, chs. 10 and
12.

[Neh 10:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#003) [Neh
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001) [Neh
12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012) Priests who sealed the
Covenant Priests who were Heads of their Houses Priestly Houses and
their respective Heads 1. Seraiah 1. Seraiah\* SeraiahMeraiah 2. Azariah
2. Jeremiah\* Jeremiah Hananiah 3. Jeremiah 3. Ezra\* Ezra Meshullam 4.
Pashur 4. Amariah\* Amariah Jehohanan 5. Amariah 5. Malluch\* Meluchi
Jonathan 6. Malchijah 6. Hattush\* 7. Hattush 7. Shecaniah\* Shebaniah
Joseph 8. Shebaniah 8. Rehum\* Harim Adna 9. Malluch 9. Meremoth\*
Meraioth Helkai 10. Harim 10. Iddo Idiah Zecariah 11. Meremoth 11.
Ginnethon\* Ginnethon Meshullam 12. Obadiah 12. Abijah\* Abijah Zichri
13. Daniel 13. Miamin\* Miniamin 14. Ginnethon 14. Maadiah\* Moadiah
Piltai 15. Baruch 15. Bilgah\* Bilgah Shammua 16. Meshullam 16.
Shemaiah\* Shemaiah Jehonathan 17. Abijah 17. Joiarib Joiarib Mathnai
18. Mijamin 18. Jedaiah Jedaiah Uzzi 19. Maaziah 19. Sallu Sallai Kallai
20. Bilgai 20. Amok Amok Eber 21. Shemaiah 21. Hilkiah Hilkiah Hashabiah
22. Jedaiah 22. Jedaiah Nethaneel When, in the first place, we compare
the two series in Neh 12, we find the name of the head of the house of
Minjamin, and the names both of the house and the head, Hattush, between
Meluchi and Shebaniah, omitted. In other respects the two lists agree
both in the order and number of the names, with the exception of
unimportant variations in the names, as מלוּכי (Chethiv, [Neh
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#014)) for מלּוּך ([Neh
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#002)); שׁכניה ([Neh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#003)) for שׁבניה ([Neh
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#014), [Neh
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#006)); רחם ([Neh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#003)), a transposition of חרם ([Neh
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#015), [Neh
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#006)); מריות ([Neh
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#015)) instead of מרמות ([Neh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#003), [Neh
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#006)); עדיא (Chethiv, [Neh
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#016)) instead of עדּוא ([Neh
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#004)); מיּמין ([Neh
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#005)) for מנימין ([Neh
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#017)); מועדיה ([Neh
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#017)) for מעדיה ([Neh
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#004)), or, according to a different
pronunciation, מעזיה ([Neh 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#009)); סלּי
([Neh 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#020)) for סלּוּ ([Neh
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#007)). - If we next compare the two
lists in Neh 12 with that in Neh 10, we find that of the twenty-two
names given (Neh 12), the fifteen marked thus \* occur also in Neh 10;
עזריה, [Neh 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#004), being evidently a
clerical error, or another form of עזרא, [Neh
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#002), [Neh
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#013). Of the names enumerated in Neh
10, Pashur, Malchiah, Obadiah, Daniel, Baruch, and Meshullam are wanting
in Neh 12, and are replaced by Iddo and the six last: Joiarib, Jedaiah,
Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah. The name of Eliashib the high priest
being also absent, Bertheau seeks to explain this difference by
supposing that a portion of the priests refused their signatures because
they did not concur in the strict measures of Ezra and Nehemiah. This
conjecture would be conceivable, if we found in Neh 10 that only
thirteen orders or heads of priests had signed instead of twenty-two.
Since, however, instead of the seven missing names, six others signed
the covenant, this cannot be the reason for the difference between the
names in the two documents (Neh 10, 12), which is probably to be found
in the time that elapsed between the making of these lists. The date of
the list, [Neh 12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001), is that of
Zerubbabel and Joshua (b.c. 536); that of the other in Neh 12, the times
of the high priest Joiakim the son of Joshua, i.e., at the earliest, the
latter part of the reign of Darius Hystaspis, perhaps even the reign of
Xerxes.

How, then, are the two lists in Neh 12 and that in Neh 10, agreeing as
they do in names, related to the list of the priests who, according to
[Ezr 2:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036) and [Neh
7:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#039), returned from Babylon with
Zerubbabel and Joshua? The traditional view, founded on the statements
of the Talmud,

(Note: In Hieros. Taanith, f. 68a; Tosafta Taanith, c. 11, in Babyl.
Erachin, f. 12b. The last statement is, according to Herzfeld, Gesch. i.
p. 393, as follows: "Four divisions of priests returned from captivity,
viz., Jedaiah, Charim, Paschur, and Immer. These the prophets of the
returned captives again divided into twenty-four; whereupon their names
were written upon tickets and put in an urn, from which Jedaiah drew
five, and each of the other three before-named divisions as many: it was
then ordained by those prophets, that even if the division Joiarib
(probably the first division before the captivity) should return,
Jedaiah should nevertheless retain his position, and Joiarib should be
טפל לו (associated with him, belonging to him)." Comp. Bertheau on Neh.
p. 230, and Oehler in Herzog's Realencycl. xii. p. 185, who, though
refusing this tradition the value of independent historical testimony,
still give it more weight than it deserves.)

is, that the four divisions given in Ezra 2 and Neh 7, "the sons of
Jedaiah, the sons of Immer, the sons of Pashur and Harim," were the
priests of the four (Davidic) orders of Jedaiah, Immer, Malchijah, and
Harim (the second, sixteenth, fifth, and third orders of 1 Chron 24).
For the sake of restoring, according to the ancient institution, a
greater number of priestly orders, the twenty-two orders enumerated in
Neh 12 were formed from these four divisions; and the full number of
twenty-four was not immediately completed, only because, according to
[Ezr 2:61](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#061) and [Neh
7:63](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#063)., three families of priests who
could not find their registers returned, as well as those before named,
and room was therefore left for their insertion in the twenty-four
orders: the first of these three families, viz., Habaiah, being probably
identical with the eighth class, Abia; the second, Hakkoz, with the
seventh class of the same name. See Oehler's before-cited work. p. 184f.
But this view is decidedly erroneous, and the error lies in the
identification of the four races of [Ezr
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036), on account of the similarity of
the names Jedaiah, Immer, and Harim, with those of the second,
sixteenth, and third classes of the Davidic division, - thus regarding
priestly races as Davidic priestly classes, through mere similarity of
name, without reflecting that even the number 4487, given in [Ezr
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036)., is incompatible with this
assumption. For if these four races were only four orders of priests,
each order must have numbered about 1120 males, and the twenty-four
orders of the priesthood before the captivity would have yielded the
colossal sum of from 24,000 to 26,000 priests. It is true that we have
no statement of the numbers of the priesthood; but if the numbering of
the Levites in David's times gave the amount of 38,000 males, the
priests of that time could at the most have been 3800, and each of the
twenty-four orders would have included in all 150 persons, or at most
seventy-five priests of the proper age for officiating. Now, if this
number had doubled in the interval of time extending to the close of the
captivity, the 4487 who returned with Zerubbabel would have formed more
than half of the whole number of priests then living, and not merely the
amount of four classes. Hence we cannot but regard Jedaiah, Immer,
Pashur, and Harim, of [Ezr 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036), as
names not of priestly orders, but of great priestly races, and explain
the occurrence of three of these names as those of certain of the orders
of priests formed by David, by the consideration, that the Davidic
orders were names after heads of priestly families of the days of David,
and that several of these heads, according to the custom of bestowing
upon sons, grandsons, etc., the names of renowned ancestors, bore the
names of the founders and heads of the greater races and houses. The
classification of the priests in [Ezr
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036). is genealogical, i.e., it
follows not the division into orders made by David for the service of
the temple, but the genealogical ramification into races and houses. The
sons of Jedaiah, Immer, etc., are not the priests belonging to the
official orders of Jedaiah, Immer, etc., but the priestly races
descended from Jedaiah, etc. The four races (mentioned [Ezr
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036), etc.), each of which averaged
upwards of 1000 men, were, as appears from [Neh
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001) and [Neh
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012), divided into twenty-two houses.
From this number of houses, it was easy to restore the old division into
twenty-four official orders. That it was not, however, considered
necessary to make this artificial restoration of the twenty-four classes
immediately, is seen from the circumstances that both under Joiakim,
i.e., a generation after Zerubbabel's return ([Neh
12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012)), only twenty-two houses are
enumerated, and under Nehemiah, i.e., after Ezra's return (in Neh 10),
only twenty-one heads of priestly houses sealed the document. Whether,
and how the full number of twenty-four was completed, cannot, for want
of information, be determined. The statement of Joseph. Ant. vii. 14. 7,
that David's division into orders continues to this day, affords no
sufficient testimony to the fact.

According, then, to what has been said, the difference between the names
in the two lists of Neh 10 and 12 is to be explained simply by the fact,
that the names of those who sealed the covenant, Neh 10, are names
neither of orders nor houses, but of heads of houses living in the days
of Ezra and Nehemiah. Of these names, a portion coincides indeed with
the names of the orders and houses, while the rest are different. The
coincidence or sameness of the names does not, however, prove that the
individuals belonged to the house whose name they bore. On the contrary,
it appears from [Neh 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#013) and [Neh
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#016), that of two Meshullams, one was
the head of the house of Ezra, the other of the house of Ginnethon; and
hence, in Neh 10, Amariah may have belonged to the house of Malluch,
Hattush to the house of Shebaniah, Malluch to the house of Meremoth,
etc. In this manner, both the variation and coincidence of the names in
Neh 10 and 12 may be easily explained; the only remaining difficulty
being, that in Neh 10 only twenty-one, not twenty-two, heads of houses
are said to have sealed. This discrepancy seems, indeed, to have arisen
from the omission of a name in transcription. For the other possible
explanation, viz., that in the interval between Joiakim and Nehemiah,
the contemporary of Eliashib, one house had died out, is very
far-fetched.

[Neh 12:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#008)

The heads of Levitical houses in the time of Jeshua the high priest. -
Of these names we meet, [Neh 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#010).,
with those of Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, and Sherebiah, as of heads who
sealed the covenant; while those of Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son (?) of
Kadmiel, are again cited in [Neh 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024)
as heads of Levites, i.e., of Levitical divisions. The name יהוּדה does
not occur in the other lists of Levites in the books of Ezra and
Nehemiah, and is perhaps miswritten for הודיּה ([Neh
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#010); [Neh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007)). Mattaniah is probably Mattaniah
the Asaphite, the son of Micah, the son of Zabdi, head of the first band
of singers ([Neh 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#017)); for he was
היּדות על, over the singing of praise. The form היּדות, which should
probably be read according to the Keri היּדוּת, is a peculiar formation
of an abstract noun; comp. Ewald, 165, b.

[Neh 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#009)

Bakbukiah and Unni (Chethiv ענּו), their brethren, were before them
(opposite them) למשׁמרות, at the posts of service, i.e., forming in
service the opposite choir. [Neh 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024)
forbids us to understand משׁמרות as watch-posts, though the omission of
the doorkeepers (comp. [Ezr 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#042)) is
remarkable. Bakbukiah recurs [Neh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024); the name Unni is not again met
with, though there is no occasion, on this account, for the inapt
conjecture of Bertheau, that the reading should be וענוּ or ויּענוּ.

[Nehemiah 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 12:10</span></span>

A note on the genealogy of the high-priestly line from Jeshua to Jaddua
is inserted, so to speak, as a connecting link between the lists of
Levites, to explain the statements concerning the dates of their
composition, - dates defined by the name of the respective high priests.
The lists given [Neh 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001) were of the
time of Jeshua; those from [Neh 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012)
and onwards, of the days of Joiakim and his successors. The name יונתן,
as is obvious from [Neh 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022) and [Neh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023), is a clerical error for יוחנן,
Johanan, Greek Ἰωάννης, of whom we are told, Joseph. Ant. xi. 7. 1, that
he murdered his brother Jesus, and thus gave Bagoses, the general of
Artaxerxes Mnemon, an opportunity for taking severe measures against the
Jews.

[Nehemiah 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 12:12</span></span>

[Neh 12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012) contains the list of the
priestly houses and their heads, which has been already explained in
conjunction with that in [Neh 12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001).
[Neh 12:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022). The list of the heads
of the Levites, [Neh 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022) and [Neh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024), is, according to [Neh
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#026), that of the days of Joiakim,
and of the days of Nehemiah and Ezra. Whence it follows, that it does
not apply only to the time of Joiakim; for though Ezra might indeed have
come to Jerusalem in the latter days of Joiakim's high-priesthood, yet
Nehemiah's arrival found his successor Eliashib already in office, and
the statements of [Neh 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022) and [Neh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023) must be understood accordingly.

[Nehemiah 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 12:22</span></span>

"With respect to the Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan,
and Jaddua were recorded the heads of the houses, and also (those) of
the priests during the reign of Darius the Persian." To judge from the
הלויּם with which it commences, this verse seems to be the title of the
list of Levites following, while the rest of its contents rather seems
adapted for the subscription of the preceding list of priests ([Neh
12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012)). מלכוּת על, under the reign.
The use of על with reference to time is to be explained by the
circumstance that the time, and here therefore the reign of Darius, is
regarded as the ground and soil of that which is done in it, as e.g.,
ἐπὶ νυκτί, upon night = at night-time. Darius is Darius Nothus, the
second Persian monarch of that name; where also the meaning of this
verse has been already discussed. In [Neh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023), the original document in which
the list of Levites was originally included, is alluded to as the book
of the daily occurrences or events of the time, i.e., the public
chronicle, a continuation of the former annals of the kingdom. ימי ועד,
and also to the days of Johanan, the son of Eliashib. So far did the
official records of the chronicle extend. That Nehemiah may have been
still living in the days of Johanan, i.e., in the time of his
high-priesthood, has been already shown, p. 95. The statements in [Neh
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022) and [Neh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023) are aphoristic, and of the
nature of supplementary and occasional remarks.

[Nehemiah 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">neh 12:24</span></span>

The names Hashabiah, Sherebiah, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, frequently occur as
those of heads of Levitical orders: the two first in [Neh
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#012)., [Ezr
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#018).; the two last in [Neh
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#008), [Neh
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#010), and [Ezr
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#040); and the comparison of these
passages obliges us to regard and expunge as a gloss the בּן before
Kadmiel. Opposite to these four are placed their brethren, whose office
it was "to praise (and) to give thanks according to the commandment of
David," etc.: comp. [Ch1 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#004); [Ch1
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#030); [Ch2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#013); and בּמצות ד, [Ch2
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#025). משׁמר לעמּת משׁמר, ward
opposite ward, elsewhere used of the gatekeepers, [Ch1
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#016), is here applied to the position
of the companies of singers in divine worship. The names of the
brethren, i.e., of the Levitical singers, follow, [Neh
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#025), where the first three names
must be separated from those which follow, and combined with [Neh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024). This is obvious from the
consideration, that Mattaniah and Bakbukiah are mentioned in [Neh
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#017) as presidents of two companies
of singers, and with them Abda the Jeduthunite, whence we are
constrained to suppose that עבדיה is only another form for עבדּא of [Neh
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#017). According, then, to what has
been said, the division into verses must be changed, and [Neh
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#025) should begin with the name
משׁלּם. Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub are chiefs of the doorkeepers; the
two last names occur as such both in [Neh
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#019) and [Ezr
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#042), and even so early as [Ch1
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#017), whence we perceive that these
were ancient names of races of Levitical doorkeepers. In [Ezr
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#042) and [Ch1
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#017), שׁלוּם, answering to משׁלּם of
the present verse, is also named with them. The combination משׁמר
שׁוערים שׁמרים is striking: we should at least have expected משׁמר
שׁמרים שׁוערים, because, while שׁוערים cannot be combined with משׁמר,
שׁמרים may well be so; hence we must either transpose the words as
above, or read according to [Neh
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#019), בּשּׁערים שׁמרים. In the latter
case, בּשּׁערים is more closely defined by the apposition השּׁערים
בּאספּי: at the doors, viz., at the treasure-chambers of the doors. On
'acupiym, see rem. on [Ch1 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#015), [Ch1
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#017).

[Nehemiah 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">neh 12:26</span></span>

[Neh 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#026) is the final subscription
of the two lists in [Neh 12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012) and
[Neh 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024), [Neh
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#025).

[Nehemiah 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">neh 12:27</span></span>

The dedication of the wall of Jerusalem. - The measures proposed for
increasing the numbers of the inhabitants of Jerusalem having now been
executed ([Neh 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#005) and [Neh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001).), the restored wall of
circumvallation was solemnly dedicated. [Neh
12:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027) treat of the preparations for
this solemnity.

[Neh 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027)

At the dedication (i.e., at the time of, בּ denoting nearness of time)
they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to
Jerusalem to keep the dedication. Only a portion of the Levites dwelt in
Jerusalem ([Neh 11:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#015)); the rest
dwelt in places in the neighbourhood, as is more expressly stated in
[Neh 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#028) and [Neh
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#029). ושׂמחה, to keep the dedication
and joy, is not suitable, chiefly on account of the following וּבתודות,
and with songs of praise. We must either read בּשׂמחה, dedication with
joy (comp. [Ezr 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016)), or expunge,
with the lxx and Vulgate, the ו before בּתודות. בּ must be repeated
before מצלתּים from the preceding words. On the subject, comp. [Ch1
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#008); [Ch1
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#016), and elsewhere.

[Neh 12:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#028)

And the sons of the singers, i.e., the members of the three Levitical
companies of singers (comp. [Neh 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#025)
and [Neh 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#017)), gathered themselves
together, both out of the Jordan valley round about Jerusalem, and the
villages (or fields, חצרים, comp. [Lev
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#031)) of Netophathi, and from
Beth-gilgal, etc. הכּכּר does not mean the district round Jerusalem, the
immediate neighbourhood of the city (Bertheau). For, according to
established usage, הכּכּר is used to designate the Jordan valley (see
rem. on [Neh 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#022)); and ירוּשׁלים
סביבות is here added to limit the כּכּר, - the whole extent of the
valley of the Jordan from the Dead Sea to the Sea of Galilee not being
intended, but only its southern portion in the neighbourhood of Jericho,
where it widens considerably westward, and which might be said to be
round about Jerusalem. The villages of Netophathi (comp. [Ch1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#016)) are the villages or fields in
the vicinity of Netopha, i.e., probably the modern village of Beit
Nettif, about thirteen miles south-west of Jerusalem: comp. Rob.
Palestine; Tobler, dritte Wand. p. 117, etc.; and V. de Velde, Mem. p.
336. Bertheau regards Beth-gilgal as the present Jiljilia, also called
Gilgal, situate somewhat to the west of the road from Jerusalem to
Nablous (Sichem), about seventeen miles north of the former town. This
view, is, however, questionable, Jiljilia being apparently too distant
to be reckoned among the סביבות of Jerusalem. "And from the fields of
Geba and Azmaveth." With respect to Geba, see rem. on [Neh
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#031). The situation of Azmaveth is
unknown; see rem. on [Ezr 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#024). For
the singers had built them villages in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem,
and dwelt, therefore, not in the before-named towns, but in villages
near them.

[Neh 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#030)

The dedication began with the purification of the people, the gates, and
the wall, by the priests and Levites, after they had purified
themselves. This was probably done, judging from the analogy of [Ch2
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#020), by the offering of
sin-offerings and burnt-offerings, according to some special ritual
unknown to us, as sacrifices of purification and dedication. This was
followed by the central-point of the solemnity, a procession of two
bands of singers upon the wall ([Neh
12:31-42](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031)).

[Neh 12:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031)

Nehemiah brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, and appointed
two great companies of those who gave thanks, and two processions. These
went each upon the wall in different directions, and stopped opposite
each other at the house of God. The princes of Judah are the princes of
the whole community, - Judah being used in the sense of יהוּדים, [Neh
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#002). לחומה מעל, upwards to the wall,
so that they stood upon the wall. העמיד, to place, i.e., to cause to
take up a position, so that those assembled formed two companies or
processions. תודה, acknowledgement, praise, thanks, and then
thankofferings, accompanied by the singing of psalms and thanksgivings.
Hence is derived the meaning: companies of those who gave thanks, in
[Neh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031), [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), [Neh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040). ותהלכת, et processiones, solemn
processions, is added more closely to define תודה. The company of those
who gave thanks consisted of a number of Levitical singers, behind whom
walked the princes of the people, the priests, and Levites. At the head
of one procession went Ezra the scribe ([Neh
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036)), with one half of the nobles;
at the head of the second, Nehemiah with the other half ([Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038)). The one company and procession
went to the right upon the wall. Before ליּמין we must supply, "one band
went" (הולכת האחת התּודה), as is evident partly from the context of the
present verse, partly from [Neh 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038).
These words were probably omitted by a clerical error caused by the
similarity of תּהלכת to הולכת. Thus the first procession went to the
right, i.e., in a southerly direction, upon the wall towards the
dung-gate (see rem. on [Neh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014)); the
second, [Neh 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), went over against
the first (למאל), i.e., in an opposite direction, and therefore
northwards, past the tower of the furnaces, etc. The starting-point of
both companies and processions is not expressly stated, but may be
easily inferred from the points mentioned, and can have been none other
than the valley-gate, the present Jaffa gate (see rem. on [Neh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013)). Before a further description of
the route taken by the first company, the individuals composing the
procession which followed it are enumerated in [Neh
12:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#032). After them, i.e., after the
first company of them that gave thanks, went Hoshaiah and half of the
princes of Judah. Hoshaiah was probably the chief of the one half of
these princes. The seven names in [Neh
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#033) and [Neh
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#034) are undoubtedly the names of the
princes, and the ו before עזריה is explicative: even, namely. Bertheau's
remark, "After the princes came the orders of priests, Azariah," etc.,
is incorrect. It is true that of these seven names, five occur as names
of priests, and heads of priestly houses, viz.: Azariah, [Neh
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#002); [Neh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001); Meshullam, [Neh
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#007); Shemaiah, [Neh
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#008) and [Neh
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#006); and Jeremiah, [Neh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001). But even if these individuals
were heads of priestly orders, their names do not here stand for their
orders. Still less do Judah and Benjamin denote the half of the laity of
Judah and Benjamin, as Bertheau supposes, and thence infers that first
after the princes came two or three orders of priests, then half of the
laity of Judah and Benjamin, and then two more orders of priests. [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), which is said to give rise to
this view, by no means confirms it. It is true that in this verse העם
חצי, besides Nehemiah, are stated to have followed the company of those
who gave thanks; but that העם in this verse is not used to designate the
people as such, but is only a general expression for the individuals
following the company of singers, is placed beyond doubt by [Neh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040), where העם is replaced by
הסּגנים חצי; while, beside the half of the rulers, with Nehemiah, only
priests with trumpets and Levites with stringed instruments ([Neh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#041)) are enumerated as composing the
second procession. Since, then, the priests with trumpets and Levites
with musical instruments are mentioned in the first procession ([Neh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#035) and [Neh
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036)), the names enumerated in [Neh
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#033) and [Neh
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#034) can be only those of the one
half of the סגנים of the people, i.e., the one half of the princes of
Judah. The princes of Judah, i.e., of the Jewish community, consisted
not only of laymen, but included also the princes, i.e., heads of
priestly and Levitical orders; and hence priestly and Levitical princes
might also be among the seven whose names are given in [Neh
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#033) and [Neh
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#034). A strict severance, moreover,
between lay and priestly princes cannot be made by the names alone; for
these five names, which may designate priestly orders, pertain in other
passages to laymen, viz.: Azariah, in [Neh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023); Ezra, as of the tribe of Judah,
[Ch1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#017); Meshullam, [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004); [Neh
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#021), and elsewhere; Shemaiah, [Ezr
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013); [Ezr
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#031); [Ch1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#022); [Ch1
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#037) (of Judah), [Ch1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#004) (a Reubenite), and other passages
(this name being very usual; comp. Simonis Onomast. p. 546); Jeremiah,
[Ch1 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#024) (a Manassite), [Neh
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#004) (a Benjamite), [Neh
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#010) (a Gadite). Even the name Judah
is met with among the priests ([Neh
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036)), and among the Levites, [Neh
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#008), comp. also [Neh
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#009), and that of Benjamin, [Neh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023) and [Ezr
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#032). In the present verses, the two
names are not those of tribes, but of individuals, nomina duorum
principum (R. Sal.).

[Neh 12:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#035)

The princes of the congregation were followed by certain "of the sons of
the priests" (seven in number, to judge from [Neh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#041)) with trumpets; also by Jonathan
the son of Zechariah, who, as appears from the subsequent ואחיו, was at
the head of the Levitical musicians, i.e., the section of them that
followed this procession. His brethren, i.e., the musicians of his
section, are enumerated in [Neh 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036),
- eight names being given, among which are a Shemaiah and a Judah. "With
the musical instruments of David, the man of God:" comp. [Ch2
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#026); [Ch1
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#016); [Ch1
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#005); [Ezr
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010). "And Ezra the scribe before
them," viz., before the individuals enumerated from [Neh
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#032), immediately after the company
of those who gave thanks, and before the princes, like Nehemiah, [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038).

[Neh 12:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#037)

After this insertion of the names of the persons who composed the
procession, the description of the route it took is continued. From
"upon the wall, towards the dung-gate ([Neh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031)), it passed on" to the
fountain-gate; and נגדּם, before them (i.e., going straight forwards;
comp. [Jos 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005), [Jos
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#020); [Amo
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#003)), they went up by the stairs of
the city of David, the ascent of the wall, up over the house of David,
even unto the water-gate eastward. These statements are not quite
intelligible to us. The stairs of the city of David are undoubtedly "the
stairs that lead down from the city of David" ([Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)). These lay on the eastern slope
of Zion, above the fountain-gate and the Pool of Siloam. לחומה המּעלה
might be literally translated "the ascent to the wall," as by Bertheau,
who takes the sense as follows: (The procession) went up upon the wall
by the ascent formed by these steps at the northern part of the eastern
side of Zion. According to this, the procession would have left the wall
by the stairs at the eastern declivity of Zion, to go up upon the wall
again by this ascent. There is, however, no reason for this leaving of
the wall, and that which Bertheau adduces is connected with his
erroneous transposition of the fountain-gate to the place of the present
dung-gate. לחומה המּעלה seems to be the part of the wall which,
according to [Neh 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019), lay opposite
the המּקצוע הנּשׁק עלת, a place on the eastern edge of Zion, where the
wall was carried over an elevation of the ground, and where consequently
was an ascent in the wall. Certainly this cannot be insisted upon,
because the further statement דויד לבית מעל is obscure, the preposition
ל מעל admitting of various interpretations, and the situation of the
house of David being uncertain. Bertheau, indeed, says: "ועד in the
following words corresponds with מעל before דויד לבית: a wall over the
house of David is not intended; and the meaning is rather, that after
they were come as far as the wall, they then passed over the house of
David, i.e., the place called the house of David, even to the
water-gate." But the separation of מעל from דויד לבית is decidedly
incorrect, ל מעל being in the preceding and following passages always
used in combination, and forming one idea: comp. [Neh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031) (twice) and [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038) and [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039). Hence it could scarcely be
taken here in [Neh 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#037) in a
different sense from that which it has in [Neh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031) and [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038). Not less objectionable is the
notion that the house of David is here put for a place called the house
of David, on which a palace of David formerly stood, and where perhaps
the remains of an ancient royal building might still have been in
existence. By the house of David is meant, either the royal palace built
(according to Thenius) by Solomon at the north-eastern corner of Zion,
opposite the temple, or some other building of David, situate south of
this palace, on the east side of Zion. The former view is more probable
than the latter. We translate לבית ד מעל, past the house of David. For,
though לחומה מעל must undoubtedly be so understood as to express that
the procession went upon the wall (which must be conceived of as
tolerably broad), yet למגדּל מעל, [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), can scarcely mean that the
procession also went up over the tower which stood near the wall. In the
case of the gates, too, ל מעל cannot mean over upon; for it is
inconceivable that this solemn procession should have gone over the roof
of the gates; and we conclude, on the contrary, that it passed beside
the gates and towers. Whether the route taken by the procession from the
house of David to the water-gate in the east were straight over the
ridge of Ophel, which ran from about the horse-gate to the water-gate,
or upon the wall round Ophel, cannot be determined, the description
being incomplete. After the house of David, no further information as to
its course is given; its halting-place, the water-gate, being alone
mentioned.

The route taken by the second company is more particularly described. -
[Neh 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038) and [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039). "And the second company of them
that gave thanks, which went over against, and which I and the (other)
half of the people followed, (went) upon the wall past the tower of the
furnaces, as far as the broad wall; and past the gate of Ephraim, and
past the gate of the old (wall), and past the fish-gate, and past the
tower Hananeel and the tower Hammeah, even to the sheep-gate: and then
took up its station at the prison-gate." למואל (in the form with א only
here; elsewhere מול, [Deu 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001), or
מוּל), over against, opposite, sc. the first procession, therefore
towards the opposite side, i.e., to the left; the first having gone to
the right, viz., from the valley-gate northwards upon the northern wall.
וגו אחריה ואני (and I behind them) is a circumstantial clause, which we
may take relatively. The order of the towers, the lengths of wall, and
the gates, exactly answer to the description in [Neh
3:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001), with these differences: - a.
The description proceeds from the sheep-gate in the east to the
valley-gate in the west; while the procession moved in the opposite
direction, viz., from the valley-gate to the sheep-gate. b. In the
description of the building of the wall, Neh 3, the gate of Ephraim is
omitted (see rem. on [Neh 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008)). c. In
the description, the prison-gate at which the procession halted is also
unmentioned, undoubtedly for the same reason as that the gate of Ephraim
is omitted, viz., that not having been destroyed, there was no need to
rebuild it. המּטּרה שׁער is translated, gate of the prison or watch: its
position is disputed; but it can scarcely be doubted that המּטּרה is the
court of the prison mentioned [Neh
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025) (המּטּרה חצר), by or near the
king's house. Starting from the assumption that the two companies halted
or took up positions opposite each other, Hupfeld (in his before-cited
work, p. 321) transposes both the court of the prison and the king's
house to the north of the temple area, where the citadel. בּירה, βᾶρις,
was subsequently situated. But "this being forbidden," as Arnold objects
(in his before-cited work, p. 628), "by the order in the description of
the building of the wall, [Neh 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025),
which brings us absolutely to the southern side," Bertheau supposes that
the two processions which would arrive at the same moment at the temple,
- the one from the north-east, the other from the south-east, - here
passed each other, and afterwards halted opposite each other in such
wise, that the procession advancing from the south-west stood on the
northern side, and that from the north-west at the southern side of the
temple area. This notion, however, having not the slightest support from
the text, nor any reason appearing why the one procession should pass
the other, it must be regarded as a mere expedient. In [Neh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040) it is merely said, the two
companies stood in the house of God; and not even that they stood
opposite each other, the one on the north, the other on the south side
of the temple. Thus they may have stood side by side, and together have
praised the Lord. Hence we place the prison-gate also on the
south-eastern corner of the temple area, and explain the name from the
circumstance that a street ran from this gate over Ophel to the court of
the prison near the king's house upon Zion, which, together with the
gate to which it led, received its name from the court of the prison.
Not far from the prison-gate lay the water-gate in the east, near which
was an open space in the direction of the temple area ([Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)). On this open space the two
companies met, and took the direction towards the temple, entering the
temple area from this open space, that they might offer their
thank-offerings before the altar of burnt-offering ([Neh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#043)). Besides, the remark upon the
position of the two companies ([Neh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040)) anticipates the course of
events, the procession following the second company being first
described in [Neh 12:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040). At the end
of [Neh 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040) the statement of [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038) - I and the half of the people
behind - is again taken up in the words: I and the half of the rulers
with me. The סגנים are, as in [Neh
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#032), the princes of the
congregation, who, with Nehemiah, headed the procession that followed
the company of those who gave thanks. Then followed ([Neh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#041)) seven priests with trumpets,
whose names are given, answering to the sons of the priests with
trumpets ([Neh 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036)) in the first
procession. These names are all met with elsewhere of other persons.
These were succeeded, as in [Neh
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036), by eight Levites - eight
individuals, and not eight divisions (Bertheau). And the singers gave
forth sound, i.e., of voices and instruments, - whether during the
circuit or after the two companies had take their places at the temple,
is doubtful. The president of the Levitical singers was Jezrahiah.

[Neh 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#043)

The solemnity terminated with the offering of great sacrifices and a
general festival of rejoicing. In the matter of sacrificing, the person
of Nehemiah would necessarily recede; hence he relates the close of the
proceedings objectively, and speaks in the third person, as he had done
when speaking of the preparations for them, [Neh
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027), etc., only using the first
([Neh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031), [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), [Neh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040)) person when speaking of what
was appointed by himself, or of his own position. The זבהים were chiefly
thank-offerings which, terminating in feasting upon the sacrifices, -
and these feasts in which the women and children participated, -
contributed to the enhancement of the general joy, the joy which God had
given them by the success He had accorded to their work of building
their wall. For a description of their rejoicing, comp. [Ch2
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#027); [Ezr
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022), and [Neh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013).

[Nehemiah 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">neh 12:44</span></span>

The joint efforts of Nehemiah and Ezra succeeded both in restoring the
enactments of the law for the performance and maintenance of the public
worship, and in carrying out the separation of the community from
strangers, especially by the dissolution of unlawful marriages (Neh
12:44-13:3). When Nehemiah, however, returned to the king at Babylon, in
the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes, and remained there some time, the
abuses which had been abolished were again allowed by the people. During
Nehemiah's absence, Eliashib the priest prepared a chamber in the
fore-court of the temple, as a dwelling for his son-in-law Tobiah the
Ammonite. The delivery of their dues to the Levites (the first-fruits
and tenths) was omitted, and the Sabbath desecrated by field-work and by
buying and selling in Jerusalem; Jews married Ashdodite, Ammonitish, and
Moabitish wives; even a son of the high priest Joiada allying himself by
marriage with Sanballat the Horonite. All these illegal acts were
energetically opposed by Nehemiah at his return to Jerusalem, when he
strove both to purify the congregation from foreigners, and to restore
the appointments of the law with respect to divine worship (13:4-31).

The narration of these events and of the proceedings of Nehemiah in the
last section of this book, is introduced by a brief summary (in Neh
12:44-13:3) of what was done for the ordering of divine worship, and for
the separation of Israel from strangers; and this introduction is so
annexed to what precedes, not only by the formula ההוּא בּיּום ([Neh
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#033) and [Neh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001)), but also by its contents, that
it might be regarded as a summary of what Nehemiah had effected during
his first stay at Jerusalem. It is not till the connective מזּה ולפני,
"and before this" ([Neh 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#004)), with
which the recital of what occurred during Nehemiah's absence from
Jerusalem, in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes, beings, that we
perceive that this description of the restored legal appointments
relates not only to the time before the thirty-second year of
Artaxerxes, but applies also to that of Nehemiah's second stay at
Jerusalem, and bears only the appearance of an introduction, being in
fact a brief summary of all that Nehemiah effected both before and after
the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes. This is a form of statement which,
is to be explained by the circumstance that Nehemiah did not compile
this narrative of his operations till the evening of his days.

[Neh 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044)

The reformations in worship and in social life effected by Nehemiah. -
[Neh 12:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044). Appointments concerning
divine worship. [Neh 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044). And at
that time were certain appointed over the chambers of store-places for
the heave-offerings, the first-fruits, and the tenths, to gather into
them, according to the fields of the cities, the portions appointed by
the law for the priests and Levites. Though the definition of time ההוּא
בּיּום corresponds with the ההוּא בּיּום of [Neh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#043), it is nevertheless used in a
more general sense, and does not refer, as in [Neh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#043), to the day of the dedication of
the wall, but only declares that what follows belongs chiefly to the
time hitherto spoken of. יום means, not merely a day of twelve or
twenty-four hours, but very frequently stands for the time generally
speaking at which anything occurs, or certum quoddam temporis spatium;
and it is only from the context that we can perceive whether יום is used
in its narrower or more extended meaning. Hence ההוּא בּיּום is often
used in the historical and prophetical books, de die, or de tempore modo
memorato, in contradistinction to הזּה היּום, the time present to the
narrator; comp. [Sa1 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#006); [Sa1
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#025), and the discussion in Gesen.
Thes. p. 369. That the expression refers in the present verse not to any
particular day, but to the time in question generally, is obvious from
the whole statement, [Neh 12:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044).
לאוצרות נשׁכות are not chambers for the treasures, i.e.,
treasure-chambers; but both here and [Neh
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#012), אוצרות signify places where
stores are kept, magazines; hence: these are chambers for store-places
for the heave-offerings, etc.; comp. [Neh
10:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#038). With respect to נשׁכות, see
rem. on [Neh 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030). הערים לשׂדי,
according to the fields of the cities, according to the delivery of the
tenth of the crop from the fields of the different cities. These
contributions necessitated the appointment of individuals to have the
care of the store-chambers; "for Judah rejoiced in the priests and the
Levites who were ministering," and therefore contributed willingly and
abundantly "the portions of the law," i.e., the portions prescribed in
the law. The form מנאות is exchanged for מניות, [Neh
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#047) and [Neh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#010). האמדים is a shorter expression
for יהוה לפני האמדים, [Deu 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008) :
standing before the Lord, i.e., ministering.

[Nehemiah 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">neh 12:45</span></span>

And they cared for the care of their God, etc.; i.e., they observed all
that was to be observed, both with respect to God and with respect to
purification, i.e., they faithfully and punctually performed their
office. On משׁמרת שׁמר, see rem. on [Gen
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005) and [Lev
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035). "And (so also) the singers and
doorkeepers," i.e., they, too, observed the duties incumbent on them.
This must be mentally supplied from the beginning of the verse.
"According to the commandment of David and of Solomon his son;" comp.
[Ch2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#014) and [Ch1
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#026). ו must be inserted before
שׁלמה, as in the lxx and Vulgate, after the analogy of [Ch2
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#007) and [Ch2
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#004); for an asyndeton would be here
too harsh. As ו is here omitted, so does it also appear superfluously
before אסף, [Neh 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#046), probably by a
clerical error. The verse can be only understood as saying: "for in the
days of David, Asaph was of old chief of the singers, and of the songs
of praise, and of the thanksgiving unto God." ו before Asaph is here out
of place; for to take it as introducing a conclusion: in the days of
David, therefore, was Asaph ... seems unnatural. The ו probably came
into the text through a reminiscence of [Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030) and [Ch2
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#015). The matter, however, of these
passages is consistent with the naming of David and Asaph, while such a
co-ordination is unsuitable in the present passage. The Masoretes have
indeed attempted to make sense of the words by altering the singular
ראשׁ into the plural ראשׁי; but the Keri ראשׁי is nothing more than a
worthless conjecture, arising partly from the unsuitableness of ו before
אסף, and partly from the consideration that Henan and Ethan were, as
well as Asaph, chiefs of bands of singers. Nehemiah, however, was not
concerned in this passage about exactness of statement, - the mention of
Asaph as chief of the singers being quite sufficient for the purpose of
his remark, that from the times of David onward orders of singers had
existed. - In [Neh 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#047) this subject
is concluded by the general statement that all Israel, i.e., the whole
community, in the days of Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, gave the portions
prescribed in the law for the ministers of the sanctuary, singers,
doorkeepers, Levites, and priests. מקדּישׁים, they were sanctifying,
i.e., consecrabant. הקדּישׁ, to sanctify, said of the bringing of gifts
and dues to the ministers of the sanctuary; comp. [Ch1
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#027); [Lev
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#014). On the matter itself, comp.
[Neh 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#038). and [Num
18:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#026).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 13](neh013)

</div>
