<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh003)  [Next](neh005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001)

[Nehemiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 4:1</span></span>

(3:33-34)

The ridicule of Tobiah and Sanballat. - As soon as Sanballat heard that
we were building (בּנים, partic., expresses not merely the resolve or
desire to build, but also the act of commencing), he was wroth and
indignant, and vented his anger by ridiculing the Jews, saying before
his brethren, i.e., the rulers of his people, and the army of Samaria
(חיל, like [Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003); [Kg2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017)), - in other words, saying
publicly before his associates and subordinates, - "What do these feeble
Jews? will they leave it to themselves? will they sacrifice? will they
finish it to-day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps that are
burned?" עשׂים מה, not, What will they do? (Bertheau), for the
participle is present, and does not stand for the future; but, What are
they doing? The form אמלל, withered, powerless, occurs here only. The
subject of the four succeeding interrogative sentences must be the same.
And this is enough to render inadmissible the explanation offered by
older expositors of להם היעזבוּ: Will they leave to them, viz., will the
neighbouring nations or the royal prefects allow them to build? Here, as
in the case of the following verbs, the subject can only be the Jews.
Hence Ewald seeks, both here and in [Neh
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#008), to give to the verb עזב the
meaning to shelter: Will they make a shelter for themselves, i.e., will
they fortify the town? But this is quite arbitrary. Bertheau more
correctly compares the passage, [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014), אלהים על עזבנוּ, we leave it to
God; but incorrectly infers that here also we must supply אלהים על, and
that, Will they leave to themselves? means, Will they commit the matter
to God. This mode of completing the sense, however, can by no means be
justified; and Bertheau's conjecture, that the Jews now assembling in
Jerusalem, before commencing the work itself, instituted a devotional
solemnity which Sanballat was ridiculing, is incompatible with the
correct rendering of the participle. עזב construed with ל means to
leave, to commit a matter to any one, like [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014), and the sense is: Will they
leave the building of the fortified walls to themselves? i.e., Do they
think they are able with their poor resources to carry out this great
work? This is appropriately followed by the next question: Will they
sacrifice? i.e., bring sacrifices to obtain God's miraculous assistance?
The ridicule lies in the circumstance that Sanballat neither credited
the Jews with ability to carry out the work, nor believed in the
overruling providence of the God whom the Jews worshipped, and therefore
casts scorn by היזבּחוּ both upon the faith of the Jews in their God and
upon the living God Himself. As these two questions are internally
connected, so also are the two following, by which Sanballat casts a
doubt upon the possibility of the work being executed. Will they finish
(the work) on this day, i.e., to-day, directly? The meaning is: Is this
a matter to be as quickly executed as if it were the work of a single
day? The last question is: Have they even the requisite materials? Will
they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish which are burnt? The
building-stone of Jerusalem was limestone, which gets softened by fire,
losing its durability, and, so to speak, its vitality. This explains the
use of the verb חיּה, to revive, bestow strength and durability upon the
softened crumbled stones, to fit the stones into a new building (Ges.
Lex.). The construction שׂרוּפות והמּה is explained by the circumstance
that אבנים is by its form masculine, but by its meaning feminine, and
that המּה agrees with the form אבנים.

[Nehemiah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 4:3</span></span>

(3:35)

Tobiah the Ammonite, standing near Sanballat, and joining in in his
raillery, adds: "Even that which they build, if a fox go up he will
break their stone wall;" i.e., even if they build up walls, the light
footsteps of the stealthy fox will suffice to tread them down, and to
make breaches in their work.

[Nehemiah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 4:4</span></span>

(3:36-37)

When Nehemiah heard of these contemptuous words, he committed the matter
to God, entreating Him to hear how they (the Jews) were become a scorn,
i.e., a subject of contempt, to turn the reproach of the enemies upon
their own head, and to give them up the plunder in a land of captivity,
i.e., in a land in which they would dwell as captives. He supplicates,
moreover, that God would not cover, i.e., forgive ([Psa
85:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#003)), their iniquity, and that their
sin might not be blotted out from before His face, i.e., might not
remain unpunished, "for they have provoked to wrath before the
builders," i.e., openly challenged the wrath of God, by despising Him
before the builders, so that they heard it. הכעים without an object,
spoken of provoking the divine wrath by grievous sins; comp. [Kg2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006) with [Ch2
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006).

[Nehemiah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 4:6</span></span>

(3:38; 4:1-2)

The Jews continued to build without heeding the ridicule of their
enemies, "and all the wall was joined together unto the half thereof,"
i.e., the wall was so far repaired throughout its whole circumference,
that no breach or gap was left up to half its height; "and the people
had a heart to work," i.e., the restoration went on so quickly because
the people had a mind to work.

The attempts of the enemies to hinder the work by force, and Nehemiah's
precautions against them. - When the enemies learnt that the restoration
of the wall was evidently getting on, they conspired together to fight
against Jerusalem ([Neh 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001) and [Neh
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#002)). The Jews then prayed to God, and
set a watch ([Neh 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#003)). When the
courage of the people began to fail, and their enemies spread a report
of sudden attack being imminent, Nehemiah furnished the people on the
wall with weapons, and encouraged the nobles and rulers to fight boldly
for their brethren, their children, and their possessions (vv. 4-8). The
Arabians, Ammonites, and Ashdodites are here enumerated as enemies,
besides Sanballat and Tobiah (vv. 2, 10, 19). The Arabians were incited
to hostilities against the Jews by Geshem (vv. 11, 19), and the
Ammonites by Tobiah; the Ashdodites, the inhabitants of the city and
territory of Ashdod, in the coast district of Philistia, were perhaps
encouraged to renew their old hatred of Judah by Sanballat the Horonite.
When these enemies heard that the walls of Jerusalem were bandaged,
i.e., that the breaches and damages in the wall were repaired, they were
filled with wrath. The biblical expression, to lay on a bandage, here
and [Ch2 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#013); [Jer
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022); [Jer
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017); [Jer
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#006), is derived from the healing of
wounds by means of a bandage, and is explained by the sentence
following: that the breaches began to be closed or stopped. The enemies
conspired together to march against Jerusalem and injure it. לו, because
the people of the town are meant. תּועה occurs but once more, viz., in
[Isa 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006), in the sense of error; here
it signifies calamities, for, as Aben Ezra well remarks, qui in
angustiis constitutus est, est velut errans, qui nescit quid agat quove
se vertat.

[Nehemiah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 4:9</span></span>

(4:3)

The Jews, on the other hand, made preparation by prayer, and by setting
a watch (משׁמר, comp. [Neh 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#003); [Neh
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#030)) day and night. We, viz.,
Nehemiah and the superintendents of the work, prayed and set a watch
עליהם, against them, to ward off a probable attack. מפּניהם, for fear of
them, comp. [Neh 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#010).

[Nehemiah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 4:10</span></span>

(4:4)

The placing of the watch day and night, and the continuous labour, must
have pressed heavily upon the people; therefore Judah said: "The
strength of the bearers of burdens fails, and there is much rubbish; we
are not able to build the wall." That is to say, the labour is beyond
our power, we cannot continue it.

[Nehemiah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 4:11</span></span>

(4:5)

Their discouragement was increased by the words of their enemies, who
said: They (the Jews) shall not know nor see, till we come in the midst
among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.

[Nehemiah 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 4:12</span></span>

(4:6-7)

When, therefore, the Jews who dwelt near them, i.e., in the
neighbourhood of the adversaries, and heard their words, came to
Jerusalem, "and said to us ten times (i.e., again and again), that from
all places ye must return to us, then I placed," etc. Jews came from all
places to Jerusalem, and summoned those who were building there to
return home, for adversaries were surrounding the community on all
sides: Sanballat and the Samaritans on the north, the Ammonites on the
east, the Arabians on the south, and the Philistines (Ashdodites) on the
west. אשׁר before תּשׁוּבוּ introduces their address, instead of כּי;
being thus used, e.g., before longer speeches, [Sa1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#020); [Sa2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#004); and for כּי generally, throughout
the later books, in conformity to Aramaean usage. "Return to us" (על
שׁוּב, as in [Ch2 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#009), for אל שׁוּב),
said the Jews who came from all quarters to Jerusalem to their
fellow-townsmen, who from Jericho, Gibeon, and Tekoa (comp. [Neh
3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002), [Neh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005), [Neh
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007)) were working on the wall of
Jerusalem. These words express their fear lest those who were left at
home, especially the defenceless women, children, and aged men, should
be left without protection against the attacks of enemies, if their
able-bodied men remained any longer in Jerusalem to take part in the
building of the wall.

[Neh 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#013)

[Neh 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007) is hardly intelligible. We
translate it: Then I placed at the lowest places behind the wall, at the
dried-up places, I (even) placed the people, after their families, with
their swords, their spears, and their bows. למּקום מתּחתּיּות is a
stronger expression for למּקום מתּחת when used to indicate position, and
מן points out the direction. The sense is: at the lowest places from
behind the wall. בּצּחחים gives the nature of the places where the
people were placed with arms. צחיח and צחיחה mean a dry or bare place
exposed to the heat of the sun: bare, uncovered, or empty places,
perhaps bare hills, whence approaching foes might be discerned at a
distance. The second ואעמיד is but a reiteration of the verb, for the
sake of combining it with its object, from which the ואעמיד at the
beginning of the verse was too far removed by the circumstantial
description of the locality.

(Note: Bertheau considers the text corrupt, regarding the word
מתּחתּיּות as the object of אעמיד, and alters it into מחשׁבות or
חשּׁבנות, engines for hurling missiles ([Ch2
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#015)), or into מטחיּות (a word of
this own invention), instruments for hurling. But not only is this
conjecture critically inadmissible, it also offers no appropriate sense.
The lxx reads the text as we do, and merely renders בצחחיים
conjecturally by ἐν τοῖς σκεπεινοῖς. Besides, it is not easy to see how
חשׁבנות could have arisen from a false reading of מתחתיות; and it should
be remembered that מחשׁבות does not mean a machine for hurling, while
מטחתייות is a mere fabrication. To this must be added, that such
machines are indeed placed upon the walls of a fortress to hurl down
stones and projectiles upon assaulting foes, and not behind the walls,
where they could only be used to demolish the walls, and so facilitate
the taking of the town by the enemy.)

[Nehemiah 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 4:14</span></span>

(4:8)

"And I looked, and rose up, and said." These words can only mean: When I
saw the people thus placed with their weapons, I went to them, and said
to the nobles, etc., "Be not afraid of them (the enemies); remember the
Lord, the great and the terrible," who will fight for you against your
enemies ([Deu 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#022); [Deu
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#003), and [Deu
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#006)), "and fight ye for your
brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your houses,"
whom the enemies would destroy.

[Nehemiah 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 4:15</span></span>

(4:9-17)

Thus was the design of the enemy circumvented, and the Jews returned to
their work on the wall, which they had forsaken to betake themselves to
their weapons. The manner in which they resumed their building work was,
that one half held weapons, and the other half laboured with weapons in
hand.

[Neh 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#015)

When our enemies heard that it (their intention) was known to us, and
(that) God had brought their counsel to nought (through the measures
with which we had met it), we returned all of us to the wall, every one
to his work. The conclusion does not begin till ונּשׁוב, האל ויּפר
belonging to the premiss, in continuation of נודא כּי.

[Neh 4:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#016)

From that day the half of my servants wrought at the work, and the other
half of them held the spears and shields, the bows and the armour, i.e.,
carried the arms. The servants of Nehemiah are his personal retinue,
[Neh 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#017), [Neh
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#010), [Neh
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#016), namely, Jews placed at his
disposal as Pechah for official purposes. The ו before הרמחים was
probably placed before this word, instead of before the המּגנּים
following, by a clerical error; for if it stood before the latter also,
it might be taken in the sense of et - et. מצזיקים, instead of being
construed with בּ, is in the accusative, as also in [Neh
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#011), and even in [Jer
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023) and [Isa
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#009), [Isa
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#013). Unnecessary and unsuitable is
the conjecture of Bertheau, that the word בּרמחים originally stood after
מצזיקים, and that a fresh sentence begins with והרמחים: and the other
half held the spears; and the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the
armour, and the rulers, were behind the whole house of Judah, - a
strange combination, which places the weapons and rulers behind the
house of Judah. Besides, of the circumstance of the weapons being placed
behind the builders, so that they might at any moment seize them, we not
only read nothing in the text; but in [Neh
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#011) and [Neh
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#012) just the contrary, viz., that the
builders wrought with one hand, and with the other held a weapon. "The
rulers were behind all the house of Judah," i.e., each was behind his
own people who were employed on the work, to encourage them in their
labour, and, in case of attack, to lead them against the enemy. - In
[Neh 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#011) בּחומה הבּונים is prefixed
after the manner of a title. With respect to those who built the wall,
both the bearers of burdens were lading with the one hand of each
workman, and holding a weapon with the other, and the builders were
building each with his sword girt on his side. The ו prefixed to
הנּשׂאים and הבּנים means both; and בסּבל נשׂא, bearers of burdens, who
cleared away the rubbish, and worked as labourers. These, at all events,
could do their work with one hand, which would suffice for emptying
rubbish into baskets, and for carrying material in handle baskets. ידו
בּעחת, literally, with the one (namely) of his hands that was doing the
work. The suffix of ידו points to the genitive following. ואחת אחת, the
one and the other hand. השּׁלח, not a missile, but a weapon that was
stretched out, held forth, usually a sword or some defensive weapon: see
rem. on [Jos 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#008); [Ch2
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005). The builders, on the contrary,
needed both hands for their work: hence they had swords girt to their
sides. "And he that sounded the trumpet was beside me." Nehemiah, as
superintendent of the work, stood at the head of his servants, ready to
ward off any attack; hence the trumpeter was beside him, to be able to
give to those employed on the wall the signal for speedy muster in case
danger should threaten.

[Neh 4:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#019)

Hence he said to the nobles, the rulers, and the rest of the people,
i.e., all employed in building, "The work is much (great) and wide, and
we are separated upon the wall one far from another; in what place ye
hear the sound of the trumpet, assemble yourselves to me: our God will
fight for us." - In [Neh 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#015) the
whole is summed up, and for this purpose the matter of [Neh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#010) is briefly repeated, to unite
with it the further statement that they so laboured from early morning
till late in the evening. "We (Nehemiah and his servants) laboured in
the work, and half of them (of the servants) held the spears from the
grey of dawn till the stars appeared."

[Neh 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#022)

He took moreover, a further precaution: he said to the people (i.e., to
the labourers on the wall, and not merely to the warriors of the
community, as Bertheau supposes): Let every one with his servant lodge
within Jerusalem, i.e., to remain together during the night also, and
not be scattered through the surrounding district, "that they may be
guardianship for us by night and labour by day." The abstracts,
guardianship and labour, stand for the concretes, guards and labourers.
As לנוּ, to us, refers to the whole community separated on the walls, so
is ונערו אישׁ to be understood of all the workers, and not of the
fighting men only. From ונערו אישׁ it only appears that the fathers of
families and master builders had servants with them as labourers.

[Neh 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#023)

Nehemiah, moreover, and his brethren (his kinsmen and the members of his
house), and his servants, and the men of the guard in his retinue, were
constantly in their clothes ("not putting off our clothes" to rest). The
last words, המּים שׁלחו אישׁ are very obscure, and give no tolerable
sense, whether we explain המּים of water for drinking or washing. Luther
translates, Every one left off washing; but the words, Every one's
weapon was water, can never bear this sense. Roediger, in Gesen. Thes.
s.v. שׁלח, seeks to alter המים into בידו, to which Bttcher (N. krit.
Aehrenl. iii. p. 219) rightly objects: "how could בידו have been altered
into המּים, or המּים have got into the text at all, if some portion of
it had not been originally there? What this בידו expresses, would be far
more definitely given with the very slight correction of changing the
closing ם of המּים, and reading המינו = המינוּ (comp. [Sa2
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#019)); thus each had taken his
missile on the right (in his right hand), naturally that he might be
ready to discharge it in case of a hostile attack." This conjecture
seems to us a happy emendation of the unmeaning text, since נוּ might
easily have been changed into ם; and we only differ in this matter from
Bttcher, by taking שׁלח in its only legitimate meaning of weapon, and
translating the words: And each laid his weapon on the right, viz., when
he laid himself down at night to rest in his clothes, to be ready for
fighting at the first signal from the watch.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 5](neh005)

</div>
