<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num004)  [Next](num006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 5:0</span></span>

Spiritual Organization of theCongregation of Israel - Numbers 5-6

From the outward organization of the tribes of Israel as the army of
Jehovah, the law proceeds to their internal moral and spiritual order,
for the purpose of giving an \_inward support, both moral and religious,
to their outward or social and political unity. This is the object of
the directions concerning the removal of unclean persons from the camp
([Num 5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#001)), the restitution of
anything unjustly appropriated ([Num
5:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#005)), the course to be pursued with
a wife suspected of adultery (Num 5:11-31), and also of the laws
relating to the Nazarite (Num 6:1-21), and to the priestly blessing
([Num 6:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#022)).

[Numbers 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 5:1</span></span>

Removal of Unclean Persons out of the Camp. - As Jehovah, the Holy One,
dwelt in the midst of the camp of His people, those who were affected
with the uncleanness of leprosy (Lev 13), of a diseased flux, or of
menstruation ([Lev 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002)., [Num
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#019).), and those who had become
unclean through touching a corpse ([Num
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011)., cf. [Lev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001); [Lev
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#004)), whether male or female, were to
be removed out of the camp, that they might not defile it by their
uncleanness. The command of God, to remove these persons out of the
camp, was carried out at once by the nation; and even in Canaan it was
so far observed, that lepers at any rate were placed in special
pest-houses outside the cities (see at [Lev
13:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045)).

[Numbers 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 5:5</span></span>

Restitution in Case of a Trespass. - No crime against the property of a
neighbour was to remain without expiation in the congregation of Israel,
which was encamped or dwelt around the sanctuary of Jehovah; and the
wrong committed was not to remain without restitution, because such
crimes involved unfaithfulness (מעל, see [Lev
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015)) towards Jehovah. "If a man or a
woman do one of the sins of men, to commit unfaithfulness against
Jehovah, and the same soul has incurred guilt, they shall confess their
sin which they have done, and (the doer) shall recompense his debt
according to its sum" (בּראשׁו, as in [Lev
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005)), etc. האדם מכּל־חטּאת, one of the
sins occurring among men, not "a sin against a man" (Luther, Ros.,
etc.). The meaning is a sin, with which a מעל was committed against
Jehovah, i.e., one of the acts described in [Lev
6:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003), by which injury was done to the
property of a neighbour, whereby a man brought a debt upon himself, for
the wiping out of which a material restitution of the other's property
was prescribed, together with the addition of a fifth of its value, and
also the presentation of a sin-offering ([Lev
6:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004)). To guard against that
disturbance of fellowship and peace in the congregation, which would
arise from such trespasses as these, the law already given in [Lev
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001) is here renewed and supplemented
by the additional stipulation, that if the man who had been unjustly
deprived of some of his property had no Gol, to whom restitution could
be made for the debt, the compensation should be paid to Jehovah for the
priests. The Gol was the nearest relative, upon whom the obligation
rested to redeem a person who had fallen into slavery through poverty
([Lev 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025)). The allusion to the Gol
in this connection presupposes that the injured person was no longer
alive. To this there are appended, in [Num
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#009) and [Num
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#010), the directions which are
substantially connected with this, viz., that every heave-offering
(Terumah, see at [Lev 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009)) in the holy
gifts of the children of Israel, which they presented to the priest, was
to belong to him (the priest), and also all the holy gifts which were
brought by different individuals. The reference is not to literal
sacrifices, i.e., gifts intended for the altar, but to dedicatory
offerings, first-fruits, and such like. את־קדשׁיו אישׁ, "with regard to
every man's, his holy gifts...to him (the priest) shall they be; what
any man gives to the priest shall belong to him." The second clause
serves to explain and confirm the first. את: as far, with regard to,
quoad (see Ewald, 277, d; Ges. 117, 2, note).

[Numbers 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 5:11</span></span>

Sentence of God upon Wives Suspected of Adultery. - As any suspicion
cherished by a man against his wife, that she either is or has been
guilty of adultery, whether well-founded or not, is sufficient to shake
the marriage connection to its very roots, and to undermine, along with
marriage, the foundation of the civil commonwealth, it was of the
greatest importance to guard against this moral evil, which was so
utterly irreconcilable with the holiness of the people of God, by
appointing a process in harmony with the spirit of the theocratical law,
and adapted to bring to light the guilt or innocence of any wife who had
fallen into such suspicion, and at the same time to warn fickle wives
against unfaithfulness. This serves to explain not only the introduction
of the law respecting the jealousy-offering in this place, but also the
general importance of the subject, and the reason for its being so
elaborately described.

[Num 5:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#012)

If a man's wife went aside, and was guilty of unfaithfulness towards him
([Num 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#013) is an explanatory clause),
through a (another) man having lain with her with emissio seminis, and
it was hidden from the eyes of her husband, on account of her having
defiled herself secretly, and there being no witness against her, and
her not having been taken (in the act); but if, for all that, a spirit
of jealousy came upon him, and he was jealous of his wife, and she was
defiled,...or she was not defiled: the man was to take his wife to the
priest, and bring as her sacrificial gift, on her account, the tenth of
an ephah of barley meal, without putting oil or incense, "for it is a
meat-offering of jealousy, a meat-offering of memory, to bring iniquity
to remembrance." As the woman's crime, of which her husband accused her,
was naturally denied by herself, and was neither to be supported by
witnesses nor proved by her being taken in the very act, the only way
left to determine whether there was any foundation or not for the spirit
of jealousy excited in her husband, and to prevent an unrighteous
severance of the divinely appointed marriage, was to let the thing be
decided by the verdict of God Himself. To this end the man was to bring
his wife to the priest with a sacrificial gift, which is expressly
called קרבּנהּ, her offering, brought עליה "on her account," that is to
say, with a meat-offering, the symbol of the fruit of her walk and
conduct before God. Being the sacrificial gift of a wife who had gone
aside and was suspected of adultery, this meat-offering could not
possess the character of the ordinary meat-offerings, which shadowed
forth the fruit of the sanctification of life in good works; could not
consist, that is to say, of fine wheaten flour, but only of barley meal.
Barley was worth only half as much as wheat ([Kg2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001), [Kg2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#016), [Kg2
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#018)), so that only the poorer
classes, or the people generally in times of great distress, used barley
meal as their daily food ([Jdg 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#013);
[Kg2 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#042); [Eze
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012); [Joh
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009), [Joh
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#013)), whilst those who were better
off used it for fodder ([Kg1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#008)).
Barley meal was prescribed for this sacrifice, neither as a sign that
the adulteress had conducted herself like an irrational animal (Philo,
Jonathan, Talm., the Rabb., etc.), nor "because the persons presenting
the offering were invoking the punishment of a crime, and not the favour
of God" (Cler., Ros.): for the guilt of a woman was not yet established;
nor even, taking a milder view of the matter, to indicate that the
offerer might be innocent, and in that case no offering at all was
required Knobel), but to represent the questionable repute in which the
woman stood, or the ambiguous, suspicious character of her conduct.
Because such conduct as hers did not proceed from the Spirit of God, and
was not carried out in prayer: oil and incense, the symbols of the
Spirit of God and prayer, were not to be added to her offering. It was
an offering of jealousy (קנאת, an intensive plural), and the object was
to bring the ground of that jealousy to light; and in this respect it is
called the "meat-offering of remembrance," sc., of the woman, before
Jehovah (cf. [Num 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010); [Num
31:54](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#054); [Exo
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#012), [Exo
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#029); [Exo
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#016); [Lev
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024)), namely, "the remembrance of
iniquity," bringing her crime to remembrance before the Lord, that it
might be judged by Him.

[Num 5:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#016)

The priest was to bring her near to the altar at which he stood, and
place her before Jehovah, who had declared Himself to be present at the
altar, and then to take holy water, probably water out of the basin
before the sanctuary, which served for holy purposes ([Exo
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018)), in an earthen vessel, and put
dust in it from the floor of the dwelling. He was then to loosen the
hair of the woman who was standing before Jehovah, and place the
jealousy-offering in her hands, and holding the water in his own hand,
to pronounce a solemn oath of purification before her, which she had to
appropriate to herself by a confirmatory Amen, Amen. The water, which
the priest had prepared for the woman to drink, was taken from the
sanctuary, and the dust to be put into it from the floor of the
dwelling, to impregnate this drink with the power of the Holy Spirit
that dwelt in the sanctuary. The dust was strewed upon the water, not to
indicate that man was formed from dust and must return to dust again,
but as an allusion to the fact, that dust was eaten by the serpent ([Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)) as the curse of sin, and
therefore as the symbol of a state deserving a curse, a state of the
deepest humiliation and disgrace ([Mic
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#017); [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023); [Psa
72:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009)). On the very same ground, an
earthen vessel was chosen; that is to say, one quite worthless in
comparison with the copper one. The loosening of the hair of the head
(see [Lev 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045)), in other cases a
sign of mourning, is to be regarded here as a removal or loosening of
the female head-dress, and a symbol of the loss of the proper ornament
of female morality and conjugal fidelity. During the administration of
the oath, the offering was placed in her hands, that she might bring the
fruit of her own conduct before God, and give it up to His holy
judgment. The priest, as the representative of God, held the vessel in
his hand, with the water in it, which was called the "water of
bitterness, the curse-bringing," inasmuch as, if the crime imputed to
her was well-founded, it would bring upon the woman bitter suffering as
the curse of God.

[Num 5:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#019)

The oath which the priest required her to take is called, in [Num
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#021), האלה שׁבעת, "oath of cursing"
(see [Gen 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#028)); but it first of all
presupposes the possibility of the woman being innocent, and contains
the assurance, that in that case the curse-water would do her no harm.
"If no (other) man has lain with thee, and thou hast not gone aside to
union (טמאה, accus. of more precise definition, as in [Lev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002), [Lev
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#018)), under thy husband," i.e., as a
wife subject to thy husband ([Eze
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005); [Hos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#012)), "then remain free from the
water of bitterness, this curse-bringing," i.e., from the effects of
this curse-water. The imperative is a sign of certain assurance (see
[Gen 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002); [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007); cf. Ges. 130, 1). "But if thou
hast gone aside under thy husband, if thou hast defiled thyself, and a
man has given thee his seed beside thy husband,"...(the priest shall
proceed to say; this is the meaning of the repetition of
לאשּׁה...והשׁבּיע, [Num 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#021)),
"Jehovah shall make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, by making
thy hip to fall and thy belly to swell; and this curse-bringing water
shall come into thy bowels, to make the belly to vanish and the hip to
fall." To this oath that was spoken before her the woman was to reply,
"true, true," or "truly, truly," and thus confirm it as taken by herself
(cf. [Deu 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015).; [Neh
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#013)). It cannot be determined with
any certainty what was the nature of the disease threatened in this
curse. Michaelis supposes it to be dropsy of the ovary (hydrops ovarii),
in which a tumour is formed in the place of the ovarium, which may even
swell so as to contain 100 lbs. of fluid, and with which the patient
becomes dreadfully emaciated. Josephus says it is ordinary dropsy
(hydrops ascites: Ant. iii. 11, 6). At any rate, the idea of the curse
is this: Δι ̓ ὧν γὰρ ἡ ἁμαρτία, διὰ τούτων ἡ τιμωρία ("the punishment
shall come from the same source as the sin," Theodoret). The punishment
was to answer exactly to the crime, and to fall upon those bodily organs
which had been the instruments of the woman's sin, viz., the organs of
child-bearing.

[Num 5:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#023)

After the woman's Amen, the priest was to write "these curses," those
contained in the oath, in a book-roll, and wash them in the bitter
water, i.e., wash the writing in the vessel with water, so that the
words of the curse should pass into the water, and be imparted to it; a
symbolical act, to set forth the truth, that God imparted to the water
the power to act injuriously upon a guilty body, though it would do no
harm to an innocent one. The remark in [Num
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#024), the priest was to give her this
water to drink is anticipatory; for according to [Num
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#026) this did not take place till
after the presentation of the sacrifice and the burning of the memorial
of it upon the altar. The woman's offering, however, was not presented
to God till after the oath of purification, because it was by the oath
that she first of all purified herself from the suspicion of adultery,
so that the fruit of her conduct could be given up to the fire of the
holiness of God. As a known adulteress, she could not have offered a
meat-offering at all. But as the suspicion which rested upon her was not
entirely removed by her oath, since she might have taken a false oath,
the priest was to give her the curse-water to drink after the offering,
that her guilt or innocence might be brought to light in the effects
produced by the drink. This is given in [Num
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#027) as the design of the course
prescribed: "When he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall
come to pass, that if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her
husband, the water that causeth the curse shall come (enter) into her as
bitterness (i.e., producing bitter sufferings), namely, her belly shall
swell and her hip vanish: and so the woman shall become a curse in the
midst of her people."

[Num 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#028)

"But if she have not defiled herself, and is clean (from the crime of
which she was suspected), she will remain free (from the threatened
punishment of God), and will conceive seed," i.e., be blessed with the
capacity and power to conceive and bring forth children.

[Num 5:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#029)

[Num 5:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#029) bring the law of jealousy
to a formal close, with the additional remark, that the man who adopted
this course with a wife suspected of adultery was free from sin, but the
woman would bear her guilt (see [Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)), i.e., in case she were guilty,
would bear the punishment threatened by God. Nothing is said about what
was to be done in case the woman refused to take the oath prescribed,
because that would amount to a confession of her guilt, when she would
have to be put to death as an adulteress, according to the law in [Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010); and not she alone, but the
adulterer also. In the law just mentioned the man is placed on an
equality with the woman with reference to the sin of adultery; and thus
the apparent partiality, that a man could sue his wife for adultery, but
not the wife her husband, is removed. But the law before us applied to
the woman only, because the man was at liberty to marry more than one
wife, or to take concubines to his own wife; so that he only violated
the marriage tie, and was guilty of adultery, when he formed an illicit
connection with another man's wife. In that case, the man whose marriage
had been violated could proceed against his adulterous wife, and in most
instances convict the adulterer also, in order that he might receive his
punishment too. For a really guilty wife would not have made up her mind
so easily to take the required oath of purification, as the curse of God
under which she came was no easier to bear than the punishment of death.
For this law prescribed no ordeal whose effects were uncertain, like the
ordeals of other nations, but a judgment of God, from which the guilty
could not escape, because it had been appointed by the living God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 6](num006)

</div>
