<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num031)  [Next](num033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 32:0</span></span>

Division of the Conquered Land Beyond the Jordan Among the Tribes of
Reuben, Gad, and Half-Manasseh - Numbers 32

(Note: This chapter is also cut in pieces by Knobel: [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001), [Num
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#002), [Num
32:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016), [Num
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#024), [Num
32:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028), and [Num
32:33-38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033), being assigned to the
Elohist; and the remainder, viz., [Num
32:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003), [Num
32:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006), [Num
32:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020), [Num
32:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025), [Num
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#031), [Num
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#032), and [Num
32:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039), to the Jehovist. But as the
supposed Elohistic portions are fragmentary, inasmuch as it is assumed,
for example, in [Num 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#019), that the
tribes of Reuben and Gad had already asked for the land of the Jordan
and been promised it by Moses, whereas there is nothing of the kind
stated in [Num 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001) and [Num
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#002), the Elohistic account is said to
have been handed down in a fragmentary state. The main ground for this
violent hypothesis is the fancy of the critic, that the tribes mentioned
could not have been so shameless as to wish to remain on the eastern
side of the Jordan, and leave the conquest of Canaan to the other
tribes, and that the willingness to help their brethren to conquer
Canaan which they afterwards express in [Num
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016)., is irreconcilable with their
previous refusal to do this, - arguments which need no refutation for an
unprejudiced reader of the Bible who is acquainted with the selfishness
of the natural heart. The arguments founded upon the language employed
are also all weak. Because there are words in [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001) and [Num
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029), which the critics pronounce to
be Jehovistic, they must proceed, both here and elsewhere, to remove all
that offends them with their critical scissors, in order that they may
uphold the full force of their dicta!)

[Numbers 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 32:1</span></span>

The Reubenites and Gadites, who had very large flocks and herds,
petitioned Moses, Eleazar, and the princes of the congregation, to give
them the conquered land of Gilead for a possession, as a land that was
peculiarly adapted for flocks, and not to make them pass over the
Jordan. מאד עצוּם, "very strong," is an apposition introduced at the
close of the sentence to give emphasis to the רב. The land which they
wished for, they called the "land of Jazer (see [Num
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#032)), and the land of Gilead." They
put Jazer first, probably because this district was especially rich in
excellent pasture land. Gilead was the land to the south and north of
the Jabbok (see at [Deu 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010)), the
modern provinces of Belka in the south between the Jabbok and the Arnon,
and Jebel Ajlun to the north of the Jabbok, as far as the Mandhur.
Ancient Gilead still shows numerous traces of great fertility even in
its present desolation, covered over as it is with hundreds of ruins of
old towns and hamlets. Belka is mountainous towards the north, but in
the south as far as the Arnon it is for the most part table-land; and in
the mountains, as Buckingham says, "we find on every hand a pleasant
shade from fine oaks and wild pistachio-trees, whilst the whole
landscape has more of a European character. The pasturage in Belka is
much better than it is anywhere else throughout the whole of southern
Syria, so that the Bedouins say, 'You can find no country like Belka.'
The oxen and sheep of this district are considered the very best" (see
v. Raumer, Pal. p. 82). The mountains of Gilead on both sides of the
Jabbok are covered for the most part with glorious forests of oak.
"Jebel Ajlun," says Robinson (Pal. App. 162), "presents the most
charming rural scenery that I have seen in Syria. A continued forest of
noble trees, chiefly the evergreen oak (Sindin), covers a large part of
it, while the ground beneath is covered with luxuriant grass, which we
found a foot or more in height, and decked with a rich variety of
flowers" (see v. Raumer, ut sup.). This also applies to the ancient
Basan, which included the modern plains of Jaulan and Hauran, that were
also covered over with ruins of former towns and hamlets. The plain of
Hauran, though perfectly treeless, is for all that very fertile, rich in
corn, and covered in some places with such luxuriant grass that horses
have great difficulty in making their way through it; for which reason
it is a favourite resort of the Bedouins (Burckhardt, p. 393). "The
whole of Hauran," says Ritter (Erdkunde, xv. pp. 988, 989), "stretches
out as a splendid, boundless plain, between Hermon on the west, Jebel
Hauran on the east, and Jebel Ajlun to the south; but there is not a
single river in which there is water throughout the whole of the summer.
It is covered, however, with a large number of villages, every one of
which has its cisterns, its ponds, or its birket; and these are filled
in the rainy season, and by the winter torrents from the snowy Jebel
Hauran. Wherever the soil, which is everywhere black, deep, dark brown,
or ochre-coloured, and remarkably fertile, is properly cultivated, and
you find illimitable corn-fields, and chiefly golden fields of wheat,
which furnish Syria in all directions with its principal food. By far
the larger part of this plain, which was a luxuriant garden in the time
of the Romans, is now uncultivated, waste, and without inhabitants, and
therefore furnishes the Bedouins of the neighbourhood with the desired
paradise for themselves and their flocks." On its western slope Jebel
Hauran is covered with splendid forests of oak, and rich in meadow land
for flocks (Burckhardt, pp. 152, 169, 170, 173, 358; Wetstein, Reiseber.
pp. 39ff. and 88). On the nature of the soil of Hauran, see at [Deu
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004). The plain of Jaulan appears in
the distance like the continuation of Hauran (Robinson, App. 162); it
has much bush-land in it, but the climate is not so healthy as in Hauran
(Seetzen, i. pp. 353, 130, 131). "In general, Hauran, Jaulan, el
Botthin, el Belka, and Ejlun, are the paradise of nomads, and in all
their wanderings eastwards they find no pasture like it" (Seetzen, i. p.
364). מקום, a locality, or district. מקנה מאום = מקנה ארץ ([Num
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#004)), a district adapted for grazing.

[Numbers 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 32:3</span></span>

In [Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003) the country is more
distinctly defined by the introduction of the names of a number of
important towns, whilst the clause "the country which the Lord smote
before the congregation of Israel," in which the defeat of Sihon is
referred to, describes it as one that was without a ruler, and therefore
could easily be taken possession of. For more minute remarks as to the
towns themselves, see at [Num 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034).
On the construction את יתּן, see at [Gen
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018). - The words, "let us not go over
the Jordan," may be understood as expressing nothing more than the
desire of the speakers not to receive their inheritance on the western
side of the Jordan, without their having any intention of withdrawing
their help from the other tribes in connection with the conquest of
Canaan, according to their subsequent declaration ([Num
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016).); but they may also be
understood as expressing a wish to settle at once in the land to the
east of the Jordan, and leave the other tribes to conquer Canaan alone.
Moses understood them in the latter sense ([Num
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006).), and it is probable that this
was their meaning, as, when Moses reproved them, the speakers did not
reply that they had not cherished the intention attributed to them, but
simply restricted themselves to the promise of co-operation in the
conquest of Canaan. But even in this sense their request did not
manifest "a shamelessness that would hardly be historically true"
(Knobel). It may very well be explained from the opinion which they
cherished, and which is perfectly intelligible after the rapid and easy
defeat of the two mighty kings of the Amorites, Sihon and Og, that the
remaining tribes were quite strong enough to conquer the land of Canaan
on the west of the Jordan. But for all that, the request of the
Reubenites and Gadites did indicate an utter want of brotherly feeling,
and complete indifference to the common interests of the whole nation,
so that they thoroughly deserved the reproof which they received from
Moses.

[Numbers 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 32:6</span></span>

Moses first of all blames their want of brotherly feeling: "Shall your
brethren go into the war, and ye sit here?" He then calls their
attention to the fact, that by their disinclination they would take away
the courage and inclination of the other tribes to cross over the Jordan
and conquer the land, and would bring the wrath of God upon Israel even
more than their fathers who were sent from Kadesh to spy out the land,
and who led away the heart of the people into rebellion through their
unfavourable account of the inhabitants of Canaan, and brought so severe
a judgment upon the congregation. מן את־לב הניא, to hold away the heart,
i.e., render a person averse to anything. The Keri תּניאוּן, as in [Num
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#009), is unquestionably to be
preferred to the Kal תּנוּאוּן, in the Kethib of [Num
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#007). - In [Num
32:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#008), Moses reminds them of the
occurrences described in ch. 13 and 14. On the expression, "wholly
followed Jehovah," cf. [Num 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024). The
words, "He drove them about in the desert," caused them to wander
backwards and forwards in it for forty years, point back to [Num
14:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#033).

[Numbers 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 32:14</span></span>

"Behold, ye rise up instead of your fathers," i.e., ye take their place,
"an increase (תּרבּוּת, from רבה; equivalent to a brood) of sinners, to
augment yet the burning of the wrath of Jehovah against Israel." על ספה,
to add to, or increase.

[Numbers 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 32:15</span></span>

"If ye draw back behind Him," i.e., resist the fulfilment of the will of
God, to bring Israel to Canaan, "He will leave it (Israel) still longer
in the desert, and ye prepare destruction for all this nation."

[Numbers 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 32:16</span></span>

The persons thus reproved came near to Moses, and replied, "We will
build sheep-folds here for our flocks, and towns for our children; but
we will equip ourselves hastily (חשׁים, part. pass. hasting) before the
children of Israel, till we bring them to their place" (i.e., to
Canaan). צאן גּדרת, folds or pens for flocks, that were built of stones
piled up one upon another ([Sa1 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004)).

(Note: According to Wetstein (Reiseber. p. 29), it is a regular custom
with the nomads in Leja, to surround every place, where they pitch their
tents, with a Sira, i.e., with an enclosure of stones about the height
of a man, that the flocks may not be scattered in the night, and that
they may know at once, from the noise made by the falling of the smaller
stones which are laid at the top, if a wolf attempts to enter the
enclosure during the night.)

By the building of towns, we are to understand the rebuilding and
fortification of them. טף, the children, including the women, and such
other defenceless members of the family as were in need of protection
(see at [Exo 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)). When their
families were secured in fortified towns against the inhabitants of the
land, the men who could bear arms would not return to their houses till
the children of Israel, i.e., the rest of the tribes, had all received
their inheritance: for they did not wish for an inheritance on the other
side of Jordan and farther on, if (כּי) their inheritance was assigned
them on this side Jordan towards the east. The application of the
expression היּרדּן מעבר to the land on the east of the Jordan, as well
as to that on the west, points to a time when the Israelites had not yet
obtained a firm footing in Canaan. At that time the land to the west of
the river could very naturally be spoken of as "beyond the Jordan," from
the subjective stand-point of the historian, who was then on the east of
the river; whereas, according to the objective and geographical usage,
the land "beyond Jordan" signifies the country to the east of the river.
But in order to prevent misunderstanding, in this particular instance
the expression היּרדּן עבר is defined more precisely as מזרחה, "towards
the east," when it is intended to apply to the land on the east of the
Jordan.

[Numbers 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 32:20</span></span>

Upon this declaration Moses absolves them from all guilt, and promises
them the desired land for a possession, on condition that they fulfil
their promise; but he reminds them again of the sin that they will
commit, and will have to atone for, if their promise is not fulfilled,
and closes with the admonition to build towns for their families and
pens for their flocks, and to do what they have promised. Upon this they
promise again ([Num 32:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025)), through
their spokesman (as the singular ויּאמר in [Num
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025), and the suffix in אדני in [Num
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#027), clearly show), that they will
fulfil his command. The use of the expression "before Jehovah," in the
words, "go armed before Jehovah to war," in [Num
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020) and [Num
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#021), may be explained from the fact,
that in the war which they waged at the command of their God, the
Israelites were the army of Jehovah, with Jehovah in the midst. Hence
the ark of the covenant was taken into the war, as the vehicle and
substratum of the presence of Jehovah; whereas it remained behind in the
camp, when the people wanted to press forward into Canaan of their own
accord ([Num 14:44](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#044)). But if this is
the meaning of the expression "before Jehovah," we may easily understand
why the Reubenites and Gadites do not make use of it in [Num
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017), namely, because they only
promise to go equipped "before the children of Israel," i.e., to help
their brethren to conquer Canaan. In [Num
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#032) they also adopt the expression,
after hearing it from the mouth of Moses ([Num
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020)).

(Note: This completely sets aside the supposed discrepancy which Knobel
adduces in support of his fragmentary hypothesis, viz., that the Elohist
writes "before Israel" in [Num 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017)
and [Num 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029), when the Jehovist
would write "before Jehovah," - a statement which is not even correct;
since we find "before Jehovah" in [Num
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029), which Knobel is obliged to
erase from the text in order to establish his assertion.)

נקיּים, innocent, "free from guilt before Jehovah and before Israel." By
drawing back from participation in the war against the Canaanites, they
would not only sin against Jehovah, who had promised Canaan to all
Israel, and commanded them to take it, but also against Israel itself,
i.e., against the rest of the tribes, as is more fully stated in [Num
32:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#007). In [Num
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#022), "before Jehovah" signifies
according to the judgment of Jehovah, with divine approval. חטּאתכם
וּדעוּ, "ye will know your sin," which will overtake (מצא) or smite you,
i.e., ye will have to make atonement for them.

[Numbers 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 32:28</span></span>

Moses thereupon commanded Eleazar, Joshua, and the heads of the tribes
of Israel, i.e., the persons entrusted in [Num
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#017). with the division of the land
of Canaan, to give the Gadites and Reubenites the land of Gilead for a
possession, after the conquest of Canaan, if they should go along with
them across the Jordan equipped for battle. But if they should not do
this, they were to be made possessors (i.e., to be settled; נאחז in a
passive sense, whereas in [Gen 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#010);
[Gen 47:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#027), it is reflective, to fix
oneself firmly, to settle) in the land of Canaan along with the other
tribes. In the latter case, therefore, they were not only to receive no
possession in the land to the east of the Jordan, but were to be
compelled to go over the Jordan with their wives and children, and to
receive an inheritance there for the purpose of preventing a schism of
the nation.

[Numbers 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 32:31</span></span>

The Gadites and Reubenites repeated their promise once more ([Num
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025)), and added still further ([Num
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#032)): "We will pass over armed
before Jehovah into the land of Canaan, and let our inheritance be with
us (i.e., remain to us) beyond the Jordan."

[Numbers 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 32:33</span></span>

Moses then gave to the sons of Gad and Reuben, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of
Bashan, namely, "the land according to its towns, in (its) districts,
(namely) the towns of the land round about," i.e., the whole of the land
with its towns and the districts belonging to them, or surrounding the
towns. It appears strange that the half-tribe of Manasseh is included
here for the first time at the close of the negotiations, whereas it is
not mentioned at all in connection with the negotiations themselves.
This striking fact may easily be explained, however, on the supposition
that it was by the two tribes of Reuben and Gad alone that the request
was made for the land of Gilead as a possession; but that when Moses
granted this request, he did not overlook the fact, that some of the
families of Manasseh had conquered various portions of Gilead and Bashan
([Num 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039)), and therefore gave these
families, at the same time, the districts which they had conquered, for
their inheritance, that the whole of the conquered land might be
distributed at once. As O. v. Gerlach observes, "the participation of
this half-tribe in the possession is accounted for in [Num
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039)." Moses restricted himself,
however, to a general conveyance of the land that had been taken on the
east of the Jordan to these two and a half tribes for their inheritance,
without sharing it amongst them, or fixing the boundaries of the
territory of each particular tribe. That was left to the representatives
of the nation mentioned in [Num 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028),
and was probably not carried out till the return of the fighting men
belonging to these tribes, who went with the others over the Jordan. In
the verses which follow, we find only those towns mentioned which were
fortified by the tribes of Gad and Reuben, and in which they constructed
sheep-folds ([Num 32:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034)), and the
districts which the families of Manasseh had taken and received as their
possession ([Num 32:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039)).

[Numbers 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 32:34</span></span>

The Gadites built, i.e., restored and fortified, the following places.
Dibon, also called Dibon Gad, an hour's journey to the north of the
central Arnon. Ataroth, probably preserved in the extensive ruins of
Attarus, on Jebel Attarus, between el Krriath (Kureyat) and Makur, i.e.,
Machaerus (see Seetzen, ii. p. 342). Aroer, not the Aroer before Rabbah,
which was allotted to the Gadites ([Jos
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025)), as v. Raumer supposes; but the
Aroer of Reuben in the centre of the valley of the Arnon ([Jos
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#002); [Jos
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#009), [Jos
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#016)), which is still to be seen in
the ruins of Araayr, on the edge of the lofty rocky wall which bounds
the Modjeb (Burckhardt, p. 633). Atroth Shophan: only mentioned here;
situation unknown. Jaezer: probably to be sought for in the ruins of es
Szir, to the west of Ammn (see at [Num
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#032)). Jogbehah: only mentioned again
in [Jdg 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#011), and preserved in the
ruins of Jebeiha, about two hours to the north-west of Ammn (Burckhardt,
p. 618; Robinson, App. p. 168). Beth-nimrah, contracted into Nimrah
([Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003)), according to [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027), in the valley of the Jordan,
and according to the Onomast. (s. v. Βηθναβράν) Beth-amnaram, five Roman
miles to the north of Libias (Bethharam), now to be seen in the ruins of
Nimrein or Nemrin, where the Wady Shaib enters the Jordan (Burckhardt,
pp. 609, 661; Robinson, ii. p. 279), in a site abounding in water and
pasturage (Seetzen, ii. pp. 318, 716). Beth-Haran, or Beth-Haram ([Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027)): Beth-ramphtha, according to
Josephus, Ant. 18:2, 1, which was called Julias, in honour of the wife
of Augustus. According to the Onomast. it was called Beth-Ramtha by the
Syrians (רמתא בּית, the form of the Aramaean stat. emphat.), and was
named Livias by Herod Antipas, in honour of Livia, the wife of Augustus.
It has been preserved in the ruins of Rameh, not far from the mouth of
the Wady Hesbn (Burckhardt, p. 661, and Robinson, ii. 305). The words
וגו מבצר ערי in [Num 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036) are
governed by ויּבנוּ in [Num 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034) :
"they built them as fortified cities and folds for flocks," i.e., they
fortified them, and built folds in them.

[Numbers 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 32:37</span></span>

The Reubenites built Heshbon, the capital of king Sihon (see [Num
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016)), which was allotted to the
tribe of Reuben ([Jos 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017)), but
relinquished to the Gadites, because it was situated upon the border of
their territory, and given up by them to the Levites ([Jos
21:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#039); [Ch1
6:66](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#066)). It stood almost in the centre
between the Arnon and Jabbok, opposite to Jericho, and, according to the
Onomast., twenty Roman miles from the Jordan, where the ruins of a large
town of about a mile in circumference are still to be seen, with deep
bricked wells, and a large reservoir, bearing the ancient name of Hesban
or H׬sban (Seetzen; Burckhardt, p. 623; Robinson, Pal. ii. 278; cf. v.
Raumer, Pal. p. 262; and Ritter's Erdkunde, xv. p. 1176). - Elealeh:
half-an-hour's journey to the north-east of Heshbon, now called el Aal,
i.e., the height, upon the top of a hill, from which you can see the
whole of southern Belka; it is now in ruins with many cisterns, pieces
of wall, and foundations of houses (Burckhardt, p. 523). - Kirjathaim,
probably to the south-west of Medeba, where the ruins of el Teym are not
to be found (see at [Gen 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005)). Nebo,
on Mount Nebo (see at [Num 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)). The
Onomast. places the town eight Roman miles to the south of Heshbon,
whilst the mountain is six Roman miles to the west of that town.
Baal-Meon, called Beon in [Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003),
Beth-Meon in [Jer 48:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#023), and more
fully Beth-Baal-Meon in [Jos 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017), is
probably to be found, not in the ruins of Maein discovered by Seetzen
and Legh, an hour's journey to the south-west of Tueme (Teim), and the
same distance to the north of Habbis, on the north-east of Jebel
Attarus, and nine Roman miles to the south of Heshbon, as most of the
modern commentators from Rosenm׬ller to Knobel suppose; but in the ruins
of Myun, mentioned by Burckhardt (p. 624), three-quarters of an hour to
the south-east of Heshbon, where we find it marked upon Kiepert's and
Van de Velde's maps.

(Note: Although Baal-Meon is unquestionably identified with Maein in the
Onom. (see v. Raumer, Pal. p. 259), [Ch1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#008) is decidedly at variance with
this. It is stated there that "Bela dwelt in Aroer, and even unto Nebo
and Baal-Meon," a statement which places Baal-Meon in the neighbourhood
of Nebo, like the passage before us, and is irreconcilable with the
supposition that it was identical with Maein in the neighbourhood of
Attarus. In the case of Seetzen, however, the identification of Maein
with Baal-Meon is connected with the supposition, which is now generally
regarded as erroneous, namely, that Nebo is the same as the Jebel
Attarus. (See, on the other hand, Hengstenberg, Balaam; and Ritter's
Erdkunde, xv. pp. 1187ff.))

Shibmah ([Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003), Shebam), which was
only 500 paces from Heshbon, according to Jerome (on [Isa
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008)), has apparently disappeared,
without leaving a trace behind.

(Note: The difference in the forms Shibmah, Baal-Meon ([Num
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038)), and Beth-Nimrah ([Num
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036)), instead of Shebam, Beon, and
Nimrah ([Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003)), is rendered
useless as a proof that [Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003) is
Jehovistic, and [Num 32:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036)
Elohistic, from the simple fact that Baal-Meon itself is a contraction
of Beth-Baal-Meon ([Jos 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017)). If the
Elohist could write this name fully in one place and abbreviated in
another, he could just as well contract it still further, and by
exchanging the labials call it Beon; and so also he could no doubt omit
the Beth in the case of Nimrah, and use the masculine form Shebam in the
place of Shibmah. The contraction of the names in [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003) is especially connected with the
fact, that diplomatic exactness was not required for an historical
account, but that the abbreviated forms in common use were quite
sufficient.)

Thus all the places built by the Reubenites were but a short distance
from Heshbon, and surrounded this capita; whereas those built by the
Gadites were some of them to the south of it, on the Arnon, and others
to the north, towards Rabbath-Ammon. It is perfectly obvious from this,
that the restoration of these towns took place before the distribution
of the land among these tribes, without any regard to their possession
afterwards. In the distribution, therefore, the southernmost of the
towns built by the Gadites, viz., Aroer, Dibon, and Ataroth, fell to the
tribe of Reuben; and Heshbon, which was built by the Reubenites, fell to
the tribe of Gad. The words שׁם מוּסבּת, "changed of name," are governed
by בּנוּ: "they built the towns with an alteration of their names,"
mutatis nominibus (for סבב, in the sense of changing, see [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010)). There is not sufficient ground
for altering the text, שׁם into שׁוּר (Knobel), according to the
περικυκλωμένας of the lxx, or the περιτετευχισμένας of Symmachus. The
Masoretic text is to be found not only in the Chaldee, the Syriac, the
Vulgate, and the Saadic versions, but also in the Samaritan. The
expression itself, too, cannot be justly described as "awkward," nor is
it a valid objection that the naming is mentioned afterwards; for
altering the name of a town and giving it a new name are not
tautological. The insertion of the words, "their names being changed,"
before Shibmah, is an indication that the latter place did not receive
any other name. Moreover, the new names which the builders gave to these
towns did not continue in use long, but were soon pressed out by the old
ones again. "And they called by names the names of the towns:" this is a
roundabout way of saying, they called the towns by (other, or new)
names: cf. [Ch1 6:50](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#050).

[Numbers 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 32:39</span></span>

Moses gave the Manassites the land which was conquered by them; in fact,
the whole of the kingdom of Bashan, including not only the province of
Bashan, but the northern half of Gilead (see at [Num
21:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033)). Of this the sons of Machir
received Gilead, the modern Jebel Ajlun, between the Jabbok (Zerka) and
the Mandhur (Hieromax, Jarmuk), because they had taken it and driven out
the Amorites and destroyed them (see [Deu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013)). The imperfects in [Num
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039) are to be understood in the
sense of pluperfects, the different parts being linked together by w
consec. according to the simple style of the Semitic historical writings
explained in the note on [Gen 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019),
and the leading thought being preceded by the clauses which explain it,
instead of their being logically subordinated to it. "The sons of Machir
went to Gilead and took it...and Moses gave," etc., instead of "Moses
gave Gilead to the sons of Machir, who had gone thither and taken it..."
The words בּהּ ויּשׁב, "Machir dwelt therein (in Gilead)," do not point
to a later period than the time of Moses, but simply state that the
Machirites took possession of Gilead. As soon as Moses had given them
the conquered land for their possession, they no doubt brought their
families, like the Gadites and Reubenites, and settled them in fortified
towns, that they might dwell there in safety, whilst the fighting men
helped the other tribes to conquer Canaan. ישׁב signifies not merely "to
dwell," but literally to place oneself, or settle down (e.g., [Gen
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008), etc.), and is even applied to
the temporary sojourn of the Israelites in particular encampments ([Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)). - Machir ([Num
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#040)): for the sons of Machir, or
Machirites ([Num 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#029)). But as Gilead
does not mean the whole of the land with this name, but only the
northern half, so the sons of Machir are not the whole of his posterity,
but simply those who formed the family of Machirites which bore its
father's name ([Num 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#029)), i.e., the
seven fathers' houses or divisions of the family, the heads of which are
named in [Ch1 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#024). The other
descendants of Machir through Gilead, who formed the six families of
Gilead mentioned in [Num 26:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#029), and
[Jos 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#002), received their inheritance
in Canaan proper (Josh 17).

[Numbers 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 32:41</span></span>

The family of Manasseh named after Machir included "Jair the son (i.e.,
descendant) of Manasseh." Jair, that is to say, was the grandson of a
daughter of Machir the son of Manasseh, and therefore a great-grandson
of Manasseh on the mother's side. His father Segub was the son of Hezron
of the tribe of Judah, who had married a daughter of Manasseh ([Ch1
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#021)); so that Jair, or rather
Segub, had gone over with his descendants into the maternal tribe,
contrary to the ordinary rule, and probably because Machir had portioned
his daughter with a rich dowry like an heiress. Jair took possession of
the whole of the province of Argob in Bashan, i.e., in the plain of
Jaulan and Hauran ([Deu 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004) and [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)), and gave the conquered towns
the name of Havvoth Jair, i.e., Jair's-lives (see at [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)).

[Numbers 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 32:42</span></span>

Nobah, whose family is never referred to, but who probably belonged,
like Jair, to one of the families of Machirites, took the town of Kenath
and its daughters, i.e., the smaller towns dependent upon it (see [Num
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025)), and gave it his own name
Nobah. The name has not been preserved, and is not to be sought, as
Kurtz supposes, in the village of Nowa (Newe), in Jotan, which is
mentioned by Burckhardt (p. 443), and was once a town of half an hour's
journey in circumference. For Kenath, which is only mentioned again in
[Ch1 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#023) as having been taken from
the Israelites by Gesur and Aram, is Κάναθα, which Josephus (de bell.
Jud. i. 19, 2), and Ptolemy speak of as belonging to Coelesyria, and
Pliny (h. n. 5, 16) to Decapolis, and which was situated, according to
Jerome, "in the region of Trachonitis, near to Bostra." The ruins are
very extensive even now, being no less than 2 1/2 or 3 miles in
circumference, and containing magnificent remains of palaces from the
times of Trajan and Hadrian. It is on the western slope of Jebel Hauran,
and is only inhabited by a few families of Druses. The present name is
Kanuat. (For description, see Seetzen, i. pp. 78ff.; Burckhardt, pp.
157ff.; cf. Ritter, Erdk.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 33](num033)

</div>
