<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num015)  [Next](num017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 16:0</span></span>

Rebellion of Korah's Company - Numbers 16:1-40(17:1-5)

The sedition of Korah and his company, with the renewed sanction of the
Aaronic priesthood on the part of God which it occasioned, is the only
important occurrence recorded in connection with the thirty-seven years'
wandering in the wilderness. The time and place are not recorded. The
fact that the departure from Kadesh is not mentioned in Num 14, whilst,
according to [Deu 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046), Israel
remained there many days, is not sufficient to warrant the conclusion
that it took place in Kadesh. The departure from Kadesh is not mentioned
even after the rebellion of Korah; and yet we read, in [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001), that the whole congregation came
again into the desert of Zin to kadesh at the beginning of the fortieth
year, and therefore must previously have gone away. All that can be laid
down as probable is, that it occurred in one of the earliest of the
thirty-seven years of punishment, though we have no firm ground even for
this conjecture.

[Numbers 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 16:1</span></span>

[Num 16:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

The authors of the rebellion were Korah the Levite, a descendant of the
Kohathite Izhar, who was a brother of Amram, an ancestor (not the
father) of Aaron and Moses (see at [Exo
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018)), and three Reubenites, viz.,
Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab, of the Reubenitish family of Pallu
([Num 26:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#008)), and On, the son of
Peleth, a Reubenite, not mentioned again. The last of these (On) is not
referred to again in the further course of this event, either because he
played altogether a subordinate part in the affair, or because he had
drawn back before the conspiracy came to a head. The persons named took
(יקּח), i.e., gained over to their plan, or persuaded to join them, 250
distinguished men of the other tribes, and rose up with them against
Moses and Aaron. On the construction ויּקוּמוּ...ויּקּה ([Num
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001) and [Num
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002)), Gesenius correctly observes in
his Thesaurus (p. 760), "There is an anakolouthon rather than an
ellipsis, and not merely a copyist's error, in these words, 'and
Korah,...and Dathan and Abiram, took and rose up against Moses with 250
men,' for they took 250 men, and rose up with them against Moses," etc.
He also points to the analogous construction in [Sa2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018). Consequently there is no
necessity either to force a meaning upon לקח, which is altogether
foreign to it, or to attempt an emendation of the text. "They rose up
before Moses:" this does not mean, "they stood up in front of his tent,"
as Knobel explains it, for the purpose of bringing [Num
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002) into contradiction with [Num
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003), but they created an uproar
before his eyes; and with this the expression in [Num
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003), "and they gathered themselves
together against Moses and Aaron," may be very simply and easily
combined. The 250 men of the children of Israel who joined the rebels no
doubt belonged to the other tribes, as is indirectly implied in the
statement in [Num 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#003), that
Zelophehad the Manassite was not in the company of Korah. These men were
"princes of the congregation," i.e., heads of the tribes, or of large
divisions of the tribes, "called men of the congregation," i.e., members
of the council of the nation which administered the affairs of the
congregation (cf. [Num 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016)), "men of
name" (שׁם אנשׁי, see [Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004)). The
leader was Korah; and the rebels are called in consequence "Korah's
company" ([Num 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005), [Num
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#006); [Num
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#009); [Num
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#003)). He laid claim to the
high-priesthood, or at least to an equality with Aaron ([Num
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#017)). Among his associates were the
Reubenites, Dathan and Abiram, who, no doubt, were unable to get over
the fact that the birthright had been taken away from their ancestor,
and with it the headship of the house of Israel (i.e., of the whole
nation). Apparently their present intention was to seize upon the
government of the nation under a self-elected high priest, and to force
Moses and Aaron out of the post assigned to them by God, - that is to
say, to overthrow the constitution which God had given to His people.

[Num 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003)

רב־לכם, "enough for you!" (רב, as in [Gen
45:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#028)), they said to Moses and Aaron,
i.e., "let the past suffice you" (Knobel); ye have held the priesthood
and the government quite long enough. It must now come to an end; "for
the whole congregation, all of them (i.e., all the members of the
nation), are holy, and Jehovah is in the midst of them. Wherefore lift
ye yourselves above the congregation of Jehovah?" The distinction
between עדה and קהל is the following: עדה signifies conventus, the
congregation according to its natural organization; קהל signifies
convocatio, the congregation according to its divine calling and
theocratic purpose. The use of the two words in the same verse upsets
the theory that יהוה עדת belongs to the style of the original work, and
יהוה קהל to that of the Jehovist. The rebels appeal to the calling of
all Israel to be the holy nation of Jehovah ([Exo
19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)), and infer from this the equal
right of all to hold the priesthood, "leaving entirely out of sight, as
blind selfishness is accustomed to do, the transition of the universal
priesthood into the special mediatorial office and priesthood of Moses
and Aaron, which had their foundation in fact" (Baumgarten); or
altogether overlooking the fact that God Himself had chosen Moses and
Aaron, and appointed them as mediators between Himself and the
congregation, to educate the sinful nation into a holy nation, and train
it to the fulfilment of its proper vocation. The rebels, on the
contrary, thought that they were holy already, because God had called
them to be a holy nation, and in their carnal self-righteousness forgot
the condition attached to their calling, "If ye will obey My voice
indeed, and keep My covenant" ([Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)).

[Numbers 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 16:4</span></span>

When Moses heard these words of the rebels, he fell upon his face, to
complain of the matter to the Lord, as in [Num
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#005). He then said to Korah and his
company, "To-morrow Jehovah will show who is His and holy, and will let
him come near to Him, and he whom He chooseth will draw near to Him."
The meaning of לו אשׁר is evident from בּו יבחר אשׁר. He is Jehovah's,
whom He chooses, so that He belongs to Him with his whole life. The
reference is to the priestly rank, to which God had chosen Aaron and his
sons out of the whole nation, and sanctified them by a special
consecration ([Exo 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001); [Exo
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001); [Lev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012), [Lev
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030)), and by which they became the
persons "standing near to Him" ([Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003)), and were qualified to appear
before Him in the sanctuary, and present to Him the sacrifices of the
nation.

[Numbers 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 16:6</span></span>

To leave the decision of this to the Lord, Korah and his company, who
laid claim to this prerogative, were to take censers, and bring lighted
incense before Jehovah. He whom the Lord should choose was to be the
sanctified one. This was to satisfy them. With the expression רב־לכם in
[Num 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#007), Moses gives the rebels back
their own words in [Num 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003). The
divine decision was connected with the offering of incense, because this
was the holiest function of the priestly service, which brought the
priest into the immediate presence of God, and in connection with which
Jehovah had already shown to the whole congregation how He sanctified
Himself, by a penal judgment on those who took this office upon
themselves without a divine call ([Lev
10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)). [Num
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#008). He then set before them the
wickedness of their enterprise, to lead them to search themselves, and
avert the judgment which threatened them. In doing this, he made a
distinction between Korah the Levite, and Dathan and Abiram the
Reubenites, according to the difference in the motives which prompted
their rebellion, and the claims which they asserted. He first of all
([Num 16:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#008)) reminded Korah the
Levite of the way in which God had distinguished his tribe, by
separating the Levites from the rest of the congregation, to attend to
the service of the sanctuary ([Num
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#005)., [Num
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#006).), and asked him, "Is this too
little for you? The God of Israel (this epithet is used emphatically for
Jehovah) has brought thee near to Himself, and all thy brethren the sons
of Levi with thee, and ye strive after the priesthood also.
Therefore...thou and thy company, who have leagued themselves against
Jehovah:...and Aaron, what is he, that he murmur against him?" These
last words, as an expression of wrath, are elliptical, or rather an
aposiopesis, and are to be filled up in the following manner:
"Therefore,...as Jehovah has distinguished you in this manner,...what do
ye want? Ye rebel against Jehovah! why do ye murmur against Aaron? He
has not seized upon the priesthood of his own accord, but Jehovah has
called him to it, and he is only a feeble servant of God" (cf. [Exo
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007)). Moses then ([Num
16:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)) sent for Dathan and Abiram,
who, as is tacitly assumed, had gone back to their tents during the
warning given to Korah. But they replied, "We shall not come up." עלה,
to go up, is used either with reference to the tabernacle, as being in a
spiritual sense the culminating point of the entire camp, or with
reference to appearance before Moses, the head and ruler of the nation.
"Is it too little that thou hast brought us out of a land flowing with
milk and honey (they apply this expression in bitter irony to Egypt), to
kill us in the wilderness (deliver us up to death), that thou wilt be
always playing the lord over us?" The idea of continuance, which is
implied in the inf. abs., השׂתּרר, from שׂרר, to exalt one's self as
ruler (Ges. 131, 36), is here still further intensified by גּם.
"Moreover, thou hast not brought us into a land flowing with milk and
honey, or given us fields and vineyards for an inheritance (i.e., thou
hast not kept thy promise, [Exo 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#030)
compared with [Num 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#007).). Wilt thou
put out the eyes of these people?" i.e., wilt thou blind them as to thy
doings and designs?

[Numbers 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 16:15</span></span>

Moses was so disturbed by these scornful reproaches, that he entreated
the Lord, with an assertion of his own unselfishness, not to have
respect to their gift, i.e., not to accept the sacrifice which they
should bring (cf. [Gen 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004)). "I have
not taken one ass from them, nor done harm to one of them," i.e., I have
not treated them as a ruler, who demands tribute of his subjects, and
oppresses them (cf. [Sa1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)).

[Numbers 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 16:16</span></span>

In conclusion, he summoned Korah and his associates once more, to
present themselves the following day before Jehovah with censers and
incense.

[Numbers 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 16:18</span></span>

The next day the rebels presented themselves with censers before the
tabernacle, along with Moses and Aaron; and the whole congregation also
assembled there at the instigation of Korah. The Lord then interposed in
judgment. Appearing in His glory to the whole congregation (just as in
[Num 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010)), He said to Moses and
Aaron, "Separate yourselves from this congregation; I will destroy them
in a moment." By assembling in front of the tabernacle, the whole
congregation had made common cause with the rebels. God threatened them,
therefore, with sudden destruction. But the two men of God, who ere so
despised by the rebellious faction, fell on their faces, interceding
with God, and praying, "God, Thou God of the spirits of all flesh! this
one man (i.e., Korah, the author of the conspiracy) hath sinned, and
wilt Thou be wrathful with all the congregation?" i.e., let Thine anger
fall upon the whole congregation. The Creator and Preserver of all
beings, who has given and still gives life and breath to all flesh, is
God of the spirits of all flesh. As the author of the spirit of life in
all perishable flesh, God cannot destroy His own creatures in wrath;
this would be opposed to His own paternal love and mercy. In this
epithet, as applied to God, therefore, Moses appeals "to the universal
blessing of creation. It is of little consequence whether these words
are to be understood as relating to all the animal kingdom, or to the
human race alone; because Moses simply prayed, that as God was the
creator and architect of the world, He would not destroy the men whom He
had created, but rather have mercy upon the works of His own hands"
(Calvin). The intercession of the prophet Isaiah, in [Isa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008), is similar to this, though that
is founded upon the special relation in which God stood to Israel.

[Numbers 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 16:23</span></span>

Jehovah then instructed Moses, that the congregation was to remove away
(עלה, to get up and away) from about the dwelling-place of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram; and, as we may supply from the context, the
congregation fell back from Korah's tent, whilst Dathan and Abiram,
possibly at the very first appearance of the divine glory, drew back
into their tents. Moses therefore betook himself to the tents of Dathan
and Abiram, with the elders following him, and there also commanded the
congregation to depart from the tents of these wicked men, and not touch
anything they possessed, that they might not be swept away in all their
sins.

[Numbers 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 16:27</span></span>

The congregation obeyed; but Dathan and Abiram came and placed
themselves in front of the tents, along with their wives and children,
to see what Moses would do. Moses then announced the sentence: "By this
shall he know that Jehovah hath sent me to do all these works, that not
out of my own heart (i.e., that I do not act of my own accord). If these
men die like all men (i.e., if these wicked men die a natural death like
other men), and the oversight of all men take place over them (i.e., if
the same providence watches over them as over all other men, and
preserves them from sudden death), Jehovah hath not sent me. But if
Jehovah create a creation (בריאה בּרא, i.e., work an extraordinary
miracle), and the earth open its mouth and swallow them up, with all
that belongs to them, so that they go down alive into hell, ye shall
perceive that these men have despised Jehovah."

[Numbers 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 16:31</span></span>

And immediately the earth clave asunder, and swallowed them up, with
their families and all their possessions, and closed above them, so that
they perished without a trace from the congregation. אתם refers to the
three ringleaders. "Their houses;" i.e., their families, not their
tents, as in [Num 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#031); [Exo
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003). "All the men belonging to Korah"
were his servants; for, according to [Num
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#011), his sons did not perish with
him, but perpetuated his family ([Num
26:58](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#058)), to which the celebrated
Korahite singers of David's time belonged ([Ch1
6:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#018); [Ch1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#019)).

[Numbers 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 16:34</span></span>

This fearful destruction of the ringleaders, through which Jehovah
glorified Moses afresh as His servant in a miraculous way, filled all
the Israelites round about with such terror, that they fled לקלם, "at
their noise," i.e., at the commotion with which the wicked men went down
into the abyss which opened beneath their feet, lest, as they said, the
earth should swallow them up also.

[Numbers 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 16:35</span></span>

The other 250 rebels, who were probably still in front of the
tabernacle, were then destroyed by fire which proceeded from Jehovah, as
Nadab and Abihu had been before ([Lev
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#002)).

[Numbers 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 16:36</span></span>

(Or Numbers 17:1-5). After the destruction of the sinners, the Lord
commanded that Eleazar should take up the censers "from between the
burning," i.e., from the midst of the men that had been burned, and
scatter the fire (the burning coals in the pans) far away, that it might
not be used any more. "For they (the censers) are holy;" that is to say,
they had become holy through being brought before Jehovah ([Num
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#039)); and therefore, when the men
who brought them were slain, they fell as banned articles to the Lord
([Lev 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028)). "The censers of these
sinners against their souls" (i.e., the men who have forfeited their
lives through their sin: cf. [Pro
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002); [Hab
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010)), "let them make into broad
plates for a covering to the altar" (of burnt-offering). Through this
application of them they became a sign, or, according to [Num
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#039), a memorial to all who drew near
to the sanctuary, which was to remind them continually of this judgment
of God, and warn the congregation of grasping at the priestly
prerogatives. The words, יהיה ולא, in [Num
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#040), introduce the predicate in the
form of an apodosis to the subject, which is written absolutely, and
consists of an entire sentence. היה with כּ signifies, "to experience
the same fate as" another.

[Numbers 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 16:41</span></span>

Punishment of the Murmuring Congregation. - The judgment upon the
company of Korah had filled the people round about with terror and
dismay, but it had produced no change of heart in the congregation that
had risen up against its leaders. The next morning the whole
congregation began to murmur against Moses and Aaron, and to charge them
with having slain the people of Jehovah. They referred to Korah and his
company, but especially to the 250 chiefs of renown, whom they regarded
as the kernel of the nation, and called "the people of Jehovah." They
would have made Moses and Aaron responsible for their death, because in
their opinion it was they who had brought the judgment upon their
leaders; whereas it was through the intercession of Moses ([Num
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022)) that the whole congregation was
saved from the destruction which threatened it. To such an extent does
the folly of the proud heart of man proceed, and the obduracy of a race
already exposed to the judgment of God.

[Num 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#042)

When the congregation assembled together, Moses and Aaron turned to the
tabernacle, and saw how the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord
appeared. As the cloud rested continually above the tabernacle during
the time of encampment ([Num 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#018).;
[Exo 40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038)), we must suppose that at
this time the cloud covered it in a fuller and much more conspicuous
sense, just as it had done when the tabernacle was first erected ([Num
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015); [Exo
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034)), and that at the same time the
glory of God burst forth from the dark cloud in a miraculous splendour.

[Num 16:43-50](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#043)

Thereupon they both went into the court of (פּני אל, as in [Lev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#005)) the tabernacle, and God commanded
them to rise up (הרמּוּ, Niphal of רמם = רוּם; see Ges. 65, Anm. 5) out
of this congregation, which He would immediately destroy. But they fell
upon their faces in prayer, as in [Num
16:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#021). This time, however, they
could not avert the bursting forth of the wrathful judgment, as they had
done the day before ([Num 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022)). The
plague had already commenced, when Moses told Aaron to take the censer
quickly into the midst of the congregation, with coals and incense
(הולך, imper. Hiph.), to make expiation for it with an incense-offering.
And when this was done, and Aaron placed himself between the dead and
the living, the plague, which had already destroyed 14,700 men, was
stayed. The plague consisted apparently of a sudden death, as in the
case of a pestilence raging with extreme violence, though we cannot
regard it as an actual pestilence.

The means resorted to by Moses to stay the plague showed afresh how the
faithful servant of God bore the rescue of his people upon his heart.
All the motives which he had hitherto pleaded, in his repeated
intercession that this evil congregation might be spared, were now
exhausted. He could not stake his life for the nation, as at Horeb ([Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)), for the nation had rejected
him. He could no longer appeal to the honour of Jehovah among the
heathen, seeing that the Lord, even when sentencing the rebellious race
to fall in the desert, had assured him that the whole earth should be
filled with His glory ([Num 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#020).).
Still less could he pray to God that He would not be wrathful with all
for the sake of one or a few sinners, as in [Num
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022), seeing that the whole
congregation had taken part with the rebels. In this condition of things
there was but one way left of averting the threatened destruction of the
whole nation, namely, to adopt the means which the Lord Himself had
given to His congregation, in the high-priestly office, to wipe away
their sins, and recover the divine grace which they had forfeited
through sin, - viz., the offering of incense which embodied the
high-priestly prayer, and the strength and operation of which were not
dependent upon the sincerity and earnestness of subjective faith, but
had a firm and immovable foundation in the objective force of the divine
appointment. This was the means adopted by the faithful servant of the
Lord, and the judgment of wrath was averted in its course; the plague
was averted. - The effectual operation of the incense-offering of the
high priest also served to furnish the people with a practical proof of
the power and operation of the true and divinely appointed priesthood.
"The priesthood which the company of Korah had so wickedly usurped, had
brought down death and destruction upon himself, through his offering of
incense; but the divinely appointed priesthood of Aaron averted death
and destruction from the whole congregation when incense was offered by
him, and stayed the well-merited judgment, which had broken forth upon
it" (Kurtz).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 17](num017)

</div>
