<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num011)  [Next](num013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)

[Numbers 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 12:1</span></span>

All the rebellions of the people hitherto had arisen from
dissatisfaction with the privations of the desert march, and had been
directed against Jehovah rather than against Moses. And if, in the case
of the last one, at Kibroth-hattaavah, even Moses was about to lose
heart under the heavy burden of his office; the faithful covenant God
had given the whole nation a practical proof, in the manner in which He
provided him support in the seventy elders, that He had not only laid
the burden of the whole nation upon His servant Moses, but had also
communicated to him the power of His Spirit, which was requisite to
enable him to carry this burden. Thus not only was his heart filled with
new courage when about to despair, but his official position in relation
to all the Israelites was greatly exalted. This elevation of Moses
excited envy on the part of his brother and sister, whom God had also
richly endowed and placed so high, that Miriam was distinguished as a
prophetess above all the women of Israel, whilst Aaron had been raised
by his investiture with the high-priesthood into the spiritual head of
the whole nation. But the pride of the natural heart was not satisfied
with this. They would dispute with their brother Moses the pre-eminence
of his special calling and his exclusive position, which they might
possibly regard themselves as entitled to contest with him not only as
his brother and sister, but also as the nearest supporters of his
vocation. Miriam was the instigator of the open rebellion, as we may see
both from the fact that her name stands before that of Aaron, and also
from the use of the feminine תּדבּר in [Num
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001). Aaron followed her, being no
more able to resist the suggestions of his sister, than he had formerly
been to resist the desire of the people for a golden idol (Ex 32).
Miriam found an occasion for the manifestation of her discontent in the
Cushite wife whom Moses had taken. This wife cannot have been Zipporah
the Midianite: for even though Miriam might possibly have called her a
Cushite, whether because the Cushite tribes dwelt in Arabia, or in a
contemptuous sense as a Moor or Hamite, the author would certainly not
have confirmed this at all events inaccurate, if not contemptuous
epithet, by adding, "for he had taken a Cushite wife;" to say nothing of
the improbability of Miriam having made the marriage which her brother
had contracted when he was a fugitive in a foreign land, long before he
was called by God, the occasion of reproach so many years afterwards. It
would be quite different if, a short time before, probably after the
death of Zipporah, he had contracted a second marriage with a Cushite
woman, who either sprang from the Cushites dwelling in Arabia, or from
the foreigners who had come out of Egypt along with the Israelites. This
marriage would not have been wrong in itself, as God had merely
forbidden the Israelites to marry the daughters of Canaan ([Exo
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016)), even if Moses had not
contracted it "with the deliberate intention of setting forth through
this marriage with a Hamite woman the fellowship between Israel and the
heathen, so far as it could exist under the law; and thus practically
exemplifying in his own person that equality between the foreigners and
Israel which the law demanded in various ways" (Baumgarten), or of
"prefiguring by this example the future union of Israel with the most
remote of the heathen," as O. v. Gerlach and many of the fathers
suppose. In the taunt of the brother and sister, however, we meet with
that carnal exaggeration of the Israelitish nationality which forms so
all-pervading a characteristic of this nation, and is the more
reprehensible the more it rests upon the ground of nature rather than
upon the spiritual calling of Israel (Kurtz).

[Num 12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#002)

Miriam and Aaron said, "Hath Jehovah then spoken only by Moses, and not
also by us?" Are not we - the high priest Aaron, who brings the rights
of the congregation before Jehovah in the Urim and Thummim ([Exo
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030)), and the prophetess Miriam
([Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)) - also organs and
mediators of divine revelation? "They are proud of the prophetic gift,
which ought rather to have fostered modesty in them. But such is the
depravity of human nature, that they not only abuse the gifts of God
towards the brother whom they despise, but by an ungodly and
sacrilegious glorification extol the gifts themselves in such a manner
as to hide the Author of the gifts" (Calvin). - "And Jehovah heard."
This is stated for the purpose of preparing the way for the judicial
interposition of God. When God hears what is wrong, He must proceed to
stop it by punishment. Moses might also have heard what they said, but
"the man Moses was very meek (πραΰ́ς, lxx, mitis, Vulg.; not 'plagued,'
geplagt, as Luther renders it), more than all men upon the earth." No
one approached Moses in meekness, because no one was raised so high by
God as he was. The higher the position which a man occupies among his
fellow-men, the harder is it for the natural man to bear attacks upon
himself with meekness, especially if they are directed against his
official rank and honour. This remark as to the character of Moses
serves to bring out to view the position of the person attacked, and
points out the reason why Moses not only abstained from all
self-defence, but did not even cry to God for vengeance on account of
the injury that had been done to him. Because he was the meekest of all
men, he could calmly leave this attack upon himself to the all-wise and
righteous Judge, who had both called and qualified him for his office.
"For this is the idea of the eulogium of his meekness. It is as if Moses
had said that he had swallowed the injury in silence, inasmuch as he had
imposed a law of patience upon himself because of his meekness"
(Calvin).

The self-praise on the part of Moses, which many have discovered in this
description of his character, and on account of which some even of the
earlier expositors regarded this verse as a later gloss, whilst more
recent critics have used it as an argument against the Mosaic authorship
of the Pentateuch, is not an expression of vain self-display, or a
glorification of his own gifts and excellences, which he prided himself
upon possessing above all others. It is simply a statement, which was
indispensable to a full and correct interpretation of all the
circumstances, and which was made quite objectively, with reference to
the character which Moses had not given to himself but had acquired
through the grace of God, and which he never falsified from the very
time of his calling until the day of his death, either at the rebellion
of the people at Kibroth-hattaavah (ch. 11), or at the water of strife
(at Kadesh (ch. 20). His despondency under the heavy burden of his
office in the former case (ch. 11) speaks rather for than against the
meekness of his character; and the sin at Kadesh (ch. 20) consisted
simply in the fact, that he suffered himself to be brought to doubt
either the omnipotence of God, or the possibility of divine help, in
account of the unbelief of the people.

(Note: There is not a word in [Num
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#010) or [Psa
106:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#032) to the effect, that "his
dissatisfaction broke out into evident passion" (Kurtz). And it is quite
a mistake to observe, that in the case before us there was nothing at
all to provoke Moses to appeal to his meekness, since it was not his
meekness that Miriam had disputed, but only his prophetic call. If such
grounds as these are interpolated into the words of Moses, and it is to
be held that an attack upon the prophetic calling does not involve such
an attack upon the person as might have excited anger, it is certainly
impossible to maintain the Mosaic authorship of this statement as to the
character of Moses; for the vanity of wishing to procure the recognition
of his meekness by praising it, cannot certainly be imputed to Moses the
man of God.)

No doubt it was only such a man as Moses who could speak of himself in
such a way, - a man who had so entirely sacrificed his own personality
to the office assigned him by the Lord, that he was ready at any moment
to stake his life for the cause and glory of the Lord (cf. [Num
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#015), and [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)), and of whom Calmet observes
with as much truth as force, "As he praises himself here without pride,
so he will blame himself elsewhere with humility,"-a man or God whose
character is not to be measured by the standard of ordinary men (cf.
Hengstenberg, Dissertations, vol. ii. pp. 141ff.).

[Numbers 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 12:4</span></span>

Jehovah summoned the opponents of His servant to come at once before His
judgment-seat. He commanded Moses, Aaron, and Miriam suddenly to come
out of the camp (see at [Num 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#030)) to
the tabernacle. Then He Himself came down in a pillar of cloud to the
door of the tabernacle, i.e., to the entrance to the court, not to the
dwelling itself, and called Aaron and Miriam out, i.e., commanded them
to come out of the court,

(Note: The discrepancy discovered by Knobel, in the fact that, according
to the so-called Elohist, no one but Moses, Aaron, and the sons of Aaron
were allowed to enter the sanctuary, whereas, according to the Jehovist,
others did so, - e.g., Miriam here, and Joshua in [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011), - rests entirely upon a
groundless fancy, arising from a misinterpretation, as there is not a
word about entering the sanctuary, i.e., the dwelling itself, either in
the verse before us or in [Exo 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011).)

and said to them ([Num 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006).): "If
there is a prophet of Jehovah to you (i.e., if you have one), I make
Myself known to him in a vision; I speak to him in a dream (בּו, lit.,
"in him," inasmuch as a revelation in a dream fell within the inner
sphere of the soul-life). Not so My servant Moses: he is approved in My
whole house; mouth to mouth I speak to him, and as an appearance, and
that not in enigmas; and he sees the form of Jehovah. Why are ye not
afraid to speak against My servant, against Moses?" נביאכם = לכם נביא,
the suffix used with the noun instead of the separate pronoun in the
dative, as in [Gen 39:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#021); [Lev
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#003), etc. The noun Jehovah is in all
probability to be taken as a genitive, in connection with the word
נביאכם ("a prophet to you"), as it is in the lxx and Vulg., and not to
be construed with the words which follow ("I Jehovah will make Myself
known"). The position of Jehovah at the head of the clause without a
preceding אנכי (I) would be much more remarkable than the separation of
the dependent noun from the governing noun by the suffix, which occurs
in other cases also (e.g., [Lev 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003);
[Lev 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042), etc.); moreover, it would
be by no means suited to the sense, as no such emphasis is laid upon the
fact that it was Jehovah who made Himself known, as to require or even
justify such a construction. The "whole house of Jehovah" ([Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007)) is not "primarily His dwelling,
the holy tent" (Baumgarten), - for, in that case, the word "whole" would
be quite superfluous, - but the whole house of Israel, or the covenant
nation regarded as a kingdom, to the administration and government of
which Moses had been called: as a matter of fact, therefore, the whole
economy of the Old Testament, having its central point in the holy tent,
which Jehovah had caused to be built as the dwelling-place of His name.
It did not terminate, however, in the service of the sanctuary, as we
may see from the fact that god did not make the priests who were
entrusted with the duties of the sanctuary the organs of His saving
revelation, but raised up and called prophets after Moses for that
purpose. Compare the expression in [Heb
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006), "Whose house we are." נאמן with
בּ does not mean to be, or become, entrusted with anything (Baumgarten,
Knobel), but simply to be lasting, firm, constant, in a local or
temporal sense ([Deu 28:59](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#059); [Sa1
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#035); [Sa2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016), etc.); in a historical sense, to
prove or attest one's self ([Gen
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#020)); and in an ethical sense, to be
found proof, trustworthy, true ([Psa
78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008); [Sa1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#020); [Sa1
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#014) : see Delitzsch on [Heb
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)). In the participle, therefore, it
signifies proved, faithful, πιστός (lxx). "Mouth to mouth" answers to
the "face to face" in [Exo 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011) (cf.
[Deu 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010)), i.e., without any
mediation or reserve, but with the same closeness and freedom with which
friends converse together ([Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011)). This is still further
strengthened and elucidated by the words in apposition, "in the form of
seeing (appearance), and not in riddles," i.e., visibly, and not in a
dark, hidden, enigmatical way. מראה is an accusative defining the mode,
and signifies here not vision, as in [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006), but adspectus, view, sight; for
it forms an antithesis to בּמּראה in [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006). "The form (Eng. similitude) of
Jehovah" was not the essential nature of God, His unveiled glory, - for
this no mortal man can see (vid., [Exo
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#018).), - but a form which manifested
the invisible God to the eye of man in a clearly discernible mode, and
which was essentially different, not only from the visionary sight of
God in the form of a man ([Eze 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026);
[Dan 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009) and [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)), but also from the appearances
of God in the outward world of the senses, in the person and form of the
angel of Jehovah, and stood in the same relation to these two forms of
revelation, so far as directness and clearness were concerned, as the
sight of a person in a dream to that of the actual figure of the person
himself. God talked with Moses without figure, in the clear distinctness
of a spiritual communication, whereas to the prophets He only revealed
Himself through the medium of ecstasy or dream.

Through this utterance on the part of Jehovah, Moses is placed above all
the prophets, in relation to God and also to the whole nation. The
divine revelation to the prophets is thereby restricted to the two forms
of inward intuition (vision and dream). It follows from this, that it
had always a visionary character, though it might vary in intensity; and
therefore that it had always more or less obscurity about it, because
the clearness of self-consciousness and the distinct perception of an
external world, both receded before the inward intuition, in a dream as
well as in a vision. The prophets were consequently simply organs,
through whom Jehovah made known His counsel and will at certain times,
and in relation to special circumstances and features in the development
of His kingdom. It was not so with Moses. Jehovah had placed him over
all His house, had called him to be the founder and organizer of the
kingdom established in Israel through his mediatorial service, and had
found him faithful in His service. With this servant (θεράπων, lxx) of
His, He spake mouth to mouth, without a figure or figurative cloak, with
the distinctness of a human interchange of thought; so that at any time
he could inquire of God and wait for the divine reply. Hence Moses was
not a prophet of Jehovah, like many others, not even merely the first
and highest prophet, primus inter pares, but stood above all the
prophets, as the founder of the theocracy, and mediator of the Old
Covenant. Upon this unparalleled relation of Moses to God and the
theocracy, so clearly expressed in the verses before us, the Rabbins
have justly founded their view as to the higher grade of inspiration in
the Thorah. This view is fully confirmed through the history of the Old
Testament kingdom of God, and the relation in which the writings of the
prophets stand to those of Moses. The prophets subsequent to Moses
simply continued to build upon the foundation which Moses laid. And if
Moses stood in this unparalleled relation to the Lord, Miriam and Aaron
sinned grievously against him, when speaking as they did. [Num
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#009). After this address, "the wrath
of Jehovah burned against them, and He went." As a judge, withdrawing
from the judgment-seat when he has pronounced his sentence, so Jehovah
went, by the cloud in which He had come down withdrawing from the
tabernacle, and ascending up on high. And at the same moment, Miriam,
the instigator of the rebellion against her brother Moses, was covered
with leprosy, and became white as snow.

[Numbers 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 12:11</span></span>

When Aaron saw his sister smitten in this way, he said to Moses, "Alas!
my lord, I beseech thee, lay not this sin upon us, for we have done
foolishly;" i.e., let us not bear its punishment. "Let her (Miriam) not
be as the dead thing, on whose coming out of its mother's womb half its
flesh is consumed;" i.e., like a still-born child, which comes into the
world half decomposed. His reason for making this comparison was, that
leprosy produces decomposition in the living body.

[Numbers 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 12:13</span></span>

Moses, with his mildness, took compassion upon his sister, upon whom
this punishment had fallen, and cried to the Lord, "O God, I beseech
Thee, heal her." The connection of the particle נא with אל is certainly
unusual, but yet it is analogous to the construction with such
exclamations as אוי ([Jer 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#031); [Jer
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#003)) and הנּה ([Gen
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#011); [Gen
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002), etc.); since אל in the vocative
is to be regarded as equivalent to an exclamation; whereas the
alteration into אל, as proposed by J. D. Michaelis and Knobel, does not
even give a fitting sense, apart altogether from the fact, that the
repetition of נא after the verb, with נא אל before it, would be
altogether unexampled.

[Numbers 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 12:14</span></span>

Jehovah hearkened to His servant's prayer, though not without inflicting
deep humiliation upon Miriam. "If her father had but spit in her face,
would she not be ashamed seven days?" i.e., keep herself hidden from Me
out of pure shame. She was to be shut outside the camp, to be excluded
from the congregation as a leprous person for seven days, and then to be
received in again. Thus restoration and purification from her leprosy
were promised to her after the endurance of seven days' punishment.
Leprosy was the just punishment for her sin. In her haughty exaggeration
of the worth of her own prophetic gift, she had placed herself on a par
with Moses, the divinely appointed head of the whole nation, and exalted
herself above the congregation of the Lord. For this she was afflicted
with a disease which shut her out of the number of the members of the
people of God, and thus actually excluded from the camp; so that she
could only be received back again after she had been healed, and by a
formal purification. The latter followed as a matter of course, from Lev
13 and 14, and did not need to be specially referred to here.

[Num 12:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#015)

The people did not proceed any farther till the restoration of Miriam.
After this they departed from Hazeroth, and encamped in the desert of
Paran, namely at Kadesh, on the southern boundary of Canaan. This is
evident from ch. 13, more especially v. 26, as compared with [Deu
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019)., where it is stated not merely
that the spies, who were sent out from this place of encampment to
Canaan, returned to the congregation at Kadesh, but that they set out
from Kadesh-barnea for Canaan, because there the Israelites had come to
the mountains of the Amorites, which God had promised them for an
inheritance.

With regard to the situation of Kadesh, it has already been observed at
[Gen 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007), that it is probably to be
sought for in the neighbourhood of the fountain of Ain Kades, which was
discovered by Rowland, to the south of Bir Seba and Khalasa, on the
heights of Jebel Helal, i.e., at the north-west corner of the mountain
land of Azazimeh, which is more closely described at [Num
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#012), where the western slopes of
this highland region sink gently down into the undulating surface of the
desert, which stretches thence to El Arish, with a breadth of about six
hours' journey, and keeps the way open between Arabia Petraea and the
south of Palestine. "In the northern third of this western slope, the
mountains recede so as to leave a free space for a plain of about an
hour's journey in breadth, which comes towards the east, and to which
access is obtained through one or more of the larger wadys that are to
be seen here (such as Retemat, Kusaimeh, el Ain, Muweileh)." At the
north-eastern background of this plain, which forms almost a rectangular
figure of nine miles by five, or ten by six, stretching from west to
east, large enough to receive the camp of a wandering people, and about
twelve miles to the E.S.E. of Muweileh, there rises, like a large
solitary mass, at the edge of the mountains which run on towards the
north, a bare rock, at the foot of which there is a copious spring,
falling in ornamental cascades into the bed of a brook, which is lost in
the sand about 300 or 400 yards to the west. This place still bears the
ancient name of Kudēṡ. There can be no doubt as to the identity of this
Kudēṡ and the biblical Kadesh. The situation agrees with all the
statements in the Bible concerning Kadesh: for example, that Israel had
then reached the border of the promised land; also that the spies who
were sent out from Kadesh returned thither by coming from Hebron to the
wilderness of Paran ([Num 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026)); and
lastly, according to the assertions of the Bedouins, as quoted by
Rowland, this Kudes was ten or eleven days' journey from Sinai (in
perfect harmony with [Deu 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#002)), and
was connected by passable wadys with Mount Hor. The Israelites
proceeded, no doubt, through the wady Retemat, i.e., Rithmah (see at
[Num 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#018)), into the plain of Kadesh.
(On the town of Kadesh, see at [Num
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016).)

(Note: See Kurtz, History of the Old Covenant, vol. iii. p. 225, where
the current notion, that Kadesh was situated on the western border of
the Arabah, below the Dead Sea, by either Ain Hasb or Ain el Weibeh, is
successfully refuted.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 13](num013)

</div>
