<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num024)  [Next](num026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)

[Numbers 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 25:1</span></span>

The Lord had defended His people Israel from Balaam's curse; but the
Israelites themselves, instead of keeping the covenant of their God,
fell into the snares of heathen seduction ([Num
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001), [Num
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002)). Whilst encamped at Shittim, in
the steppes of Moab, the people began to commit whoredom with the
daughters of Moab: they accepted the invitations of the latter to a
sacrificial festival of their gods, took part in their sacrificial
meals, and even worshipped the gods of the Moabites, and indulged in the
licentious worship of Baal-Peor. As the princes of Midian, who were
allied to Moab, had been the advisers and assistants of the Moabitish
king in the attempt to destroy the Israelites by a curse of God; so now,
after the failure of that plan, they were the soul of the new
undertaking to weaken Israel and render it harmless, by seducing it to
idolatry, and thus leading it into apostasy from its God. But it was
Balaam, as is afterwards casually observed in [Num
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#016), who first of all gave this
advice. This is passed over here, because the point of chief importance
in relation to the object of the narrative, was not Balaam's share in
the proposal, but the carrying out of the proposal itself. The daughters
of Moab, however, also took part in carrying it out, by forming friendly
associations with the Israelites, and then inviting them to their
sacrificial festival. They only are mentioned in [Num
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001), [Num
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002), as being the daughters of the
land. The participation of the Midianites appears first of all in the
shameless licentiousness of Cozbi, the daughter of the Midianitish
prince, from which we not only see that the princes of Midian performed
their part, but obtain an explanation of the reason why the judgment
upon the crafty destroyers of Israel was to be executed upon the
Midianites.

(Note: Consequently there is no discrepancy between [Num
25:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001) and [Num
25:6-18](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006), to warrant the violent
hypothesis of Knobel, that there are two different accounts mixed
together in this chapter-An Elohistic account in [Num
25:6-18](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006), of which the commencement has
been dropped, and a Jehovistic account in [Num
25:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001), of which the latter part has
been cut off. The particular points adduced in proof of this fall to the
ground, when the history is correctly explained; and such assertions as
these, that the name Shittim and the allusion to the judges in [Num
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005), and to the wrath of Jehovah in
[Num 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003) and [Num
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004), are foreign to the Elohist, are
not proofs, but empty assumptions.)

Shittim, an abbreviation of Abel-Shittim (see at [Num
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001)), to which the camp of the
Israelites in the steppes of Moab reached ([Num
33:49](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#049)), is mentioned here instead of
Arboth-Moab, because it was at this northern point of the camp that the
Israelites came into contact with the Moabites, and that the latter
invited them to take part in their sacrificial meals; and in [Jos
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001) and [Jos
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001), because it was from this spot
that the Israelites commenced the journey to Canaan, as being the
nearest to the place where they were to pass through the Jordan. זנה,
construed with אל, as in [Eze 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#028),
signifies to incline to a person, to attach one's self to him, so as to
commit fornication. The word applies to carnal and spiritual whoredom.
The lust of the flesh induced the Israelites to approach the daughters
of Moab, and form acquaintances and friendships with them, in
consequence of which they were invited by them "to the slain-offerings
of their gods," i.e., to the sacrificial festivals and sacrificial
meals, in connection with which they also "adored their gods," i.e.,
took part in the idolatrous worship connected with the sacrificial
festival. These sacrificial meals were celebrated in honour of the
Moabitish god Baal-Peor, so that the Israelites joined themselves to
him. צמד, in the Niphal, to bind one's self to a person. Baal-Peor is
the Baal of Peor, who was worshipped in the city of Beth-Peor ([Deu
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#029); [Deu
4:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#046); see at [Num
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#028)), a Moabitish Priapus, in honour
of whom women and virgins prostituted themselves. As the god of war, he
was called Chemosh (see at [Num
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029)).

[Numbers 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 25:3</span></span>

And the anger of the Lord burned against the people, so that Jehovah
commanded Moses to fetch the heads of the people, i.e., to assemble them
together, and to "hang up" the men who had joined themselves to
Baal-Peor "before the Lord against the sun," that the anger of God might
turn away from Israel. The burning of the wrath of God, which was to be
turned away from the people by the punishment of the guilty, as enjoined
upon Moses, consisted, as we may see from [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008), [Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009), in a plague inflicted upon the
nation, which carried off a great number of the people, a sudden death,
as in [Num 14:37](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#037); [Num
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#011). הוקיע, from יקע, to be torn
apart or torn away (Ges., Winer), refers to the punishment of
crucifixion, a mode of capital punishment which was adopted by most of
the nations of antiquity (see Winer, bibl. R. W. i. p. 680), and was
carried out sometimes by driving a stake into the body, and so impaling
them (ἀνασκολοπίζειν), the mode practised by the Assyrians and Persians
(Herod. iii. 159, and Layard's Nineveh and its Remains, vol. ii. p. 374,
and plate on p. 369), at other times by fastening them to a stake or
nailing them to a cross (ἀνασταυροῦν). In the instance before us,
however, the idolaters were not impaled or crucified alive, but, as we
may see from the word הרגּוּ in [Num
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005), and in accordance with the
custom frequently adopted by other nations (see Herzog's Encyclopaedia),
they were first of all put to death, and then impaled upon a stake or
fastened upon a cross, so that the impaling or crucifixion was only an
aggravation of the capital punishment, like the burning in [Lev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014), and the hanging (תּלה) in [Deu
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022). The rendering adopted by the
lxx and Vulgate is παραδειγματίζειν, suspendere, in this passage, and in
[Sa2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#006), [Sa2
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#009), ἐξηλιάζειν (to expose to the
sun), and crucifigere. ליהוה, for Jehovah, as satisfaction for Him,
i.e., to appease His wrath. אותם (them) does not refer to the heads of
the nation, but to the guilty persons, upon whom the heads of the nation
were to pronounce sentence.

[Numbers 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 25:5</span></span>

The judges were to put to death every one his men, i.e., such of the
evil-doers as belonged to his forum, according to the judicial
arrangements instituted in Ex 18. This command of Moses to the judges
was not carried out, however, because the matter took a different turn.

[Numbers 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 25:6</span></span>

Whilst the heads of the people were deliberating on the subject, and the
whole congregation was assembled before the tabernacle, weeping on
account of the divine wrath, there came an Israelite, a prince of the
tribe of Simeon, who brought a Midianitish woman, the daughter of a
Midianitish chief ([Num 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014)), to his
brethren, i.e., into the camp of the Israelites, before the eyes of
Moses and all the congregation, to commit adultery with her in his tent.
This shameless wickedness, in which the depth of the corruption that had
penetrated into the congregation came to light, inflamed the zeal of
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the high priest, to such an extent, that he
seized a spear, and rushing into the tent of the adulterer, pierced both
of them through in the very act. הקּבּה, lit., the arched, or arch, is
applied here to the inner or hinder division of the tent, the
sleeping-room and women's room in the larger tents of the upper classes.

[Numbers 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 25:8</span></span>

Through this judgment, which was executed by Phinehas with holy zeal
upon the daring sinners, the plague was restrained, so that it came to
an end. The example which Phinehas had made of these sinners was an act
of intercession, by which the high priest appeased the wrath of God, and
averted the judgment of destruction from the whole congregation ("he was
zealous for his God," ויכפּר, [Num
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013)). The thought upon which this
expression is founded is, that the punishment which was inflicted as a
purifying chastisement served as a "covering" against the exterminating
judgment (see Herzog's Cyclopaedia).

(Note: Upon this act of Phinehas, and the similar examples of Samuel
([Sa1 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033)) and Mattathias (1 Macc.
2:24), the later Jews erected the so-called "zealot right," jus
zelotarum, according to which any one, even though not qualified by his
official position, possessed the right, in cases of any daring contempt
of the theocratic institutions, or any daring violation of the honour of
God, to proceed with vengeance against the criminals. (See Salden, otia
theol. pp. 609ff., and Buddeus, de jure zelotarum apud Hebr. 1699, and
in Oelrich's collect. T. i. Diss. 5.) The stoning of Stephen furnishes
an example of this.)

[Num 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009)

Twenty-four thousand men were killed by this plague. The Apostle Paul
deviates from this statement in [Co1
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008), and gives the number of those
that fell as twenty-three thousand, probably from a traditional
interpretation of the schools of the scribes, according to which a
thousand were deducted from the twenty-four thousand who perished, as
being the number of those who were hanged by the judges, so that only
twenty-three thousand would be killed by the plague; and it is to these
alone that Paul refers.

[Numbers 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 25:10</span></span>

For this act of divine zeal the eternal possession of the priesthood was
promised to Phinehas and his posterity as Jehovah's covenant of peace.
בּקנאו, by displaying my zeal in the midst of them (viz., the
Israelites). קנאתי is not "zeal for me," but "my zeal," the zeal of
Jehovah with which Phinehas was filled, and impelled to put the daring
sinners to death. By doing this he had averted destruction from the
Israelites, and restrained the working of Jehovah's zeal, which had
manifested itself in the plague. "I gave him my covenant of peace" (the
suffix is attached to the governing noun, as in [Lev
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003)). בּרית נתן, as in [Gen
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#002), to give, i.e., to fulfil the
covenant, to grant what was promised in the covenant. The covenant
granted to Phinehas consisted in the fact, that an "eternal priesthood"
(i.e., the eternal possession of the priesthood) was secured to him, not
for himself alone, but for his descendants also, as a covenant, i.e., in
a covenant, or irrevocable form, since God never breaks a covenant that
He has made. In accordance with this promise, the high-priesthood which
passed from Eleazar to Phinehas ([Jdg
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028)) continued in his family, with
the exception of a brief interruption in Eli's days (see at 1 Sam 1-3
and [Sa1 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#003)), until the time of the
last gradual dissolution of the Jewish state through the tyranny of
Herod and his successors (see my Archologie, 38). - In [Num
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014), [Num
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015), the names of the two daring
sinners are given. The father of Cozbi, the Midianitish princess, was
named Zur, and is described here as "head of the tribes (אמּות, see at
[Gen 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016)) of a father's house in
Midian," i.e., as the head of several of the Midianitish tribes that
were descended from one tribe-father; in [Num
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#008), however, he is described as a
king, and classed among the five kings of Midian who were slain by the
Israelites.

[Numbers 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 25:16</span></span>

The Lord now commanded Moses to show hostility (צרר to the Midianites,
and smite them, on account of the stratagem which they had practised
upon the Israelites by tempting them to idolatry, "in order that the
practical zeal of Phinehas against sin, by which expiation had been made
for the guilt, might be adopted by all the nation" (Baumgarten). The
inf. abs. צרור, instead of the imperative, as in [Exo
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008), etc. על־דּברף, in consideration
of Peor, and indeed, or especially, in consideration of Cozbi. The
repetition is emphatic. The wickedness of the Midianites culminated in
the shameless wantonness of Cozbi the Midianitish princess. "Their
sister," i.e., one of the members of their tribe. - The 19th verse
belongs to the following chapter, and forms the introduction to [Num
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#001).

(Note: In the English version this division is adopted. - Tr.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 26](num026)

</div>
