<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num029)  [Next](num031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)

[Numbers 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 30:1</span></span>

The rules by which vows were to be legally regulated, so far as their
objects and their discharge were concerned, has been already laid down
in Lev; but the chapter before us contains instructions with reference
to the force of vows and renunciations. These are so far in place in
connection with the general rules of sacrifice, that vows related for
the most part to the presentation of sacrifices; and even vows of
renunciation partook of the character of worship. The instructions in
question were addressed ([Num 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)) to
"the heads of the tribes," because they entered into the sphere of civil
rights, namely, into that of family life.

[Numbers 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 30:2</span></span>

At the head there stands the general rule, "If any one vow a vow to
Jehovah, or swear an oath, to bind his soul to abstinence, he shall not
break his word; he shall do according to all that has gone out of his
mouth:" i.e., he shall keep or fulfil the vow, and the promise of
abstinence, in perfect accordance with his word. נדר is a positive vow,
or promise to give or sanctify any part of one's property to the Lord.
אסּר, from אסר, to bind or fetter, the negative vow, or vow of
abstinence. על־נפשׁו אסּר אסר, to take an abstinence upon his soul. In
what such abstinence consisted is not explained, because it was well
understood from traditional customs; in all probability it consisted
chiefly in fasting and other similar abstinence from lawful things. The
Nazarite's vow, which is generally reckoned among the vows of
abstinence, is called neder in [Num
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002)., not issar, because it consisted
not merely in abstinence from the fruit of the vine, but also in the
positive act of permitting the hair to grow freely in honour of the
Lord. The expression "swear an oath" ([Num
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#002); cf. [Num
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#013)) shows that, as a rule, they
bound themselves to abstinence by an oath. The inf. constr., השּׁבא, is
used here, as in other places, for the inf. abs. (cf. Ges. 131, 4, note
2). יחל, from חלל, for יחל, as in [Eze
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#007) (cf. Ges. 67, note 8), to
desecrate (his word), i.e., to leave it unfulfilled or break it.

[Numbers 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 30:3</span></span>

[Num 30:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003) contain the rules
relating to positive and negative vows made by a woman, and four
different examples are given. The first case ([Num
30:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003)) is that of a woman in her
youth, while still unmarried, and living in her father's house. If she
made a vow of performance or abstinence, and her father heard of it and
remained silent, it was to stand, i.e., to remain in force. But if her
father held her back when he heard of it, i.e., forbade her fulfilling
it, it was not to stand or remain in force, and Jehovah would forgive
her because of her father's refusal. Obedience to a father stood higher
than a self-imposed religious service. - The second case ([Num
30:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#006)) was that of a vow of
performance or abstinence, made by a woman before her marriage, and
brought along with her (עליה, "upon herself") into her marriage. In such
a case the husband had to decide as to its validity, in the same way as
the father before her marriage. In the day when he heard of it he could
hold back his wife, i.e., dissolve her vow; but if he did not do this at
once, he could not hinder its fulfilment afterwards. שׂפתיה מבטא, gossip
of her lips, that which is uttered thoughtlessly or without reflection
(cf. [Lev 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004)). This expression
implies that vows of abstinence were often made by unmarried women
without thought or reflection. - The third case ([Num
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#009)) was that of a vow made by a
widow or divorced woman. Such a vow had full force, because the woman
was not dependent upon a husband. - The fourth case ([Num
30:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#010)) was that of a vow made by a
wife in her married state. Such a vow was to remain in force if her
husband remained silent when he heard of it, and did not restrain her.
On the other hand, it was to have no force if her husband dissolved it
at once. After this there follows the general statement ([Num
30:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#013)), that a husband could
establish or dissolve every vow of performance or abstinence made by his
wife. If, however, he remained silent "from day to day," he confirmed it
by his silence; and if afterwards he should declare it void, he was to
bear his wife's iniquity. עונה, the sin which the wife would have had to
bear if she had broken the vow of her own accord. This consisted either
in a sin-offering to expiate her sin ([Lev
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004).); or if this was omitted, in the
punishment which God suspended over the sin ([Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)).

[Numbers 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 30:16</span></span>

[Num 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#016), concluding formula.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 31](num031)

</div>
