<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num019)  [Next](num021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 20:0</span></span>

Israel's Last Journey from Kadesh to the Heights of Pisgah in yhe Fields
of Moab - Numbers 20-21

In the first month of the fortieth year, the whole congregation of
Israel assembled again at Kadesh, in the desert of Zin, to commence the
march to Canaan. In Kadesh, Miriam died ([Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)), and the people murmured against
Moses and Aaron on account of the want of water. The Lord relieved this
want, by pouring water from the rock; but Moses sinned on this occasion,
so that he was not allowed to enter Canaan ([Num
20:2-13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002)). From Kadesh, Moses sent
messengers to the king of Edom, to ask permission for the Israelites to
pass peaceably through his land; but this was refused by the king of
Edom ([Num 20:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014)). In the meantime,
the Israelites marched from Kadesh to Mount Hor, on the borders of the
land of Edom; and there Aaron died, and Eleazar was invested with the
high-priesthood in his stead ([Num
20:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022)). On this march they were
attacked by the Canaanitish king of Arad; but they gained a complete
victory, and laid his cities under the ban ([Num
21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)). As the king of Edom opposed
their passing through his land, they were compelled to go from Mount Hor
to the Red Sea, and round the land of Edom. On the way the murmuring
people were bitten by poisonous serpents; but the penitent among them
were healed of the bite of the serpent, by looking at the brazen serpent
which Moses set up at the command of God ([Num
21:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)). After going round the
Moabitish mountains, they turned to the north, and went along the
eastern side of the Edomitish and Moabitish territory, as far as the
Arnon, on the border of the Amoritish kingdom of Sihon, with the
intention of going through to the Jordan, and so entering Canaan ([Num
21:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010)). But as Sihon would not
allow the Israelites to pass through his land, and made a hostile
demonstration against them, they smote him and conquered his land, and
also the northern Amoritish kingdom of Og, king of Bashan ([Num
21:21-35](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021)), and forced their way
through the Amoritish territory to the heights of Pisgah, for the
purpose of going forward thence into the steppes of Moab by the Jordan
([Num 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001)). These marches formed the
third stage in the guidance of Israel through the desert to Canaan.

Death of Miriam. Water out of the Rock.Refusal of a Passage through
Edom. Aaron's Death.Conquest over the King of Arad - Numbers 20-21:3

The events mentioned in the heading, which took place either in Kadesh
or on the march thence to the mountain of Hor are grouped together in
Num 20:1-21:3, rather in a classified order than in one that is strictly
chronological. The death of Miriam took place during the time when the
people were collected at Kadesh-barnea in the desert of Zin ([Num
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#021)). But when the whole nation
assembled together in this desert there was a deficiency of water, which
caused the people to murmur against Moses, until God relieved the want
by a miracle ([Num 20:2-13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002)). It was
from Kadesh that messengers were sent to the king of Edom ([Num
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014).); but instead of waiting at
Kadesh till the messengers returned, Moses appears to have proceeded
with the people in the meantime into the Arabah. When and where the
messengers returned to Moses, we are not informed. So much is certain,
however, that the Edomites did not come with an army against the
Israelites ([Num 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020), [Num
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#021)), until they approached their
land with the intention of passing through. For it was in the Arabah, at
Mount Hor, that Israel first turned to go round the land of Edom ([Num
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)). The attack of the Canaanites of
Arad ([Num 21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)) who attempted to
prevent the Israelites from advancing into the desert of Zin, occurred
in the interval between the departure from Kadesh and the arrival in the
Arabah at Mount Hor; so that if a chronological arrangement were
adopted, this event would be placed in [Num
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022), between the first and second
clauses of this verse. The words "and came to Mount Hor" ([Num
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022)) are anticipatory, and introduce
the most important event of all that period, viz., the death of Aaron at
Mount Hor ([Num 20:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#023)).

(Note: Even Fries (pp. 53, 54) has admitted that the account in [Num
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001); [Num
33:40](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#040), is to be regarded as a
rehearsal of an event which took place before the arrival of the
Israelites at Mount Hor, and that the conflict with the king of Arad
must have occurred immediately upon the advance of Israel into the
desert of Zin; and he correctly observes, that the sacred writer has
arranged what stood in practical connection with the sin of Moses and
Aaron, and the refusal of Edom, in the closest juxtaposition to those
events: whereas, after he had once commenced his account of the tragical
occurrences in ch. 20, there was no place throughout the whole of that
chapter for mentioning the conflict with Arad; and consequently this
battle could only find a place in the second line, after the record of
the most memorable events which occurred between the death of Miriam and
that of Aaron, and to which it was subordinate in actual significance.
On the other hand, Fries objects to the arrangement we have adopted
above, and supposes that Israel did not go straight from Kadesh through
the Wady Murreh into the Arabah, and to the border of the (actual) land
of Edom, and then turn back to the Red Sea; but that after the failure
of the negotiations with the king of Edom, Moses turned at once from the
desert of Zin and plain of Kadesh, and went back in a south-westerly
direction to the Hebron road; and having followed this road to Jebel
Araif, the south-western corner-pillar of the western Edom, turned at
right angles and went by the side of Jebel Mukrah to the Arabah, where
he was compelled to alter his course again through meeting with Mount
Hor, the border-pillar of Edom at that point, and to go southwards to
the Red Sea (pp. 88-9). But although this combination steers clear of
the difficulty connected with our assumption, - viz., that when Israel
advanced into the Arabah to encamp at Mount Hor, they had actually
trodden upon the Edomitish territory in that part of the Arabah which
connected the mountain land of Azazimeh, of which the Edomites had taken
forcible possession, with their hereditary country, the mountains of
Seir, - we cannot regard this view as in harmony with the biblical
account. For, apart from the improbability of Moses going a second time
to Mount Hor on the border of Edom, after he had been compelled to
desist from his advance through the desert of Zin (Wady Murreh), and
take a circuitous route, or rather make a retrograde movement, on the
western side of the Edomitish territory of the land of Azazimeh, only to
be driven back a second time, the account of the contest with the king
of Arad is hard to reconcile with this combination. In that case the
king of Arad must have attacked or overtaken the Israelites when they
were collected together in the desert of Zin at Kadesh. But this does
not tally with the words of [Num 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001),
"When the Canaanite heard that Israel came (was approaching) by the way
of the spies;" for if Moses turned round in Kadesh to go down the Hebron
road as far as Jebel Araif, in consequence of the refusal of Edom, the
Israelites did not take the way of the spies at all, for their way went
northwards from Kadesh to Canaan. The supposition of Fries (p. 54), that
the words in [Num 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001), "came by the
way of the spies," are a permutation of those in [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001), "came into the desert of Zin,"
and that the two perfectly coincide as to time, is forced; as the
Israelites are described in [Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)
not only as coming into the desert of Zin in general, but as assembling
together there at Kadesh.

Modern critics (Knobel and others) have also mutilated these chapters,
and left only [Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001) (in part,), 2,
6, 22-29, [Num 21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010); [Num
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001), as parts of the original work,
whilst all the rest is described as a Jehovistic addition, partly from
ancient sources and partly from the invention of the Jehovist himself.
But the supposed contradiction - viz., that whilst the original work
describes the Israelites as going through northern Edom, and going round
the Moabitish territory in the more restricted sense, the Jehovist
represents them as going round the land of Edom upon the west, south,
and east ([Num 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#021); [Num
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)), and also as going round the
land of the Arnon in a still larger circle, and past other places as
well ([Num 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#012), [Num
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016), [Num
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#018)), - rests upon a false
interpretation of the passages in question. The other arguments adduced
- viz., the fact that the Jehovist gives great prominence to the hatred
of the Edomites ([Num 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#018), [Num
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020)) and interweaves poetical
sentences ([Num 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#014), [Num
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#015), [Num
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#017), [Num
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#018), [Num
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027), [Num
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028)), the miraculous rod in Moses'
hand ([Num 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#008)), and the etymology
([Num 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#003)), - are all just arguing in
a circle, since the supposition that all these things are foreign to the
original work, is not a fact demonstrated, but a simple petitio
principii.)

[Numbers 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 20:1</span></span>

Assembling of the Congregation at Kadesh. - In the first month the
children of Israel came into the desert of Zin, i.e., in the fortieth
year of their wanderings, at the commencement of which "the whole
congregation" assembled together once more in the very same place where
the sentence had been passed thirty-seven years and a half before, that
they should remain in the desert for forty years, until the rebellious
generation had died out. The year is not mentioned in [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001), but, according to [Num
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#032)., it can only be the year with
which the forty years of the sentence that they should die out in the
wilderness came to an end, that is to say, the fortieth year of their
wandering. This is put beyond all doubt by what follows. For the whole
congregation proceeds from Kadesh in the desert of Zin to Mount Hor,
where Aaron died, and that, according to [Num
33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038), in the fifth month of the
fortieth year after the exodus from Egypt. Miriam died during the time
that the people were staying (ישׁב) in Kadesh, and there she was buried.

[Numbers 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 20:2</span></span>

Sin of Moses and Aaron at the Water of Strife at Kadesh. - In the arid
desert the congregation was in want of water, and the people quarrelled
with Moses in consequence. In connection with the first stay in Kadesh
there is nothing said about any deficiency of water. But as the name
Kadesh embraces a large district of the desert of Zin, and is not
confined to one particular spot, there might easily be a want of water
in this place or the other. In their faithless discontent, the people
wished that they had died when their brethren died before Jehovah. The
allusion is not to Korah's company, as Knobel supposes, and the word
גּוע, "to expire," would be altogether inapplicable to their
destruction; but the reference is to those who had died one by one
during the thirty-seven years. "Why," they murmured once more against
Moses and Aaron, "have ye brought the congregation of God into this
desert, to perish there with their cattle? Why have ye brought it out of
Egypt into this evil land, where there is no seed, no fig-trees and
pomegranates, no vines, and no water to drink?"

[Numbers 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 20:6</span></span>

Moses and Aaron then turned to the tabernacle, to ask for the help of
the Lord; and the glory of the Lord immediately appeared (see at [Num
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#007) and [Num
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010)).

[Numbers 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 20:7</span></span>

The Lord relieved the want of water. Moses was to take the staff, and
with Aaron to gather together the congregation, and speak to the rock
before their eyes, when it would give forth water for the congregation
and their cattle to drink.

[Numbers 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 20:9</span></span>

Moses then took the rod "from before Jehovah," - i.e., the rod with
which he had performed miracles in Egypt ([Exo
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005)), and which was laid up in the
sanctuary, not Aaron's rod which blossomed ([Num
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010)), - and collected the
congregation together before the rock, and said to them, "Hear, ye
rebels, shall we fetch you water out of this rock?" He then smote the
rock twice with his rod, whereupon much water came out, so that the
congregation and their cattle had water to drink.

[Numbers 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 20:12</span></span>

The Lord then said to both of them, both Moses and Aaron, "Because ye
have not trusted firmly in Me, to sanctify Me before the eyes of the
children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into
the land which I have given them." The want of belief or firm confidence
in the Lord, through which both of them had sinned, was not actual
unbelief or distrust in the omnipotence and grace of God, as if God
could not relieve the want of water or extend His help to the murmuring
people; for the Lord had promised His help to Moses, and Moses did what
the Lord had commanded him. It was simply the want of full believing
confidence, a momentary wavering of that immovable assurance, which the
two heads of the nation ought to have shown to the congregation, but did
not show. Moses did even more than God had commanded him. Instead of
speaking to the rock with the rod of God in his hand, as God directed
him, he spoke to the congregation, and in these inconsiderate words,
"Shall we fetch you water out of the rock?" words which, if they did not
express any doubt in the help of the Lord, were certainly fitted to
strengthen the people in their unbelief, and are therefore described in
[Psa 106:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#033) as prating (speaking
unadvisedly) with the lips (cf. [Lev
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004)). He then struck the rock twice
with the rod, "as if it depended upon human exertion, and not upon the
power of God alone," or as if the promise of God "would not have been
fulfilled without all the smiting on his part" (Knobel). In the ill-will
expressed in these words the weakness of faith was manifested, by which
the faithful servant of God, worn out with the numerous temptations,
allowed himself to be overcome, so that he stumbled, and did not
sanctify the Lord before the eyes of the people, as he ought to have
done. Aaron also wavered along with Moses, inasmuch as he did nothing to
prevent Moses' fall. But their sin became a grievous one, from the fact
that they acted unworthily of their office. God punished them,
therefore, by withdrawing their office from them before they had
finished the work entrusted to them. They were not to conduct the
congregation into the promised land, and therefore were not to enter in
themselves (cf. [Num 27:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012); [Deu
32:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#048).). The rock, from which water
issued, is distinguished by the article הסּלע, not as being already
known, or mentioned before, but simply as a particular rock in that
neighbourhood; though the situation is not described, so as to render it
possible to search for it now.

(Note: Moses Nachmanides has given a correct interpretation of the
words, "Speak to the rock before their eyes" ([Num
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#008)): viz., "to the first rock in
front of them, and standing in their sight." The fable attributed to the
Rabbins, viz., that the rock of Rephidim followed the Israelites all
about in the desert, and supplied them with water, cannot be proved from
the talmudical and rabbinical passages given by Buxtorf (historia Petrae
in deserto) in his exercitatt. c. v., but is simply founded upon a
literal interpretation of certain rabbinical statements concerning the
identity of the well at Rephidim with that at Kadesh, which were
evidently intended to be figurative, as Abarbanel expressly affirms
(Buxtorf, l. c. pp. 422ff.). "Their true meaning," he says, "was, that
those waters which flowed out in Horeb were the gift of God granted to
the Israelites, and continued all through the desert, just like the
manna. For wherever they went, fountains of living waters were opened to
them as the occasion required. And for this reason, the rock in Kadesh
was the same rock as that in Horeb. Still less ground is there for
supposing that the Apostle Paul alluded to any such rabbinical fable
when he said, "They drank of that spiritual rock that followed them"
([Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)), and gave it a spiritual
interpretation in the words, "and that rock was Christ.")

[Numbers 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 20:13</span></span>

The account closes with the words, "This is the water of strife, about
which the children of Israel strove with Jehovah, and He sanctified
Himself on them." This does not imply that the scene of this occurrence
received the name of "strife-water," but simply that the water which God
brought out of the rock for the Israelites received that name. But God
sanctified Himself on them, by the fact that, on the one hand, He put
their unbelief to shame by the miraculous gift of water, and on the
other hand punished Moses and Aaron for the weakness of their faith.

(Note: The assumption of neological critics, that this occurrence is
identical with the similar one at Rephidim (Ex 17), and that this is
only another saga based upon the same event, has no firm ground
whatever. The want of water in the arid desert is a fact so constantly
attested by travellers, that it would be a matter of great surprise if
Israel had only experienced this want, and quarrelled with its God and
its leaders, once in the course of forty years. As early as [Exo
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022). the people murmured because of
the want of drinkable water, and the bitter water was turned into sweet;
and immediately after the event before us, it gave utterance to the
complaint again, "We have no bread and no water" ([Num
21:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)). But if the want remained the
same, the relief of that want would necessarily be repeated in the same
or a similar manner. Moreover, the occurrences at Rephidim (or
Massah-Meribah) and at Kadesh are altogether different from each other.
In Rephidim, God gave the people water out of the rock, and the
murmuring of the people was stayed. In Kadesh, God no doubt relieved the
distress in the same way; but the mediators of His mercy, Moses and
Aaron, sinned at the time, so that God sanctified Himself upon them by a
judgment, because they had not sanctified Him before the congregation.
(See Hengstenberg, Dissertations, vol. ii.))

[Numbers 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 20:14</span></span>

Message of the Israelites to the King of Edom. - As Israel was about to
start from Kadesh upon its march to Canaan, but wished to enter it from
the east across the Jordan, and not from the south, where the steep and
lofty mountain ranges presented obstacles which would have been
difficult to overcome, if not quite insuperable, Moses sent messengers
from Kadesh to the king of Edom, to solicit from the kindred nation a
friendly and unimpeded passage through their land. He reminded the king
of the relationship of Israel, of their being brought down to Egypt, of
the oppression they had endured there, and their deliverance out of the
land, and promised him that they would not pass through fields and
vineyards, nor drink the water of their wells, but keep to the king's
way, without turning to the right hand or the left, and thus would do no
injury whatever to the land ([Num
20:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014)).

(Note: We learn from [Jdg 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#017), that
Israel sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Moab also, and with a
similar commission, and that he also refused to grant the request for an
unimpeded passage through his land. This message is passed over in
silence here, because the refusal of the Moabites had no influence upon
the further progress of the Israelites. "For if they could not pass
through Edom, the permission of the Moabites would not help them at all.
It was only eventualiter that they sought this permission." -
Hengstenberg, Diss.)

By the "angel" who led Israel out of Egypt we are naturally to
understand not the pillar of cloud and fire (Knobel), but the angel of
the Lord, the visible revealer of the invisible God, whom the messengers
describe indefinitely as "an angel," when addressing the Edomites.
Kadesh is represented in [Num 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016) as
a city on the border of the Edomitish territory. The reference is to
Kadesh-Barnea ([Num 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#008); [Num
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#004); [Deu
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#002), [Deu
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019); [Deu
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#014); [Deu
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#023); [Jos
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#041); [Jos
14:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006); [Jos
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003)). This city was no doubt situated
quite in the neighbourhood of Ain Kudes, the well of Kadesh, discovered
by Rowland. This well was called En-mishpat, the fountain of judgment,
in Abraham's time ([Gen 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007)); and the
name Kadesh occurs first of all on the first arrival of the Israelites
in that region, in the account of the events which took place there, as
being the central point of the place of encampment, the "desert of
Paran," or "desert of Zin" (cf. [Num
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026) with [Num
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021), and [Num
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016)). And even on the second arrival
of the congregation in that locality, it is not mentioned till after the
desert of Zin ([Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)); whilst the
full name Kadesh-Barnea is used by Moses for the first time in [Num
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#008), when reminding the people of
those mournful occurrences in Kadesh in Num 13 and 14. The conjecture is
therefore a very natural one, that the place in question received the
name of Kadesh first of all from that tragical occurrence (Num 14), or
possibly from the murmuring of the congregation on account of the want
of water, which led Moses and Aaron to sin, so that the Lord sanctified
(יקדּשׁ) Himself upon them by a judgment, because they had not
sanctified Him before the children of Israel ([Num
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012) and [Num
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013)); that Barnea was the older or
original name of the town, which was situated in the neighbourhood of
the "water of strife," and that this name was afterwards united with
Kadesh, and formed into a composite noun. If this conjecture is a
correct one, the name Kadesh is used proleptically, not only in [Gen
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007), as a more precise definition of
En-Mishpat, but also in [Gen 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#014);
[Gen 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001); and [Num
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026), and [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001); and there is no lack of
analogies for this. It is in this too that we are probably to seek for
an explanation of the fact, that in the list of stations in Num 33 the
name Kadesh does not occur in connection with the first arrival of the
congregation in the desert of Zin, but only in connection with their
second arrival (v. 36), and that the place of encampment on their first
arrival is called Rithmah, and not Barnea, because the headquarters of
the camp were in the Wady Retemath, not at the town of Barnea, which was
farther on in the desert of Zin. The expression "town of the end of thy
territory" is not to be understood as signifying that the town belonged
to the Edomites, but simply affirms that it was situated on the border
of the Edomitish territory. The supposition that Barnea was an Edomitish
town is opposed by the circumstance that, in [Num
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#004), and [Jos
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003), it is reckoned as part of the
land of Canaan; that in [Jos 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#041) it
is mentioned as the southernmost town, where Joshua smote the Canaanites
and conquered their land; and lastly, that in [Jos
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#023) it is probably classed among the
towns allotted to the tribe of Judah, from which it seems to follow that
it must have belonged to the Amorites. "The end of the territory" of the
king of Edom is to be distinguished from "the territory of the land of
Edom" in [Num 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#023). The land of Edom
extended westwards only as far as the Arabah, the low-lying plain, which
runs from the southern point of the Dead Sea to the head of the Elanitic
Gulf. At that time, however, the Edomites had spread out beyond the
Arabah, and taken possession of a portion of the desert of Paran
belonging to the peninsula of Sinai, which was bounded on the north by
the desert of Zin (see at [Num 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#003)).
By their not drinking of the water of the wells ([Num
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#017)), we are to understand,
according to [Num 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019), their not
making use of the wells of the Edomites either by violence or without
compensation. The "king's way" is the public high road, which was
probably made at the cost of the state, and kept up for the king and his
armies to travel upon, and is synonymous with the "sultan-road" (Derb es
Sultan) or "emperor road," as the open, broad, old military roads are
still called in the East (cf. Robinson, Pal. ii. 340; Seetzen, i. pp.
61, 132, ii. pp. 336, etc.).

This military road led, no doubt, as Leake has conjectured (Burckhardt,
Syr. pp. 21, 22), through the broad Wady el Ghuweir, which not only
forms a direct and easy passage to the level country through the very
steep mountains that fall down into the Arabah, but also a convenient
road through the land of Edom (Robinson, ii. pp. 552, 583, 610), and is
celebrated for its splendid meadows, which are traceable to its many
springs (Burckhardt, pp. 688, 689); for the broad Wady Murreh runs from
the northern border of the mountain-land of Azazimeh, not only as far as
the mountain of Moddera (Madurah), where it is divided, but in its
southern half as far as the Arabah. This is very likely the "great route
through broad wadys," which the Bedouins who accompanied Rowland assured
him "was very good, and led direct to Mount Hor, but with which no
European traveller was acquainted" (Ritter's Erdk. xiv. p. 1088). It
probably opens into the Arabah at the Wady el Weibeh, opposite to the
Wady Ghuweir.

[Numbers 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 20:18</span></span>

The Edomites refused the visit of the Israelites in a most unbrotherly
manner, and threatened to come out against them with the sword, without
paying the least attention to the repeated assurance of the Israelitish
messengers, that they would only march upon the high road, and would pay
for water for themselves and their cattle. אין־דּבר רק, lit., "it is
nothing at all; I will go through with my feet:" i.e., we want no great
thing; we will only make use of the high road.

[Numbers 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 20:20</span></span>

To give emphasis to his refusal, Edom went against Israel "with much
people and with a strong hand," sc., when they approached its borders.
This statement, as well as the one in [Num
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#021), that Israel turned away before
Edom, anticipates the historical order; for, as a matter of course, the
Edomites cannot have come at once with an army on the track of the
messengers, for the purpose of blocking up the road through the Wady
Murreh, which runs along the border of its territory to the west of the
Arabah.

[Numbers 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 20:22</span></span>

Death of Aaron at Mount Hor. - The Israelites left Kadesh, and passed
along the road just mentioned to Mount Hor. This mountain, which was
situated, according to [Num 33:37](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#037), on
the border of the land of Edom, is placed by Josephus (Ant. iv. 4, 7) in
the neighbourhood of Petra; so also by Eusebius and Jerome: "Or mons, in
quo mortuus est Aaron, juxta civitatem Petram." According to modern
travellers, it is Mount Harun, on the north-western side of Wady Musa
(Petra), which is described by Robinson (vol. ii. p. 508) as "a cone
irregularly truncated, having three ragged points or peaks, of which
that upon the north-east is the highest, and has upon it the Muhammedan
Wely, or tomb of Aaron," from which the mountain has received its name
"Harun," i.e., Aaron (vid., Burckhardt, Syr. pp. 715, 716; v. Schubert,
Reise, ii. pp. 419ff.; Ritter, Erdkunde, xiv. pp. 1127ff.). There can be
no doubt as to the general correctness of this tradition;

(Note: There is no force whatever in the arguments by which Knobel has
endeavoured to prove that it is incorrect. The first objection, viz.,
that the Hebrews reached Mount Hor from Kadesh in a single march, has no
foundation in the biblical text, and cannot be inferred from the
circumstance that there is no place of encampment mentioned between
Kadesh and Mount Hor; for, on the one hand, we may clearly see, not only
from [Num 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010), but even from [Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001), as compared with [Num
33:41](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#041). and [Num
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#012)., that only those places of
encampment are mentioned in the historical account where events occurred
that were worthy of narrating; and, on the other hand, it is evident
from [Num 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033), that the Israelites
sometimes continued marching for several days before they formed an
encampment again. The second objection - viz., that if Hor was near
Petra, it is impossible to see how the advance of the Hebrews from
Kadesh to Hor could be regarded by the king of Arad, who lived more than
thirty hours' journey to the north, as coming ([Num
33:40](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#040)), not to mention "coming by the
way of the spies" ([Num 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001)), and how
this king could come into conflict with the Hebrews when posted at Petra
- rests upon the erroneous assumption, that the attack of the king of
Arad did not take place till after the death of Aaron, because it is not
mentioned till afterwards. Lastly, the third objection - viz., that a
march from Kadesh in a south-westerly direction to Wady Musa, and then
northwards past Zalmona to Phunon ([Num
33:41](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#041)), is much too adventurous - is
overthrown by [Num 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004), where the
Israelites are said to have gone from Mount Hor by the way of the Red
Sea. (See the notes on [Num 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010).))

for even if the Mohammedan tradition concerning Aaron's grave is not
well accredited, the situation of this mountain is in perfect harmony
with the statement in [Num 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#023) and
[Num 33:37](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#037), viz., that the Israelites
had then reached the border of the land of Edom. The place where the
people encamped is called Mosera in [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006), and Moseroth in the list of
stations in [Num 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#030), and is at all
events to be sought for in the Arabah, in the neighbourhood of Mount
Hor, though it is altogether unknown to us. The camp of 600,000 men,
with their wives, children, and flocks, would certainly require a space
miles wide, and might therefore easily stretch from the mouths of the
Wady el Weibeh and Wady Ghuweir, in the Arabah, to the neighbourhood of
Mount Harun. The place of encampment is called after this mountain, Hor,
both here and in [Num 33:37](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#037)., because
it was there that Aaron died and was buried. The Lord foretold his death
to Moses, and directed him to take off Aaron's priestly robes, and put
them upon Eleazar his son, as Aaron was not to enter the promised land,
because they (Aaron and Moses) had opposed the command of Jehovah at the
water of strife (see at [Num 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012)).
"Gathered to his people," like the patriarchs ([Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008), [Gen
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017); [Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029); [Gen
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033)).

[Numbers 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 20:27</span></span>

Moses executed this command, and Aaron died upon the top of the
mountain, according to [Num 33:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#037),
on the first day of the fifth month, in the fortieth year after the
exodus from Egypt, at the age of 123 years (which agrees with [Exo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007)), and was mourned by all Israel
for thirty days.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 21](num021)

</div>
