<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num014)  [Next](num016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 15:0</span></span>

Occurrences During the Thirty-Seven Years of Wandering in the Wilderness
- Numbers 15-19

After the unhappy issue of the attempt to penetrate into Canaan, in
opposition to the will of God and the advice of Moses, the Israelites
remained "many days" in Kadesh, as the Lord did not hearken to their
lamentations concerning the defeat which they had suffered at the hands
of the Canaanites and Amalekites. Then they turned, and took their
journey, as the Lord had commanded ([Num
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#025)), into the wilderness, in the
direction towards the Red Sea ([Deu
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#045); [Deu
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001)); and in the first month of the
fortieth year they came again into the desert of Zin, to Kadesh ([Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)). All that we know respecting
this journeying from Kadesh into the wilderness in the direction towards
the Red Sea, and up to the time of their return to the desert of Zin, is
limited to a number of names of places of encampment given in the list
of journeying stages in [Num 33:19-30](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#019),
out of which, as the situation of the majority of them is altogether
unknown, or at all events has not yet been determined, no connected
account of the journeys of Israel during this interval of thirty-seven
years can possibly be drawn. The most important event related in
connection with this period is the rebellion of the company of Korah
against Moses and Aaron, and the re-establishment of the Aaronic
priesthood and confirmation of their rights, which this occasioned (chs.
16-18). This rebellion probably occurred in the first portion of the
period in question. In addition to this there are only a few laws
recorded, which were issued during this long time of punishment, and
furnished a practical proof of the continuance of the covenant which the
Lord had made with the nation of Israel at Sinai. There was nothing more
to record in connection with these thirty-seven years, which formed the
second stage in the guidance of Israel through the desert. For, as
Baumgarten has well observed, "the fighting men of Israel had fallen
under the judgment of Jehovah, and the sacred history, therefore, was no
longer concerned with them; whilst the youth, in whom the life and hope
of Israel were preserved, had as yet no history at all." Consequently we
have no reason to complain, as Ewald does (Gesch. ii. pp. 241, 242),
that "the great interval of forty years remains a perfect void;" and
still less occasion to dispose of the gap, as this scholar has done, by
supposing that the last historian left out a great deal from the history
of the forty years' wanderings. The supposed "void" was completely
filled up by the gradual dying out of the generation which had been
rejected by God.

[Numbers 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 15:1</span></span>

[Num 15:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001)

Regulations concerning Sacrifices. - Vv. 1-16. For the purpose of
reviving the hopes of the new generation that was growing up, and
directing their minds to the promised land, during the mournful and
barren time when judgment was being executed upon the race that had been
condemned, Jehovah communicated various laws through Moses concerning
the presentation of sacrifices in the land that He would give them ([Num
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001) and [Num
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#002)), whereby the former laws of
sacrifice were supplemented and completed. The first of these laws had
reference to the connection between meat-offerings and drink-offerings
on the one hand, and burnt-offerings and slain-offerings on the other.

[Num 15:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#003)

In the land of Canaan, every burnt and slain-offering, whether prepared
in fulfilment of a vow, or spontaneously, or on feast-days (cf. [Lev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016); [Lev
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#018), and [Lev
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#038)), was to be associated with a
meat-offering of fine flour mixed with oil, and a drink-offering of
wine, - the quantity to be regulated according to the kind of animal
that was slain in sacrifice. (See [Lev
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#018), where this connection is
already mentioned in the case of the festal sacrifices.) For a lamb
(כּבשׂ, i.e., either sheep or goat, cf. [Num
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#011)), they were to take the tenth of
an ephah of fine flour, mixed with the quarter of a hin of oil and the
quarter of a hin of wine, as a drink-offering. In [Num
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#005), the construction changes from
the third to the second person. עשׂה, to prepare, as in [Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038).

[Num 15:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#006)

For a ram, they were to take two tenths of fine flour, with the third of
a hin of oil and the third of a hin of wine.

[Num 15:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#008)

For an ox, three tenths of fine flour, with half a hin of oil and half a
hin of wine. The הקריב (3rd person) in [Num
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#009), between תּעשׂה in [Num
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#008), and תּקריב in [Num
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#010), is certainly striking and
unusual, but no so offensive as to render it necessary to alter it into
ותּקריב.

[Num 15:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#011)

The quantities mentioned were to be offered with every ox, or ram, or
lamb, of either sheep or goat, and therefore the number of the appointed
quantities of meat and drink-offerings was to correspond to the number
of sacrificial animals.

[Num 15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#013)

These rules were to apply not only to the sacrifices of those that were
born in Israel, but also to those of the strangers living among them. By
"these things," in [Num 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#013), we are
to understand the meat and drink-offerings already appointed.

[Num 15:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#015)

"As for the assembly, there shall be one law for the Israelite and the
stranger,...an eternal ordinance...before Jehovah." הקּהל, which is
construed absolutely, refers to the assembling of the nation before
Jehovah, or to the congregation viewed in its attitude with regard to
God.

A second law ([Num 15:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#017)) appoints,
on the ground of the general regulations in [Exo
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028) and [Exo
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019), the presentation of a
heave-offering from the bread which they would eat in the land of
Canaan, viz., a first-fruit of groat-meal (עריסת ראשׁית) baked as cake
(חלּה). Arisoth, which is only used in connection with the gift of
first-fruits, in [Eze 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030); [Neh
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#038), and the passage before us,
signifies most probably groats, or meal coarsely bruised, like the
talmudical ערסן, contusum, mola, far, and indeed far hordei. This cake
of the groats of first-fruits they were to offer "as a heave-offering of
the threshing-floor," i.e., as a heave-offering of the bruised corn, in
the same manner as this (therefore, in addition to it, and along with
it); and that "according to your generations" (see [Exo
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)), that is to say, for all time,
to consecrate a gift of first-fruits to the Lord, not only of the grains
of corn, but also of the bread made from the corn, and "to cause a
blessing to rest upon his house" ([Eze
44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030)). Like all the gifts of
first-fruits, this cake also fell to the portion of the priests (see
Ezek. and Neh. ut sup.).

To these there are added, in [Num
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022), [Num
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#031), laws relating to sin-offerings,
the first of which, in [Num 15:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022),
is distinguished from the case referred to in [Lev
4:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013), by the fact that the sin is
not described here, as it is there, as "doing one of the commandments of
Jehovah which ought not to be done," but as "not doing all that Jehovah
had spoken through Moses." Consequently, the allusion here is not to
sins of commission, but to sins of omission, not following the law of
God, "even (as is afterwards explained in [Num
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#023)) all that the Lord hath
commanded you by the hand of Moses from the day that the Lord hath
commanded, and thenceforward according to your generations," i.e., since
the first beginning of the giving of the law, and during the whole of
the time following (Knobel). These words apparently point to a complete
falling away of the congregation from the whole of the law. Only the
further stipulation in [Num 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024), "if
it occur away from the eyes of the congregation through error" (in
oversight), cannot be easily reconciled with this, as it seems hardly
conceivable that an apostasy from the entire law should have remained
hidden from the congregation. This "not doing all the commandments of
Jehovah," of which the congregation is supposed to incur the guilt
without perceiving it, might consist either in the fact that, in
particular instances, whether from oversight or negligence, the whole
congregation omitted to fulfil the commandments of God, i.e., certain
precepts of the law, sc., in the fact that they neglected the true and
proper fulfilment of the whole law, either, as Outram supposes, "by
retaining to a certain extent the national rites, and following the
worship of the true God, and yet at the same time acting unconsciously
in opposition to the law, through having been led astray by some common
errors;" or by allowing the evil example of godless rulers to seduce
them to neglect their religious duties, or to adopt and join in certain
customs and usages of the heathen, which appeared to be reconcilable
with the law of Jehovah, though they really led to contempt and neglect
of the commandments of the Lord.

(Note: Maimonides (see Outram, ex veterum sententia) understands this
law as relating to extraneous worship; and Outram himself refers to the
times of the wicked kings, "when the people neglected their hereditary
rites, and, forgetting the sacred laws, fell by a common sin into the
observance of the religious rites of other nations." Undoubtedly, we
have historical ground in [Ch2 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021).,
and [Ezr 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035), for this interpretation
of our law, but further allusions are not excluded in consequence. We
cannot agree with Baumgarten, therefore, in restricting the difference
between [Lev 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013). and the passage
before us to the fact, that the former supposes the transgression of one
particular commandment on the part of the whole congregation, whilst the
latter ([Num 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022), [Num
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#023)) refers to a continued lawless
condition on the part of Israel.)

But as a disregard or neglect of the commandments of God had to be
expiated, a burnt-offering was to be added to the sin-offering, that the
separation of the congregation from the Lord, which had arisen from the
sin of omission, might be entirely removed. The apodosis commences with
והיה in [Num 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024), but is interrupted
by מעי אם, and resumed again with ועשׂוּ, "it shall be, if...the whole
congregation shall prepare," etc. The burnt-offering, being the
principal sacrifice, is mentioned as usual before the sin-offering,
although, when presented, it followed the latter, on account of its
being necessary that the sin should be expiated before the congregation
could sanctify its life and efforts afresh to the Lord in the
burnt-offering. "One kid of the goats:" see [Lev
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#023). כּמּשׂפּט (as in [Lev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010); [Lev
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#016), etc.) refers to the right
established in [Num 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#008), [Num
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#009), concerning the combination of
the meat and drink-offering with the burnt-offering. The sin-offering
was to be treated according to the rule laid down in [Lev
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#014).

[Num 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#026)

This law was to apply not only to the children of Israel, but also to
the stranger among them, "for (sc., it has happened) to the whole nation
in mistake." As the sin extended to the whole nation, in which the
foreigners were also included, the atonement was also to apply to the
whole.

[Num 15:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#027)

In the same way, again, there was one law for the native and the
stranger, in relation to sins of omission on the part of single
individuals. The law laid doon in [Lev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006) (cf. [Lev
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027).) for the Israelites, is repeated
here in [Num 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#027), [Num
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#028), and in [Num
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#028) it is raised into general
validity for foreigners also. In [Num
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#029), האזרח is written absolutely for
לאזרח.

[Num 15:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030)

But it was only sins committed by mistake (see at [Lev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002)) that could be expiated by
sin-offerings. Whoever, on the other hand, whether a native or a
foreigner, committed a sin "with a high hand," - i.e., so that he raised
his hand, as it were, against Jehovah, or acted in open rebellion
against Him, - blasphemed God, and was to be cut off (see [Gen
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014)); for he had despised the word
of Jehovah, and broken His commandment, and was to atone for it with his
life. בהּ עונה, "its crime upon it;" i.e., it shall come upon such a
soul in the punishment which it shall endure.

[Numbers 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 15:32</span></span>

The History of the Sabbath-Breaker is no doubt inserted here as a
practical illustration of sinning "with a high hand." It shows, too, at
the same time, how the nation, as a whole, was impressed with the
inviolable sanctity of the Lord's day. From the words with which it is
introduced, "and the children of Israel were in the wilderness," all
that can be gathered is, that the occurrence took place at the time when
Israel was condemned to wander about in the wilderness for forty years.
They found a man gathering sticks in the desert on the Sabbath, and
brought him as an open transgressor of the law of the Sabbath before
Moses and Aaron and the whole congregation, i.e., the college of elders,
as the judicial authorities of the congregation ([Exo
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#025).). They kept him in custody,
like the blasphemer in [Lev 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#012),
because it had not yet been determined what was to be done to him. It is
true that it had already been laid down in [Exo
31:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014), and [Exo
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#002), that any breach of the law of
the Sabbath should be punished by death and extermination, but the mode
had not yet been prescribed. This was done now, and Jehovah commanded
stoning (see [Lev 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002)), which was
executed upon the criminal without delay.

[Numbers 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 15:37</span></span>

(cf. [Deu 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012)). The command to wear
Tassels on the Edge of the Upper Garment appears to have been occasioned
by the incident just described. The Israelites were to wear ציצת,
tassels, on the wings of their upper garments, or, according to [Deu
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012), at the four corners of the
upper garment. כּסוּת, the covering in which a man wraps himself,
synonymous with בּגד, was the upper garment, consisting of a
four-cornered cloth or piece of stuff, which was thrown over the
body-coat (see my Bibl. Archol. ii. pp. 36, 37), and is not to be
referred, as Schultz supposes, to the bed-coverings also, although this
garment was actually used as a counterpane by the poor (see [Exo
22:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025)). "And upon the tassel of the
wing they shall put a string of hyacinth-blue," namely, to fasten the
tassel to the edge of the garment. ציצת (fem., from ציץ, the glittering,
the bloom or flower) signifies something flowery or bloom-like, and is
used in [Eze 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003) for a lock of hair;
here it is applied to a tassel, as being made of twisted threads: lxx
κράσπεδα; [Mat 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005), "borders." The
size of these tassels is not prescribed. The Pharisees liked to make
them large, to exhibit openly their punctilious fulfilment of the law.
For the Rabbinical directions how to make them, see Carpzov. apparat.
pp. 197ff.; and Bodenschatz, kirchliche Verfassung der heutigen Juden,
iv. pp. 11ff.

[Numbers 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 15:39</span></span>

"And it shall be to you for a tassel," i.e., the fastening of the tassel
with the dark blue thread to the corners of your garments shall be to
you a tassel, "that ye, when ye see it, may remember all the
commandments of Jehovah, and do them; and ye shall not stray after your
hearts and your eyes, after which ye go a whoring." The zizith on the
sky-blue thread was to serve as a memorial sign to the Israelites, to
remind them of the commandments of God, that they might have them
constantly before their eyes and follow them, and not direct their heart
and eyes to the things of this world, which turn away from the word of
God, and lead astray to idolatry (cf. [Pro
4:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025)). Another reason for these
instructions, as is afterwards added in [Num
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#040), was to remind Israel of all the
commandments of the Lord, that they might do them and be holy to their
God, and sanctify their daily life to Him who had brought them out of
Egypt, to be their God, i.e., to show Himself as God to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 16](num016)

</div>
