<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro010)  [Next](pro012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)

[Proverbs 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 11:1</span></span>

The next three proverbs treat of honesty, discretion, and innocence or
dove-like simplicity:

1 Deceitful balances are an abomination to Jahve;

But a full weight is His delight.

The very same proverb, with slightly varied expression, is found in [Pro
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#023); and other such like proverbs,
in condemnation of false and in approbation of true balances, are found,
[Pro 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#010); [Pro
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#011); similar predicates, but
connected with other subjects, are found at [Pro
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#022); [Pro
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008). "An abomination to Jahve" is an
expression we have already twice met with in the introduction, [Pro
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#032); [Pro
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016), cf. [Pro
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#007); תּועבה is, like תּועה, a
participial noun, in which the active conception of abhorring is
transferred to the action accomplished. רצון is in post-biblical Hebr.
the designation of the arbitrium and the voluntas; but here רצונו
signifies not that which God wishes, but that which He delights in
having. "מרמה (here for the first time in Proverbs), from רמה, the Piel
of which means ([Pro 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#019)) aliquem
dolo et fraude petere. אבן, like the Pers. sanak, sanakh, Arab. ṣajat, a
stone for weight; and finally, without any reference to its root
signification, like [Zac 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#008), אבן
העופרת, a leaden weight, as when we say: a horseshoe of gold, a
chess-man of ivory."

[Proverbs 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 11:2</span></span>

Now follows the Solomonic "Pride goeth before a fall."

There cometh arrogance, so also cometh shame;

But with the humble is wisdom.

Interpreted according to the Hebr.: if the former has come, so
immediately also comes the latter. The general truth as to the causal
connection of the two is conceived of historically; the fact, confirmed
by many events, is represented in the form of a single occurrence as a
warning example; the preterites are like the Greek aoristi gnomici
(vid., p. 32); and the perf., with the fut. consec. following, is the
expression of the immediate and almost simultaneous consequence (vid.,
at [Hab 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010)): has haughtiness (זדון
after the form לצון, from זיד, to boil, to run over) appeared, then
immediately also disgrace appeared, in which the arrogant behaviour is
overwhelmed. The harmony of the sound of the Hebr. זדון and קלון cannot
be reproduced in German \[nor in English\]; Hitzig and Ewald try to do
so, but such a quid pro quo as "Kommt Unglimpf kommt an ihn Schimpf"
\[there comes arrogance, there comes to him disgrace\] is not a
translation, but a distortion of the text. If, now, the antithesis says
that with the humble is wisdom, wisdom is meant which avoids such
disgrace as arrogance draws along with it; for the צנוּע thinks not more
highly of himself than he ought to think (R. צן, subsidere, demitti,
Deutsch. Morgenl. Zeitsch. xxv. 185).

[Proverbs 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 11:3</span></span>

3 The integrity of the upright guideth them;

But the perverseness of the ungodly destroyeth them.

To the upright, ישׁרים, who keep the line of rectitude without turning
aside therefrom into devious paths ([Psa
125:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#004).), stand opposed (as at [Pro
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#021).) the ungodly (faithless),
בּגדים, who conceal (from בּגד, to cover, whence בּגד = כּסוּת)
malicious thoughts and plans. And the contrast of תּמּה, integrity =
unreserved loving submission, is סלף, a word peculiar to the Solomonic
Mashal, with its verb סלּף (vid., p. 32). Hitzig explains it by the
Arab. saraf, to step out, to tread over; and Ewald by lafat, to turn, to
turn about ("treacherous, false step"), both of which are improbable.
Schultens compares salaf in the meaning to smear (R. לף, לב, ἀλείφειν;
cf. regarding such secondary formations with ש preceding, Hupfeld on
[Psa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007)), and translates here,
lubricitas. But this rendering is scarcely admissible. It has against it
lexical tradition (Menahem: מוטה, wavering; Perchon: זיוף, falsifying;
Kimchi: עוות, misrepresentation, according to which the Graec. Venet.
σκολιότης), as well as the methodical comparison of the words. The
Syriac has not this verbal stem, but the Targum has סלף in the meaning
to distort, to turn the wrong way (σκολιοῦν, στρεβλοῦν), [Pro
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#010), and [Est
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010), where, in the second Targum,
פּוּמהּ אסתּלף means "his mouth was crooked." With justice, therefore,
Gesenius in his Thesaurus has decided in favour of the fundamental idea
pervertere, from which also the Peshito and Saadia proceed; for in [Exo
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008) they translate (Syr.) mhapêk (it,
the gift of bribery, perverts) and (Arab.) tazyf (= תּזיּף, it
falsifies). Fl. also, who at [Pro 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#004)
remarks, "סלף, from סלף, to stir up, to turn over, so that the lowermost
becomes the uppermost," gives the preference to this primary idea, in
view of the Arab. salaf, invertere terram conserendi causa. It is
moreover confirmed by salaf, praecedere, which is pervertere modified to
praevertere. But how does סלף mean perversio (Theod. ὑποσκελισμός), in
the sense of the overthrow prepared for thy neighbour? The parallels
demand the sense of a condition peculiar to the word and conduct of the
godless (treacherous), [Pro 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#012) (cf.
[Exo 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008)), [Pro
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#003), thus perversitas, perversity;
but this as contrary to truth and rectitude (opp. תּמּה),
"perverseness," as we have translated it, for we understand by it want
of rectitude (dishonesty) and untruthfulness. While the sincerity of the
upright conducts them, and, so to say, forms their salvus conductus,
which guards them against the danger of erring and of hostile assault,
the perverseness of the treacherous destroys them; for the disfiguring
of truth avenges itself against them, and they experience the reverse of
the proverb, "das Ehrlich whrt am lngsten" (honesty endures the
longest). The Chethı̂b ושׁדם (ושׁדּם) is an error of transcription; the
Kerı̂ has the proper correction, ישׁדּם = ישׁדדם, [Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006). Regarding שׁדד (whence שׁדּי),
which, from its root-signification of making close and fast, denotes
violence and destruction, vid., under Gen 17.

[Proverbs 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 11:4</span></span>

Three proverbs in praise of צדקה:

4 Possessions are of no profit in the day of wrath;

But righteousness delivereth from death.

That which is new here, is only that possessions and goods (vid.,
regarding הון, p. 63) are destitute of all value in the day of the
μέλλουσα ὀργή; for יום עברה, the day of wrath breaking through the
limits (of long-suffering), has the same meaning as in the prophets; and
such prophetic words as [Isa 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003);
[Zep 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018), and, almost in the same
words, [Eze 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019), are altogether
similar to this proverb. The lxx, which translates ἐν ήμέρᾳ ἐπαγωγῆς,
harmonizes in expression with Sir. 5:8, cf. 2:2. Theodotion translates
איד, [Pro 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#010), by ἐπαγωγή
(providence, fate).

[Proverbs 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 11:5</span></span>

5 The righteousness of the blameless smootheth his way,

And by his own wickedness doth the wicked fall.

With the תּמים (cf. [Pro 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#012)), formed
after the passive, more than with תּם, is connected the idea of the
perfected, but more in the negative sense of moral spotlessness than of
moral perfection. The rectitude of a man who seeks to keep his
conscience and his character pure, maketh smooth (ישּׁר, as [Pro
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006), not of the straightness of the
line, but of the surface, evenness) his life's path, so that he can
pursue his aim without stumbling and hindrance, and swerving from the
direct way; while, on the contrary, the godless comes to ruin by his
godlessness - that by which he seeks to forward his interests, and to
make a way for himself, becomes his destruction.

[Proverbs 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 11:6</span></span>

6 The rectitude of the upright saveth them,

And in their own covetousness are the faithless taken.

The integrity of those who go straight forward and straight through,
without permitting themselves to turn aside on crooked ways, delivers
them from the snares which are laid for them, the dangers they
encounter; while, on the contrary, the faithless, though they mask their
intentions ever so cunningly, are ensnared in their passionate
covetousness: the mask is removed, they are convicted, and are caught
and lost. Regarding הוּה, abyss, overthrow, also stumbling against
anything = covetousness, vid., at [Pro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003), and under [Psa
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010). The form of the expression 6b
follows the scheme, "in the image of God created He man," [Gen
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006). The subject is to be taken from
the genitive, as is marked by the accentuation, for it gives Mugrash to
the וּבהוּת, as if it were the principal form, for וּבהוּה.

[Proverbs 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 11:7</span></span>

Three proverbs regarding destruction and salvation:

7 When a godless man dies, his hope cometh to nought,

And the expectation of those who stand in fulness of strength is
destroyed.

We have already remarked in the Introduction that אדם is a favourite
word of the Chokma, and the terminological distinction of different
classes and properties of men (vid., pp. 40, 42); we read, [Pro
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012), אדם בּליּעל, and here, as also
[Job 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029); [Job
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#013), אדם רשׁע, cf. [Pro
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#029), אישׁ רשׁע, but generally only
רשׁע is used. A godless man, to whom earthly possessions and pleasure
and honour are the highest good, and to whom no means are too base, in
order that he may appease this his threefold passion, rocks himself in
unbounded and measureless hopes; but with his death, his hope, i.e., all
that he hoped for, comes to nought. The lxx translate τελευτήσαντος
ἀνδρὸς δικαίου οὐκ ὄλλυται ἐλπίς, which is the converse of that which is
here said, 7a: the hope of the righteous expects its fulfilment beyond
the grave. The lxx further translate, τὸ δὲ καύχημα (וּתהלּת) τῶν ἀσεβῶν
ὄλλυται; but the distich in the Hebr. text is not an antithetic one, and
whether אונים may signify the wicked (thus also the Syr., Targ., Venet.,
and Luther), if we regard it as a brachyology for אנשׁי אונים, or as the
plur. of an adj. און, after the form טוב (Elazar b. Jacob in Kimchi), or
wickedness (Zckler, with Hitzig, "the wicked expectation"), is very
questionable. Yet more improbable is Malbim's (with Rashi's) rendering
of this אונים, after [Gen 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003); [Psa
78:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051), and the Targ. on [Job
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012), of the children of the
deceased; children gignuntur ex robore virili, but are not themselves
the robur virile. But while אונים is nowhere the plur. of און fo . in
its ethical signification, it certainly means in [Psa
78:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051), as the plur. of און, manly
strength, and in [Isa 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026), [Isa
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029) the fulness of strength
generally, and once, in [Hos 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004), as
plur. of און in its physical signification, derived from its
root-meaning anhelitus ([Gen 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018),
cf. [Hab 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007)), deep sorrow (a
heightening of the און, [Deu 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#014)).
This latter signification has also been adopted: Jerome, expectatio
solicitorum; Bertheau, "the expectation of the sorrowing;" Ewald,
"continuance of sorrow;" but the meaning of this in this connection is
so obscure, that one must question the translators what its import is.
Therefore we adhere to the other rendering, "fulness of strength," and
interpret אונים as the opposite of אין אונים, [Isa
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029), for it signifies, per
metonymiam abstracti pro concr., those who are full of strength; and we
gain the meaning that there is a sudden end to the expectation of those
who are in full strength, and build their prospects thereon. The two
synonymous lines complete themselves, in so far as אונים gains by אדם
רשׁע the associated idea of self-confidence, and the second strengthens
the thought of the first by the transition of the expression from the
fut. to the preterite (Fl.). ותוחלת has, for the most part in recent
impressions, the Mugrash; the correct accentuation, according to codices
and old impressions, is ותוחלת אונים (vid., Baer's Torath Emeth, p. 10,
4).

[Proverbs 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 11:8</span></span>

8 The righteous is delivered from trouble,

And the godless comes in his stead.

The succession of the tenses gives the same meaning as when,
periodizing, we say: while the one is delivered, the other, on the
contrary, falls before the same danger. נחלץ (vid., under [Isa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011)) followed by the historical
tense, the expression of the principal fact, is the perfect. The
statement here made clothes itself after the manner of a parable in the
form of history. It is true there are not wanting experiences of an
opposite kind (from that here stated), because divine justice manifests
itself in this world only as a prelude, but not perfectly and finally;
but the poet considers this, that as a rule destruction falls upon the
godless, which the righteous with the help of God escapes; and this he
realizes as a moral motive. In itself תּחתּיו may also have only the
meaning of the exchange of places, but the lxx translate αντ ̓ αὐτοῦ,
and thus in the sense of representation the proverb appears to be
understood in connection with [Pro
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#018) (cf. the prophetico-historical
application, [Isa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004)). The idea of
atonement has, however, no application here, for the essence of
atonement consists in the offering up of an innocent one in the room of
the guilty, and its force lies in the offering up of self; the meaning
is only, that if the divinely-ordained linking together of cause and
effect in the realms of nature and of history brings with it evil, this
brings to the godless destruction, while it opens the way of deliverance
for the righteous, so that the godless becomes for the righteous the
כּפר, or, as we might say in a figure of similar import, the lightning
conductor.

[Proverbs 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 11:9</span></span>

9 The wicked with his mouth prepareth destruction for his neighbour;

But by knowledge the righteous are delivered from it.

The lxx translate, ἐν στόματι ἀσεβῶν παγὶς (רשׁת?) πολίταις, αἴσθησις δὲ
δικαίοις εὔοδος, (יצלחו). There is no reason for changing (with Hitzig
and Ewald) the text, which in the form in which it is here translated
was before all other translators (Aq., Symmachus, Theodotion, Syr.,
Targ., Jerome). The accentuation, which separates the two instrumental
statements by greater disjunctives from that which follows, is correct.
The "three" Greek versions viz. of Aquila, Theodotion, and Symmachus
translate חנף by ὑποκριτής, which it means in the modern idiom; but in
the ancient Hebr. it signifies, him who is resolved upon evil, as in
Arab. ḥanyf, him who is resolved upon that which is right: he who turns
aside to evil enters on a path far removed from that which is right. In
ישׁחית one is reminded (without any etymological reason) of שׁחת (pit),
and so in יחלצוּ of משּׁחיתותם ([Psa
107:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#020)) or a similar word; but בּדּעת
contains the reference, in this connection not easy to be mistaken, to
the hostile purposes of the wicked masked by the words of the mouth,
which are seen through by the righteous by virtue of knowledge which
makes them acquainted with men. This penetrating look is their means of
deliverance.

[Proverbs 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 11:10</span></span>

Three proverbs follow relating to the nature of city and national life,
and between them two against mockery and backbiting:

10 In the prosperity of the righteous the city rejoiceth;

And if the wicked come to ruin, there is jubilation.

The בּ of בּטוּב denotes the ground but not the object, as elsewhere,
but the cause of the rejoicing, like the ב 10b, and in the similar
proverb, [Pro 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002), cf. [Pro
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012). If it goes well with the
righteous, the city has cause for joy, because it is for the advantage
of the community; and if the wicked (godless) come to an end, then there
is jubilation (substantival clause for תּרן), for although they are
honoured in their lifetime, yet men breathe freer when the city is
delivered from the tyranny and oppression which they exercised, and from
the evil example which they gave. Such proverbs, in which the city
(civitas) represents the state, the πόλις the πολιτεία, may, as Ewald
thinks, be of earlier date than the days of an Asa or Jehoshaphat; for
"from the days of Moses and Joshua to the days of David and Solomon,
Israel was a great nation, divided indeed into many branches and
sections, but bound together by covenant, whose life did not at all
revolve around one great city alone." We value such critical judgments
according to great historical points of view, but confess not to
understand why קריה must just be the chief city and may not be any city,
and how on the whole a language which had not as yet framed the
conception of the state (post-bibl. מדינה), when it would described the
community individually and as a whole, could speak otherwise than of
city and people.

[Proverbs 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 11:11</span></span>

11 By the blessing of the upright a city is exalted,

But by the mouth of the godless it is broken down.

This verse is related, in the way of confirming it, to [Pro
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#010). The lxx, which omits [Pro
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004), here omits 10b and 11a, and
combines 10a and 11b into one proverb (vid., Lagarde). The meaning is
clear: "by the benedictions and pious prayers of the upright a city
rises always to a higher eminence and prosperity; while, on the
contrary, the deceitful, arrogant, blasphemous talk of the godless
brings ruin to it" (Fl.). The nearest contrast to "by the blessing of
the upright" would be "by the cursing of the wicked," but not in the
sense of the poet, who means to say that the city raises itself by the
blessing of the upright, and on the contrary, when godless men are
exalted, then by their words (whose blessing is no better than their
curse) it comes to ruin. קרת (= קריה) occurs only four times in
Proverbs, and in [Job 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007).

[Proverbs 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 11:12</span></span>

There now follow two proverbs which refer to the intercourse of private
life.

He who mocketh his neighbour is devoid of understanding;

But the intelligent man remaineth silent.

[Pro 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#021) is a proverb similarly
beginning with בּז לרעהוּ, [Pro 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#013)
is another beginning with בּז לדבר. From this one sees that בּוּז ל (cf.
בּזה ל, [Isa 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022)) does not mean a
speaking contemptuously in one's presence; as also from [Pro
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030), that contemptuous treatment,
which expresses itself not in mockery but in insult, is thus named; so
that we do not possess a German \[nor an English\] expression which
completely covers it. Whoever in a derisive or insulting manner, whether
it be publicly or privately, degrades his neighbour, is unwise (חסר־לב
as pred., like [Pro 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032)); an
intelligent man, on the contrary, keeps silent, keeps his judgment to
himself, abstains from arrogant criticisms, for he knows that he is not
infallible, that he is not acquainted with the heart, and he possesses
too much self-knowledge to raise himself above his neighbour as a judge,
and thinks that contemptuous rejection, unamiable, reckless
condemnation, does no good, but on the contrary does evil on all sides.

[Proverbs 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 11:13</span></span>

13 He who goeth about tattling revealeth secrets;

But he who is of a faithful spirit concealeth a matter.

The tattler is called רכיל (intensive form of רכל), from his going
hither and thither. אנשׁי רכיל, [Eze
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#009), are men given to tattling,
backbiters; הולך רכיל (cf. [Lev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#016)), one of the tattlers or
backbiters goes, a divulger of the matter, a tell-tale. It is of such an
one that the proverb speaks, that he reveals the secret (סוד, properly
the being close together for the purpose of private intercourse, then
that intercourse itself, vid., at [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014)); one has thus to be on his
guard against confiding in him. On the contrary, a נאמן־רוּח, firmus
(fidus) spiritu, properly one who is established, or reflexively one who
proves himself firm and true (vid., at [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)), conceals a matter, keeps it
back from the knowledge and power of another. Zckler rightly concludes,
in opposition to Hitzig, from the parallelism that the הולך רכיל is
subject; the arrangement going before also shows that this is the
"ground-word" (Ewald); in [Pro 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#019)
the relation is reversed: the revealer of secrets is rightly named (cf.
Sir. 27:16, ὁ ἀποκαλύπτων μυστήρια, κ.τ.λ.).

[Proverbs 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 11:14</span></span>

14 Where there is no direction a people fall

But where there is no want of counsellors there is safety.

Regarding תּחבּות, vid., at [Pro 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005).
There it means rules of self-government; here, rules for the government
of the people, or, since the pluralet. denotes a multiplicity in unity,
circumspect κυβέρνησις. With 14b, [Pro
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#006) (where direction in war, as here
in peace, is spoken of, and the meaning of the word specializes itself
accordingly) agrees; cf. also [Pro
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#022). Hitzig criticises the proverb,
remarking, "we who have the longest resorted to many counsellors, as a
consequence of the superabundance have learned to say, 'Too many cooks
spoil the broth,' and, 'He who asks long, errs.'" But the truth of the
clause 14b is in modern times more fully illustrated in the region of
ecclesiastical and political affairs; and in general it is found to be
true that it is better with a people when they are governed according to
the laws and conclusions which have resulted from the careful
deliberation of many competent and authorized men, than when their fate
is entrusted unconditionally to one or to a few. The proverb, it must be
acknowledge, refers not to counsellors such as in [Isa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003), but as in [Isa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026).

[Proverbs 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 11:15</span></span>

There follow now two proverbs regarding kindness which brings injury and
which brings honour:

It fares ill, nothing but ill, with one who is surety for another;

But he who hateth suretyship remaineth in quietness.

More closely to the original: It goes ill with him; for the proverb is
composed as if the writer had before his eyes a definite person, whom
one assails when he for whom he became security has not kept within the
limits of the performance that was due. Regarding ערב with the accus. of
the person: to represent one as a surety for him, and זר as denoting the
other (the stranger), vid., at [Pro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001). The meaning of רע ירוע is seen
from [Pro 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#016). ירוע is, like [Pro
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#020), the fut. Niph. of רעע, or of
רוּע = רעע, after the forms ימּול, יעור (Olsh. 265e). The added רעע has,
like עריה, [Hab 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009), the same function
as the inf. absol. (intensivus); but as the infin. form רע could only be
inf. constru. after the form שׁך, [Jer
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#026), the infinitive absol. must be
רוע: Thus רע is an accus., or what is the same, an adverbial adj.: he is
badly treated (maltreated) in a bad way, for one holds him to his words
and, when he cannot or will not accomplish that which is due in the room
of him for whom he is bail, arrests him. He, on the contrary, who hates
תוקעים has good rest. The persons of such as become surety by striking
the hands cannot be meant, but perhaps people thus becoming surety by a
hand-stroke - such sureties, and thus such suretyship, he cannot suffer;
תוקעים approaches an abstract "striking hands," instead of "those who
strike hands" in connection with this שׂנא, expressing only a strong
impossibility, as חבלים, [Zac 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007), 14,
means uniting together in the sense of combination.

[Proverbs 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 11:16</span></span>

16 A gracious woman retaineth honour,

And strong men retain riches.

The lxx had אשׁת חן (not אשׁת חיל ton( א) in view: γυνὴ εὐχάριστος
ἐγείρει ἀνδρὶ δόξαν, - this ἀνδρί is an interpolation inserted for the
sake of the added line, θρόνος δὲ ἀτιμίας γυνὴ μισοῦσα δίκαια. The
proverb thus expanded is on both sides true: an amiable woman (gratiosa)
brings honour to her husband, gives him relief, while one who hates the
right (that which is good, gentle) is a disgraceful vessel (opp. כּסּא
כּבוד, [Isa 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#023)), which disfigures
the household, makes the family unloved, and lowers it. But the
commencing line, by which 16b is raised to an independent distich, is so
much the more imperfect: πλούτου ὀκνηροὶ ἐνδεεῖς γίνονται; for that the
negligent (idle) bring it not to riches, is, as they are wont in Swabia
to call such truisms, a Binsenwahrheit. But it is important that the
translation of 16b, οἱ δὲ ἀνδρεῖοι ἐρείδονται πλούτῳ (the Syr. has
"knowledge" for riches), presupposes the phrase וחרוּצים (cf. [Pro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004), lxx), and along with it this,
that יתמכו עשׁר is so rendered as if the words were יסמכוּ בעשׁר, is to
be regarded as unhistorical. If we now take the one proverb as it is
found in the Hebr. text, then the repetition of the תמך in the two lines
excites a prejudice in favour of it. The meaning of this otherwise
difficult תמך is missed by Lwenstein and Zckler: a gracious woman
retaineth honour (Symm. ἀνθέξεται δόξης); for (1) תמך חיל would better
agree with this predicate, and (2) it is evident from [Pro
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#023) that תמך כבוד is not to be
understood in the sense of firmiter tenere, but in the inchoative sense
of consequi honorem, whence also the ἐγείρει ἀνδρί of the lxx. It is
true that [Pro 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#030) states that
"grace (חן) is nothing," and that all depends on the fear of God; but
here the poet thinks on "grace" along with the fear of God, or he thinks
on them as not separated from each other; and since it is boldly true,
which is moreover besides this true, that a wife of gracious outward
appearance and demeanour obtains honour, her company is sought, she
finds her way into the best society, they praise her attractive,
pleasant appearance, and that the husband also of such a wife
participates to some extent in this honour. Experience also confirms it,
that the עריצים, strong men, obtain riches (cf. [Isa
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#025)); and this statement regarding
the עריצים fits better as a contrast to 16a, as a like statement
regarding the חרוצים, diligent, for the עריץ (from ערץ, to place in
terror, [Psa 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018)), whose power
consists in terrorism or violence, is the most direct contrast of a
wife, this σκεῦος ἀσθενέστερον, who by heart-winning attraction makes
yet better conquests: she thereby obtains a higher good, viz., honour,
while the former gains only riches, for "a name" (viz., a good one) "is
better than great riches," [Pro 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#001).
If we read חרוצים, this thoughtful contrast is lost.

[Proverbs 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 11:17</span></span>

Three proverbs regarding benevolence:

17 The benevolent man doeth good to his own soul,

And the violent man brings trouble on his own flesh.

Many interpreters reverse the relation of subject and predicate (Targ.
only in 17b, after the phrase ודמוביד, for which the Syr. has only
ומובד): qui sibi ipsi benefacit, is quidem erga alios quoque benignus
praesumitur, quum caritas ordinata a se ipsa incipiat; qui vero carnem
suam male habet, est crudelis erga alios (Michaelis). But this cannot be
established; for certainly it occurs that whoever does good to himself
does good also to others, and that whoever is hard against himself also
judges and treats others harshly; but in by far the greatest number of
cases the fact is this, that he who does not deny anything to himself is
in relation to others an egoist, and this is not a "benevolent man;"
and, on the contrary, that he who denies to himself lawful enjoyments is
in relation to others capable of self-denial and self-sacrifice, and
thus is the contrast of a "violent man." The word of Sirach, 14:5, ὁ
πονηρὸς ἑαυτῷ τίνα ἀγαθὸς ἔσται, to which Bertheau appeals, alludes to
the niggard, and it is true indeed that this עכר שׁארו, but not every
עכר שׁארו, is a niggard. Thus the "benevolent man" and the "violent man"
will be the two subject conceptions, and as it is said of the benevolent
(חסר as e.g., [Hos 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006), of a more
restricted sense, as [Isa 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)) that
he does good (גּמל, viz., טוב, [Pro
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#012)), so of the violent (unmerciful)
(אכזרי as [Pro 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#020); [Jer
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023); [Jer
50:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#042)) that he brings evil on his own
flesh (lxx αὐτοῦ σῶμα); for שׁארו as a parallel word to נפשׁו (cf. p.
141) signifies not blood-relations (Symm., Jerome, Luther, and Grotius),
but it has here, as at [Mic 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#002), its
nearest signification, from which it then comes to signify those who are
of our flesh and blood. But for that reason the meaning of the poet
cannot be that given by Elster: "he who exercises benevolence toward
others creates within himself a determination which penetrates his whole
being with generous and fruitful warmth, as on the other hand the
feeling of hatred deprives the heart of him who cherishes it of the true
fountain of life." If this were meant, then soul and spirit, not soul
and flesh, would stand in parallelism. The weal and woe refers thus to
the divine retribution which requites the conduct of a man toward his
neighbours, according to its character, with reward or punishment
(Hitzig, Zckler).

[Proverbs 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 11:18</span></span>

Man consists of body and soul. In regard to both, benevolence brings its
reward, and hatred its punishment.

The godless acquires deceptive gain;

But he that soweth righteousness, a true reward.

Jerome makes 18b an independent clause, for he translates it as if the
word were written וּלזרע; the Syr. and Targ. also, as if אמתּו שׂכרו
(his fidelity is his reward). But according to the text as it stands,
עשׂה extends its regimen to both parts of the verse; to make is here
equivalent to, to work out, to acquire, περιποιεῖσθαι, as [Gen
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001); [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001), etc. The labour of the godless
has selfishness as its motive, and what he acquires by his labour is
therefore "delusive gain," - it is no blessing, it profits him not ([Pro
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#002)), and it brings him no advantage
([Pro 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#016)). He, on the contrary,
acquires truth, i.e., a truly profitable and enduring reward, who sows
right-doing, or better: good-doing, by which we also, as the biblical
moral in צדקה, think principally of well-doing, unselfish activity and
self-sacrificing love. [Hos 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012)
speaks of sowing which has only צדקה as the norm; and how צדקה is
understood is seen from the parallel use of חסד \[piety\]. The "true
reward" is just the harvest by which the sowing of the good seed of
noble benevolent actions is rewarded.

[Proverbs 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 11:19</span></span>

19 Genuine righteousness reaches to life,

And he who pursues evil does it to his death.

The lxx translate υἱὸς δίκαιος, and the Syrian follows this
unwarrantable quid pro quo; the Bible uses the phrase בן־עולה and the
like, but not בן־צדקה. The Graec. Venet. (translating οὕτω) deprives the
distich of its supposed independence. The Targ. renders כּן with the
following ו as correlates, sic ... uti; but כן in comparative proverbs
stands naturally in the second, and not in the first place (vid., p.
10). Without doubt כן is here a noun. It appears to have a personal
sense, according to the parallel וּמרדּף, on which account Elster
explains it: he who is firm, stedfast in righteousness, and Zckler: he
who holds fast to righteousness; but כן cannot mean "holding fast," nor
does מכונן; - "fast" does not at all agree with the meaning of the word,
it means upright, and in the ethical sense genuine; thus Ewald better:
"he who is of genuine righteousness," but "genuine in (of)
righteousness" is a tautological connection of ideas. Therefore we must
regard כן as a substantival neuter, but neither the rectum of Cocceius
nor the firmum of Schultens furnishes a naturally expressed suitable
thought. Or is כּן a substantive in the sense of 2 Kings 7:31? The word
denotes the pedestal, the pillar, the standing-place; but what can the
basis refer to here (Euchel)? Rather read "aim" (Oetinger) or
"direction" (Lwenstein); but כן does not take its meaning from the Hiph.
הכין. One might almost assume that the Chokma-language makes כּן,
taliter, a substantive, and has begun to use it in the sense of qualitas
(like the post-bibl. איכוּת), so that it is to be explained: the quality
of righteousness tendeth to life. But must we lose ourselves in
conjectures or in modifications of the text (Hitzig, כּנּס, as a
banner), in order to gain a meaning from the word, which already has a
meaning? We say דּבּר כּן, to speak right ([Num
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#007)), and עשׂות כּן, to do right
([Ecc 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010)); in both cases כּן means
standing = consisting, stedfast, right, recte. The contrast is לא־כן,
[Kg2 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#009), which is also once used as a
substantive, [Isa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006) : the
unrighteousness of his words. So here כן is used as a substantive
connected in the genitive, but not so that it denotes the right holding,
retaining of righteousness, but its right quality - שׁל־צדקה אמתּה, as
Rashi explains it, i.e., as we understand it: genuineness, or genuine
showing of righteousness, which is not mere appearance without reality.
That כּנים denotes such people as seek to appear not otherwise than what
they truly are, is in favour of this interpretation. Such genuine
righteousness as follows the impulse of the heart, and out of the
fulness of the heart does good, has life as its result ([Pro
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#023)), an inwardly happy and
externally a prosperous life; on the other hand, he who wilfully pursues
evil, and finds in it satisfaction, brings death upon himself: he does
it to his death, or if we make (which is also possible) רדּף the
subject: it tends to his death. Thus in other words: Love is life;
hatred destroys life.

[Proverbs 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 11:20</span></span>

The following proverbs are especially directed, as connected with this
כן, against the contradiction of the external appearance and of the
masked internal nature.

20 An abomination to Jahve are the crookedly dishonest of heart,

And they who are of honest walk are his delight.

We read, [Pro 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#015); [Pro
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#008), עקּשׁ (the form of the
transgressions); but here, where the "crookedness" is transferred to the
heart, we require another word, which renders the idea of falseness, the
contrary of directness, lying in it, without any mixture of the
fundamental conception flexuosus or tortuosus. תּמימי דרך are not only
those whose walk is externally without offence and blameless, but, in
conformity with the contrast, those whose manner of conduct proceeds
from a disposition that is pure, free from deception and concealment.
Jerome, et voluntas ejus in iis qui qimpliciter ambulant. But the word
is not bit

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

mymy; they the upright are themselves His רצון ([Pro
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)) delight: He regards them, and
only them, with satisfaction.

[Proverbs 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 11:21</span></span>

21 Assuredly the hand to it the wicked remaineth not unpunished,

But the seed of the righteous is delivered.

The lxx render here, as [Pro 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005),
where the יד ליד repeats itself, χειρὶ χεῖρας ἐμβαλὼν ἀδίκως, which is
not to be understood, as Evagrius supposes, of one that can be bribed,
but only of a violent person; the Syr. and Targ. have the same
reference; but the subject is certainly רע, and a governing word, as
נשׂא ([Sa2 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#021)), is wanting, to say
nothing of the fact that the phrase "one hand against the other" would
require the words to be יד ביד. Jerome and the Graec. Venet., without
our being able, however, to see their meaning. The translation of the
other Greek versions is not given. The Jewish interpreters offer nothing
that is worthy, as e.g., Immanuel and Meri explain it by "immediately,"
which in the modern Hebr. would require מיּד, and besides is not here
suitable. The Midrash connects with 21a the earnest warning that he who
sins with the one hand and with the other does good, is nevertheless not
free from punishment. Schultens has an explanation to give to the words
which is worthy of examination: hand to hand, i.e., after the manner of
an inheritance per posteros ([Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)), resting his opinion on this,
that Arab. yad (cf. יד, [Isa 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005)) is
used among other significations in that of authorizing an inheritance.
Gesenius follows him, but only urging the idea of the sequence of time
(cf. Pers. dest bedest, hand to hand = continuing after one another),
and interprets יד ביד as Fleischer does: ab aetate in aetatem non (i.e.,
nullo unquam tempore futuro) erit impunis scelestus, sed posteri
justorum salvi erunt. According to Bttcher, "hand to hand" is equivalent
to from one hand to another, and this corresponds to the thought
expressed in Plutarch's de sera numinis vindicta: if not immediately,
yet at last. We may refer in vindication of this to the fact that, as
the Arab. lexicographers say, yad, used of the course of time, means the
extension (madd) of time, and then a period of time. But for the idea
expressed by nunquam, or neutiquam, or tandem aliquando, the language
supplied to the poet a multitude of forms, and we do not see why he
should have selected just this expression with its primary meaning
alternatim not properly agreeing with the connection. Therefore we
prefer with Ewald to regard יד ליד as a formula confirmation derived
from the common speech of the people: hand to hand (ל as in לידי, [Job
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003)), i.e., the hand for it I pledge
it, guarantee it (Bertheau, Hitzig, Elster, Zckler). But if 21a assures
by the pledge of the hand, and as it were lays a wager to it, that the
wicked shall not go unpunished, then the genitive in זרע צדּיקים is not
that of dependence by origin, but, as [Isa
65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023); [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004), the genitive of apposition, for
זרע here, as דּור, [Psa 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006); [Psa
112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002), denotes a oneness of like
origin and of like kind, but with a preponderance of the latter. נמלט is
the 3rd pret., which by the preceding fut. retains the reference to the
future: the merited punishment comes on the wicked, but the generation
of the righteous escapes the judgment. רּע has the ר dagheshed (Michlol
63d) according to the rule of the דחיק, according to which the consonant
first sounded after the word terminating in an accented a or is doubled,
which is here, as at [Pro 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001), done
with the ר.

[Proverbs 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 11:22</span></span>

22 A golden ring in a swine's snout -

A fair woman and without delicacy.

This is the first instance of an emblematical proverb in which the first
and second lines are related to each other as figure and its import,
vid., p. 9. The lxx translates rhythmically, but by its ὥσπερ ... οὕτως
it destroys the character of this picture-book proverbial form. The
nose-ring, נזם, generally attached to the right nostril and hanging down
over the mouth (vid., Lane's Manners, etc.) is a female ornament that
has been in use since the time of the patriarchs ([Gen
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#047)). If one supposes such a ring in
a swine's snout, then in such a thing he has the emblem of a wife in
whom beauty and the want of culture are placed together in direct
contrast. טעם is taste carried over into the intellectual region, the
capability of forming a judgment, [Job
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#020), and particularly the capability
of discovering that which is right and adapted to the end in view, [Sa1
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#033) (of Abigail), here in accordance
with the figure of a beast with which the ideas of uncleanness,
shamelessness, and rudeness are associated, a mind for the noble, the
fine, the fitting, that which in the higher and at the same time
intellectual and ethical sense we call tact (fine feeling); סרת
(alienata) denotes the want of this capacity, not without the
accompanying idea of self-guilt.

[Proverbs 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 11:23</span></span>

23 The desire of the righteous is nothing but good,

The expectation of the godless is presumption.

This is usually explained with Fleischer: If the righteous wish for
anything, their wish reaches to no other than a fortunate issue; but if
the godless hope for anything, then there is to them in the end as their
portion, not the good they hoped for, but wrath ([Pro
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#028), cf. [Pro
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004)). However, that עברה is at once
to be understood thus, as in יום עברה, and that the phrase is to be
rendered: the hope of the godless is God's wrath, is doubtful. But עברה
denotes also want of moderation, and particularly in the form of
presumption, [Pro 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#024), [Isa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006); and thus we gain the thought
that the desire of the righteous is directed only to that which is good,
and thus to an object that is attainable because well-pleasing to God,
while on the contrary the hope of the godless consists only in the
suggestions of their presumption, and thus is vain self-deceit. The
punctuation תאות צדיקים is contrary to rule; correct texts have תאות
צדיקים, for Dech stands before Athnach only if the Athnach-word has two
syllables (Torath Emeth, p. 43; Accentssystem, xviii. 4).

[Proverbs 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 11:24</span></span>

Three proverbs regarding giving which is not loss but gain.

24 There is one who giveth bounteously, and he increaseth still more;

And (there is) one who withholdeth what is due, only to his loss.

The first of the proverbs with ישׁ (there is), which are peculiar to the
first collection (vid., p. 32). The meaning is, that the possessions of
the liberal giver do not decrease but increase, and that, on the
contrary, the possessions of the niggardly do not increase but decrease.
מפזּר is not to be understood after [Psa
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009). Instead of ונוסף עוד the three
Erfurt codd. have ונוסף (with retrogression of the tone?), which Hitzig
approves of; but the traditional phrase which refers (et qui augetur
insuper) ונוסף not to the possession of him who scattereth, but to
himself, is finer in the expression. In the characteristic of the other,
מיּשׁר is commonly interpreted comparatively: plus aequo (Cocceius) or
justo (Schelling). But מן after חשׂך is to be regarded as governed by
it, and ישׁר denotes not competence, riches, as Arab. yusr (Bertheau,
Zckler), also not uprightness = beneficence (Midrash, מן הצדקה), but
duty, uprightness, as [Job 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#023),
where it denotes that which is advantageous to man, as here that which
befits him: he who holds back, namely himself, from that which is due to
himself, and thus should permit to himself, such an one profits nothing
at all by this ἀφειδία (17b, [Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)), but it tends only to loss to
him, only to the lessening of that which he possesses. We shall meet
with this (למחסּור) אך למחסור [Pro
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#023), and frequently again - it is a
common Mashal formula (cf. καὶ τόσῳ μᾶλλον ὑστερεῖται, Sir. 11:11). The
cause of the strange phenomenon that the liberal gains and the niggardly
loses is not here expressed, but the following proverb gives the
explanation of it:

[Proverbs 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 11:25</span></span>

25 A liberal soul \[soul of blessing\] is made fat,

And he that watereth others is also watered.

A synonymous distich (vid., p. 7). A soul of blessing is one from whom
blessings go out to others, who is even a blessing to all with whom he
comes into fellowship; בּרצה denotes also particularly the gifts of
love, [Sa1 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#027), בּרך denotes, if the
Arab. is right, which derives it from the fundamental idea "to spread
out:" to cause to increase and prosper by means of word and deed. The
blessing which goes out from such a soul comes back again to itself:
תדשּׁן (as [Pro 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#004); [Pro
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#025)), it is made fat, gains thereby
sap and strength in fulness; the Pual refers to the ordinance of God;
[Pro 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#009) is kindred in meaning to
this anima benefica pinguefiet. In 25b יורא is the Aramaic form of
writing, but without the Aramaic vocalization (cf. [Pro
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010). תּבא, [Isa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012) ויּתא). Perhaps the א makes it
noticeable that here a different word from יורה, morning rain, is used;
however, Symm. translates πρωΐνός, and the Graec. Venet. (Kimchi
following it) ὑετός. As a rule, we do not derive יורא from ירה, of which
it would be the Hophal (= יוּרה, as הודע, [Lev
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#023), = הוּדע) (Ewald, 131f.); for the
idea conspergitur, which the Ho. of the Hiph. יורה, [Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003), expresses, is, as correlate to
מרוה, as a parallel word to תדשּׁן, one not of equal force. Jerome was
guided by correct feeling, for he translates: et qui inebriat ipse
quoque inebriabitur. The stem-word is certainly רוה, whether it is with
Hitzig to be punctuated יוּרא = ירוה, or with Fleischer we are to regard
יורא as derived per metathesin from ירוה, as for Arab. ârây (to cause to
see) is used

(Note: Hitzig's comparison of rawaâ, finem respicere, as transposed from
waray is incorrect; the former verb, which signifies to consider, thus
appears to be original.)

the vulgar Arab. ârway (in the Syr. Arab.) and âwray (in the Egypt.
Arab.). We prefer the latter, for the passing of יורה (from ירוה) into
יורה is according to rule, vid., at [Pro
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#021).

[Proverbs 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 11:26</span></span>

26 Whoso withholdeth corn, him the people curse;

But blessing is on the head of him that selleth it.

This proverb is directed against the corn-usurer, whose covetousness and
deceitful conduct is described in [Amo
8:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004). But whilst it is there said
that they cannot wait till the burdensome interruption of their usurious
conduct on account of the sacred days come to an end, the figure here is
of a different aspect of their character: they hold back their stores of
corn in the times of scarcity, for they speculate on receiving yet
higher prices for it. בּר (from בּרר, to purify, to be pure) is thrashed
grain, cf. Arab. burr, wheat, and naḳḳy of the cleaning of the grain by
the separation from it of the tares, etc. (Fl.); the word has Kametz,
according to the Masora, as always in pause and in the history of
Joseph. מנע has Munach on the syllable preceding the last, on which the
tone is thrown back, and Metheg with the Tsere as the sign of a pause,
as [Pro 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010) בּצע (vid., p. 67).
משׁבּיר, qui annonam vendit, is denom. of שׁבר, properly that which is
crushed, therefore grain (Fl.). לאמּים, which we would understand in the
Proph. of nations, are here, as at [Pro
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#024), the individuals of the people.
The בּרצה which falls on the head of the charitable is the thanks of his
fellow-citizens, along with all good wishes.

[Proverbs 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 11:27</span></span>

That self-sacrificing endeavour after the good of others finds its
regard in the thought encircling the following proverbs.

27 He that striveth after good, seeketh that which is pleasing;

And he that searcheth after evil, it shall find him.

Here we have together three synonyms of seeking: בּקּשׁ (R. בק,
findere), which has the general meaning quaerere, from the root-idea of
penetrating and pressing forwards; דּרשׁ (R. דר .R( , terere), which
from the root-idea of trying (proving) corresponds to the Lat. studere;
and שׁחר (whence here שׁחר instead of משׁחר, as דּבר instead of מדבּר),
which means mane, and thus sedulo quaere (vid., at [Pro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028)). From 27b, where by רעה is meant
evil which one prepares for another, there arises for טוב the idea of
good thoughts and actions with reference to others. He who applies
himself to such, seeks therewith that which is pleasing, i.e., that
which pleases or does good to others. If that which is pleasing to God
were meant, then this would have been said (cf. [Pro
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#002)); the idea here is similar to
[Pro 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#032), and the word יבקּשׁ is
used, and not ימצא, because reference is not made to a fact in the moral
government of the world, but a description is given of one who is
zealously intent upon good, and thus of a noble man. Such an one always
asks himself (cf. [Mat 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)): what
will, in the given case, be well-pleasing to the neighbour, what will
tend to his true satisfaction? Regarding the punctuation here, שׁחר,
vid., at [Pro 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026). The subject to
תבואנּוּ, which, [Pro 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#024), stands as
the fundamental idea, here follows from the governed רעה, which may be
the gen. ([Psa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013)) as well as the
accus.

[Proverbs 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 11:28</span></span>

28 He that trusteth in his riches shall fall,

And the righteous shall flourish like the green leaf.

יפּול (plene after the Masora) as well as the figure וכעלה (cf. for the
punctuation וכעשׁן, [Pro 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#026)) are
singular, but are understood if one observes that in 28a a withered
tree, and in 28b a tree with leaves ever green, hovers before the
imagination of the poet (cf. [Psa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004);
[Jer 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008)). The proud rich man, who on
the ground of his riches appears to himself to be free from danger, goes
on to his ruin (יפול as [Pro 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#005), and
frequently in the Book of Proverbs), while on the contrary the righteous
continues to flourish like the leaf - they thus resemble the trees which
perennially continue to flourish anew. Regarding עלה as originally
collective (Symm. θάλλος), vid., at [Isa
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030), and regarding פּרח (R. פר, to
break), here of the continual breaking forth of fresh-growing leaf-buds,
vid., at [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). The apostolic word
names this continual growth the metamorphosis of believers, 2 Cor. 2:18.
The lxx has read וּמעלה (approved by Hitzig): and he who raiseth up the
righteous.

[Proverbs 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 11:29</span></span>

29 He that troubleth his own household shall inherit the wind,

And a fool becomes servant to the wise in heart.

Jerome well translates: qui conturbat domum suam, for עכר closely
corresponds to the Lat. turbare; but with what reference is the
troubling or disturbing here meant? The Syr. translates 29a doubly, and
refers it once to deceit, and the second time to the contrary of
avarice; the lxx, by ὁ μὴ συμπεριφερόμενος τῷ ἑαυτοῦ οἴκῳ, understands
one who acts towards his own not unsociably, or without affability, and
thus not tyrannically. But עכר שׁארו [Pro
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#017), is he who does not grudge to
his own body that which is necessary; עכר ישׂראל is applied to Elijah,
[Kg1 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017), on account of whose prayer
there was a want of rain; and at [Pro
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#027) it is the covetous who is spoken
of as עכר בּיתו. The proverb has, accordingly, in the man who "troubles
his own house" (Luth.), a niggard and sordid person (Hitzig) in view,
one who does not give to his own, particularly to his own servants, a
sufficiency of food and of necessary recreation. Far from raising
himself by his household arrangements, he shall only inherit wind (ינחל,
not as the Syr. translates, ינחיל, in the general signification to
inherit, to obtain, as [Pro 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#035); [Pro
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#010), etc.), i.e., he goes always
farther and farther back (for he deprives his servants of all pleasure
and love for their work in seeking the prosperity of his house), till in
the end the reality of his possession dissolves into nothing. Such
conduct is not only loveless, but also foolish; and a foolish person
(vid., regarding אויל at [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)) has
no influence as the master of a house, and generally is unable to
maintain his independence: "and the servant is a fool to him who is wise
of heart." Thus the lxx (cf. also the lxx of [Pro
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#005)), Syr., Targ., Jerome, Graec.
Venet., Luth. construe the sentence. The explanation, et servus stulti
cordato (sc. addicitur), i.e., even the domestics of the covetous fool
are at last partakers in the wise beneficence (Fl.), places 29b in an
unnecessary connection with 29a, omits the verb, which is here scarcely
superfluous, and is not demanded by the accentuation (cf. e.g., [Pro
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#022)).

[Proverbs 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 11:30</span></span>

30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life,

And the wise man winneth souls.

The lxx translate, ἐκ καρποῦ δικαιοσύνης φύεται δένδρον ζωῆς; Hitzig
takes thence the word צדק; but this translation discredits itself by the
unnatural reversal of the relation of fruit and tree. The fruit of the
righteous is here not the good which his conduct brings to him, as [Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010); [Jer
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019), but his activity itself
proceeding from an internal impulse. This fruit is a tree of life. We
need to supplement פּרי \[fruit\] as little here as ארח \[a traveller\]
at [Pro 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#017); for the meaning of the
proverb is, that the fruit of the righteous, i.e., his external
influence, itself is a tree of life, namely for others, since his words
and actions exert a quickening, refreshing, happy influence upon them.
By this means the wise (righteousness and wisdom come together according
to the saying of the Chokma, [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007))
becomes a winner of souls (לקח as [Pro
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#025), but taken in bonam partem), or,
as expressed in the N.T. ([Mat 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019)),
a fisher of men, for he gains them not only for himself, but also for
the service of wisdom and righteousness.

[Proverbs 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 11:31</span></span>

31 Lo, the righteous findeth on earth his reward;

How much more the godless and the sinner!

The particles אף כּי signify properly, interrogatively: Shall it yet be
said that...; it corresponds to the German "geschweige denn" \[nedum\]
(Fl.). הן is already in bibl. Hebr. in the way of becoming a conditional
particle; it opens, as here, the antecedent of a gradatio a minori ad
majus introduced by אף כי, [Job
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#015)., [Pro
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005)., cf. הן (הנה) with ואיך
following, [Gen 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#008); [Sa2
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#018). [Sa2
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#013) presents itself as the nearest
parallel to שׁלּם, where it means, to be rewarded. It is a vocabulum
anceps, and denotes full requital, i.e., according to the reference,
either righteous reward or righteous punishment. If 30a is understood of
reward, and 30b of punishment, then the force of the argument in the
conclusion consists in this, that the righteous can put forth no claim
to a recompense, because his well-doing is never so perfect as not to be
mingled with sin ([Ecc 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#020); [Psa
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002)); while, on the contrary, the
repression of the wicked, who, as רשׁע as to his intention, and חוטא as
to his conduct, actually denies his dependence on God, is demanded by
divine holiness. But the conclusion is not stringent, since in the
relation of God to the righteous His dispensation of grace and
faithfulness to promises also come into view, and thus in both cases
ישׁלּם appears to require the same interpretation: if the righteous does
not remain unrevenged, so much more shall not the godless and the sinner
remain..., or how much less shall the godless and the sinner remain so.
Thus the Graec. Venet., Θεῷ ὁ δίκαιος ἐν τῇ γῇ ἀποτιθήσεται; thus also
Luther, and among the moderns Lwenstein and Elster. Of the proverb so
understood the lxx version, εἰ ὁ μὲν δίκαιος μόλις (μόγις) σώζεται, ὁ
ἀσεβὴς καὶ ἁμαρτωλὸς ποῦ φανεῖται (cf. [Pe1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)) may be a free translation, for
in the ישׁלם there certainty lies, according to the sense, a כּמעט
יוּשׁע. Also ישׁלם has the principal tone, not בארץ. The thought: even
on this side (on earth), lies beyond the sphere of the O.T.
consciousness. The earth is here the world of man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 12](pro012)

</div>

</div>
