<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro022)  [Next](pro024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001)

[Proverbs 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 23:1</span></span>

[Pro 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#029), which speaks of a high
position near the king, is appropriately followed by a hexastich
referring to the slipperiness of the smooth ground of the king's court.

1 When thou sittest to eat with a ruler,

Consider well whom thou hast before thee.

2 And put thy knife to thy throat

If thou art a man of good appetite.

3 Be not lustful after his dainties,

Because it is deceitful food.

The ל of ללחום is that of end: ad cibum capiendum, thus as one invited
by him to his table; in prose the expression would be לאכל לחם; לחם, to
eat, is poet., [Pro 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017); [Pro
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#005). The fut. תּבין clothes the
admonition in the form of a wish or counsel; the infin. intens. בּין
makes it urgent: consider well him whom thou hast before thee, viz.,
that he is not thine equal, but one higher, who can destroy thee as well
as be useful to thee. With ושׂמתּ the jussive construction begun by תבין
is continued. Zckler and Dchsel, after Ewald and Hitzig, translate
incorrectly: thou puttest..., the perf. consec. after an imperf., or,
which is the same thing, a fut. meant optatively (e.g., [Lev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018) with לא, and also [Lev
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#034) without לא) continues the
exhortation; to be thus understood, the author ought to have used the
expression שׂכּין שׂמתּ and not ושׂמת שׂכין. Rightly Luther: "and put a
knife to thy throat," but continuing: "wilt thou preserve thy life,"
herein caught in the same mistake of the idea with Jerome, the Syr., and
Targ., to which נפשׁ here separates itself. שׂכּין (סכּין) (Arab. with
the assimilated a sikkı̂n, plur. sekâkı̂n, whence sekâkı̂ni, cutler)
designates a knife (R. סך שך, to stick, vid., at [Isa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010)). לוע, from לוּע, to devour, is
the throat; the word in Aram. signifies only the cheek, while Lagarde
seeks to interpret בּלעך infinitively in the sense of (Arab.) bwlw'ak,
if thou longest for (from wl'a); but that would make 2b a tautology. The
verb לוּע (cf. Arab. l'al', to pant for) shows for the substantive the
same primary meaning as glutus from glutire, which was then transferred
from the inner organ of swallowing (Kimchi, בית הבליעה, Parchon; הוּשׂט,
aesophagus) to the external. "Put a knife to thy throat, is a proverbial
expression, like our: the knife stands at his throat; the poet means to
say: restrain thy too eager desire by means of the strongest threatening
of danger - threaten as it were death to it" (Fleischer). In בּעל נפשׁ,
נפשׁ means, as at [Pro 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#002), desire,
and that desire of eating, as at [Pro
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030). Rightly Rashi: if thou art
greedy with hunger, if thou art a glutton; cf. Sir. 34:12 (31:12), "If
thou sittest at a great table, then open not widely thy throat
(φάρυγγα), and say not: There is certainly much on it!" The knife thus
denotes the restraining and moderating of too good an appetite.

In 3a the punctuation fluctuates between תתאו (Michlol 131a) and תתאו;
the latter is found in Cod. 1294, the Erfurt 2 and 3, the Cod. Jaman.,
and thus it is also to be written at [Pro
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#006) and [Pro
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#001); ויתאו, [Ch1
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#017) and [Psa
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012), Codd. and older Edd. (e.g.,
Complut. 1517, Ven. 1515, 1521) write with Pathach. מטעמּות, from טעם,
signifies savoury dishes, dainties, like (Arab.) dhwâkt, from dhâk (to
taste, to relish); cf. sapores, from sapere, in the proverb: the
tit-bits of the king burn the lips (vid., Fleischer, Ali's Hundred
Proverbs, etc., pp. 71, 104). With והוּא begins, as at [Pro
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#029), a conditioning clause: since it
is, indeed, the bread of deceit (the connection like עד־כּחבים, [Pro
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#028)), food which, as it were,
deceives him who eats it, i.e., appears to secure for him the lasting
favour of princes, and often enough herein deceives him; cf. the proverb
by Burckhardt and Meidani: whoever eats of the sultan's soup burns his
lips, even though it may be after a length of time (Fleischer). One must
come near to a king, says Calovius, hitting the meaning of the proverb,
as to a fire: not too near, lest he be burned; nor too remote, so that
he may be warmed therewith.

[Proverbs 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 23:4</span></span>

All the forms of proverbs run through these appended proverbs. There now
follows a pentastich:

4 Do not trouble thyself to become rich;

Cease from such thine own wisdom.

5 Wilt thou let thine eyes fly after it, and it is gone?

For it maketh itself, assuredly it maketh itself wings,

Like an eagle which fleeth toward the heavens.

The middle state, according to [Pro
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008), is the best: he who troubleth
himself (cf. [Pro 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#020), hasteth) to
become rich, placeth before himself a false, deceitful aim. יגע is
essentially one with (Arab.) waji'a, to experience sorrow, dolere, and
then signifies, like πονεῖν and κάμνειν, to become or to be wearied, to
weary or trouble oneself, to toil and moil (Fleischer). The בּינה (cf.
[Pro 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#005)) is just wisdom, prudence
directed towards becoming rich; for striving of itself alone does not
accomplish it, unless wisdom is connected with it, which is not very
particular in finding out means in their moral relations; but is so much
the more crafty, and, as we say, speculative. Rightly Aquila, the
Venet., Jerome, and Luther: take not pains to become rich. On the
contrary, the lxx reads אל תיגע להעשׁיר, stretch not thyself (if thou
art poor) after a rich man; and the Syr. and Targ. אל תּגּע להעשׁיר,
draw not near to the rich man; but, apart from the uncertainty of the
expression and the construction in both cases, poetry, and proverbial
poetry too, does not prefer the article; it never uses it without
emphasis, especially as here must be the case with it not elided. These
translators thought that 'בּו וגו, [Pro
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#005), presupposed a subject expressed
in [Pro 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#004); but the subject is not
העשׁיר, but the עשׁר \[riches\] contained in להעשׁיר. The
self-intelligible it in "it maketh wings," etc. is that about which
trouble has been taken, about which there has been speculation. That is
a deceitful possession; for what has been gained by many years of labour
and search, often passes away suddenly, is lost in a moment. To let the
eyes fly after anything, is equivalent to, to direct a (flying) look
toward it: wilt thou let thine eyes rove toward the same, and it is
gone? i.e., wilt thou expose thyself to the fate of seeing that which
was gained with trouble and craft torn suddenly away from thee?
Otherwise Luther, after Jerome: Let not thine eyes fly after that which
thou cast not have; but apart from the circumstance that בּו ואיננּוּ
cannot possibly be understood in the sense of ad opes quas non potes
habere (that would have required באשׁר איננו), in this sense after the
analogy of (ל) נשׂא נפשׁ אל, the end aimed at would have been denoted by
לו and not by בו. Better Immanuel, after Rashi: if thou doublest, i.e.,
shuttest (by means of the two eyelids) thine eyes upon it, it is gone,
i.e., has vanished during the night; but עוף, duplicare, is Aram. and
not Heb. Rather the explanation is with Chajg, after [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022).: if thou veilest (darkenest)
thine eyes, i.e., yieldest thyself over to carelessness; but the noun
עפעפּה shows that עוף, spoken of the eyes, is intended to signify to fly
(to rove, flutter). Hitzig too artificially (altering the expression to
להעשׁיר): if thou faintest, art weary with the eyes toward him (the rich
patron), he is gone - which cannot be adopted, because the form of a
question does not accord with it. Nor would it accord if ואיננו were
thought of as a conclusion: "dost thou let thy look fly toward it? It is
gone;" for what can this question imply? The ו of ואיננו shows that this
word is a component part of the question; it is a question lla nakar,
i.e., in rejection of the subject of the question: wilt thou cast thy
look upon it, and it is gone? i.e., wilt thou experience instant loss of
that which is gained by labour and acquired by artifice? On בו, cf. [Job
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#008). 'עיניך וגו, "thou directest thine
eyes to me: I am no more." We had in [Pro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#019) another mode of designating viz.
till I wink again an instant. The Chethı̂b 'התעוּף וגו is syntactically
correct (cf. [Pro 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#022); [Pro
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#030)), and might remain. The Kerı̂ is
mostly falsely accentuated התּעיף, doubly incorrectly; for (1) the tone
never retreats from a shut syllable terminating in , e.g., להכין, [Isa
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#020); בהכין, [Ch1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#004); אבין, [Job
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008); and (2) there is, moreover,
wanting here any legitimate occasion for the retrogression of the tone;
thus much rather the form התּעיף (with Mehuppach of the last, and
Zinnorith of the preceding open syllable) is to be adopted, as it is
given by Opitz, Jablonsky, Michaelis, and Reineccius.

The subject of 5b is, as of 5a, riches. That riches take wings and flee
away, is a more natural expression than that the rich patron flees away
- a quaint figure, appropriate however at [Nah
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#016), where the multitude of craftsmen
flee out of Nineveh like a swarm of locusts. עשׂה has frequently the
sense of acquirere, [Gen 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#005), with
לו, sibi acquirere, [Sa1 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001); [Kg1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#015); Hitzig compares Silius Ital.
xvi. 351: sed tum sibi fecerat alas. The inf. intensivus strengthens the
assertion: it will certainly thus happen.

In 5c all unnecessary discussion regarding the Chethı̂b ועיף is to be
avoided, for this Chethı̂b does not exist; the Masora here knows only of
a simple Chethı̂b and Kerı̂, viz., ועוּף (read יעוּף), not of a double one
(ועיּף), and the word is not among those which have in the middle a י,
which is to be read like ו. The manuscripts (e.g., also the Bragadin.
1615) have ועוּף, and the Kerı̂ יעוּף; it is one of the ten words
registered in the Masora, at the beginning of which a י is to be read
instead of the written ו. Most of the ancients translate with the
amalgamation of the Kerı̂ and the Chethı̂b: and he (the rich man, or
better: the riches) flees heavenwards (Syr., Aquila, Symmachus,
Theodotion, Jerome, and Luther). After the Kerı̂ the Venet. renders: ὡς
ἀετὸς πτήσεται τοῖς οὐρανοῖς (viz., ὁ πλοῦτος). Rightly the Targ.: like
an eagle which flies to heaven (according to which also it is
accentuated), only it is not to be translated "am Himmel" \[to heaven\],
but "gen Himmel" \[towards heaven\]: השּׁמים is the accusative of
direction - the eagle flies heavenward. Bochart, in the Hierozocon, has
collected many parallels to this comparison, among which is the figure
in Lucian's Timon, where Pluto, the god of wealth, comes to one limping
and with difficulty; but going away, outstrips in speed the flight of
all birds. The lxx translates ὥσπερ ἀετοῦ καὶ ὑποστρέφει εἰς τὸν οἶκον
τοῦ προεστηκότος αὐτοῦ. Hitzig accordingly reads שׁבו לבית משׂגּבּו, and
he (the rich patron) withdraws from thee to his own steep residence. But
ought not οἶκος τοῦ προεστηκότος αὐτοῦ to be heaven, as the residence of
Him who administers wealth, i.e., who gives and again takes it away
according to His free-will?

[Proverbs 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 23:6</span></span>

There now follows a proverb with unequally measured lines, perhaps a
heptastich:

6 Eat not the bread of the jealous,

And let not thyself lust after his dainties;

7 For as one who calculates with himself, so is he:

"Eat and drink," saith he to thee;

But his heart is not with thee.

8 Thy morsel which thou hast enjoyed wilt thou cast up,

And hast lost thy pleasant words.

As טוב עין, [Pro 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#009), benignus oculo,
denotes the pleasantness and joy of social friendship; so here (cf. [Deu
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#009); [Mat
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015)) רע עין, malignus oculo, the
envy and selfishness of egoism seeking to have and retain all for
itself. The lxx ἀνδρὶ βασκάνῳ, for the look of the evil eye, עין רע,
עינא בישׁא (cattivo occhio), refers to enchantment; cf. βασκαίνειν,
fascinare, to bewitch, to enchant, in modern Greek, to envy, Arab. 'an,
to eye, as it were, whence ma‛jûn, ma‛ı̂n, hit by the piercing look of
the envious eye, invidiae, as Apuleius says, letali plaga percussus
(Fleischer). Regarding תּתאו with Pathach, vid., the parallel line 3a.
7a is difficult. The lxx and Syr. read שׂער \[hair\]. The Targ. renders
תּרעא רמא, and thus reads שׁער \[fool\], and thus brings together the
soul of the envious person and a high portal, which promises much, but
conceals only deception behind (Ralbag). Joseph ha-Nakdan reads

(Note: In an appendix to Ochla We-Ochla, in the University Library at
Halle, he reads שׂער, but with פליגא \[doubtful\] added.)

שׂער with sn; and Rashi, retaining the schn, compares the "sour figs,"
[Jer 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#017). According to this, Luther
translates: like a ghost (a monster of lovelessness) is he inwardly;
for, as it appears in שׂער, the goat-like spectre שׂעיר hovered before
him. Schultens better, because more in conformity with the text:
quemadmodum suam ipsius animam abhorret (i.e., as he does nothing to the
benefit of his own appetite) sic ille (erga alios multo magis). The
thought is appropriate, but forced. Hitzig for once here follows Ewald;
he does not, however, translate: "like as if his soul were divided, so
is it;" but: "as one who is divided in his soul, so is he;" but the verb
שׁער, to divide, is inferred from שׁער, gate = division, and is as
foreign to the extra-bibl. usus loq. as it is to the bibl. The verb שׁער
signifies to weigh or consider, to value, to estimate. These meanings
Hitzig unites together: in similitudinem arioli et conjectoris aestimat
quod ignorat, perhaps meaning thereby that he conjecturally supposes
that as it is with him, so it is with others: he dissembles, and thinks
that others dissemble also. Thus also Jansen explains. The thought is
far-fetched, and does not cover itself by the text. The translation of
the Venet. also: ὡς γὰρ ἐμέτρησεν ἐν ψυχῇ οἱ οὕτως ἐστίν (perhaps: he
measures to others as penuriously as to himself), does not elucidate the
text, but obscures it. Most moderns (Bertheau, Zckler, Dchsel, etc.): as
he reckons in his soul, so is he (not as he seeks to appear for a moment
before thee). Thus also Fleischer: quemadmodum reputat apud se, ita est
(sc. non ut loquitur), with the remark that שׁער (whence שׁער, measure,
market value, Arab. si'r), to measure, to tax to as to determine the
price, to reckon; and then like חשׁב, in general, to think, and thus
also Meri with the neut. rendering of ita est. But why this
circumlocution in the expression? The poet ought in that case just to
have written כי לא למו דבּר בשׂפתיו כן הוא, for he is not as he speaks
with his mouth. If one read שׁער (Symmachus, εἰκάζων), then we have the
thought adapted to the portrait that is drawn; for like one calculating
by himself, so is he, i.e., he is like one who estimates with himself
the value of an object; for which we use the expression: he reckons the
value of every piece in thy mouth. However, with this understanding the
punctuation also of שׁער as finite may be retained and explained after
[Isa 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018) : for as if he reckoned in
his soul, so is he; but in this the perf. is inappropriate; by the
particip. one reaches the same end

(Note: We may write כּן הוּא: the Mehuppach (Jethb) sign of the
Olewejored standing between the two words represents also the place of
the Makkeph; vid., Thorath Emeth, p. 20.)

by a smoother way. True, he says to thee: eat and drink ([Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)), he invites thee with courtly
words; but his heart is not with thee (בּל, like [Pro
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023)): he only puts on the appearance
of joy if thou partakest abundantly, but there lurks behind the mask of
liberal hospitality the grudging niggardly calculator, who poisons thy
every bite, every draught, by his calculating, grudging look. Such a
feast cannot possibly do good to the guest: thy meal (פּת, from פּתת;
cf. κλᾶν τὸν ἄρτον, Aram. פּרס לחמא, to divide and distribute bread,
whence פּרנס, to receive aliment, is derived) which thou hast eaten thou
wilt spue out, i.e., wilt vomit from disgust that thou hast eaten such
food, so that that which has been partaken of does thee no good. פּתּך
is also derived from פּתּה:

(Note: Immanuel makes so much of having recognised the verb in this
פּתּך (and has he persuaded thee), that in the concluding part of his
Divan (entitled Machberoth Immanuel), which is an imitation of Dante's
Divina Commedia, he praises himself on this account in the paradise of
King Solomon, who is enraptured by this explanation, and swears that he
never meant that word otherwise.)

has he deceived thee (with his courtly words), but with this אכלתּ,
which, as the Makkeph rightly denotes, stands in an attributive relation
to פתך, does not agree. תקיאנּה is Hiph. of קוא, as transitive: to make
vomiting; in Arab. the fut. Kal of ka terminates in . The fair words
which the guest, as the perf. consec. expresses, has lavished, are the
words of praise and thanks in which he recognises the liberality of the
host appearing so hospitable. Regarding the penult. accenting of the
perf. consec. by Mugrasch, as [Pro
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#009), vid., under [Psa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001). Pinsker (Babyl.-Hebr.
Punktationssystem, p. 134) conjectures that the line 8b originally
formed the concluding line of the following proverb. But at the time of
the lxx (which erroneously expresses ושׁחת) it certainly stood as in our
text.

[Proverbs 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 23:9</span></span>

Another case in which good words are lost:

Speak not to the ears of a fool,

For he will despise the wisdom of thy words.

To speak in the ears of any one, does not mean to whisper to him, to so
to speak that it is distinctly perceived. כּסיל, as we have no often
explained, is the intellectually heavy and dull, like pinguis and
tardus; Arab. balyd, clumsy, intellectually immoveable (cf. bld, the
place where one places himself firmly down, which one makes his point of
gravity). The heart of such an one is covered over ([Psa
119:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#070)), as with grease, against all
impressions of better knowledge; he has for the knowledge which the
words spoken design to impart to him, no susceptibility, no mind, but
only contempt. The construction בּוּז ל has been frequently met with
from [Pro 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030).

[Proverbs 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 23:10</span></span>

The following proverb forms a new whole from component parts of [Pro
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#028) and [Pro
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#022).:

10 Remove not ancient landmarks;

And into the fields of orphans enter thou not.

11 For their Saviour is a mighty one;

He will conduct their cause against thee.

בּוא ב separates itself here to the meaning of injuste invadere et
occupare; French, empiter sur son voisin, advance not into the ground
belonging to thy neighbour (Fleischer). If orphans have also no goel
among their kindred (Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion, ἀγχιστεύς) to redeem
by purchase ([Lev 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025)) their
inheritance that has passed over into the possession of another, they
have another, and that a mighty Saviour, Redemptor, who will restore to
them that which they have lost - viz. God ([Jer
50:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#034)) - who will adopt their cause
against any one who has unjustly taken from them.

[Proverbs 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 23:12</span></span>

The following proverb warrants us to pause here, for it opens up, as a
compendious echo of [Pro 22:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#017), a
new series of proverbs of wisdom:

12 Apply thine heart to instruction,

And thine ear to the utterances of knowledge.

We may, according as we accent in למּוּסר the divine origin or the human
medium, translate, offer disciplinae (Schultens), or adhibe ad
disciplinam cor tuum (Fleischer). This general admonition is directed to
old and young, to those who are to be educated as well as to those who
are educated. First to the educator:

[Proverbs 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 23:13</span></span>

13 Withhold not correction from the child;

For thou will beat him with the rod, and he will not die.

14 Thou beatest him with the rod,

And with it deliverest his soul from hell.

The exhortation, 13a, presupposes that education by word and deed is a
duty devolving on the father and the teacher with regard to the child.
In 13b, כּי is in any case the relative conjunction. The conclusion does
not mean: so will he not fall under death (destruction), as Luther also
would have it, after [Deu 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#021), for
this thought certainly follows [Pro
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#014); nor after [Pro
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#018) : so may the stroke not be one
whereof he dies, for then the author ought to have written אל־תּמיתנּוּ;
but: he will not die of it, i.e., only strike if he has deserved it,
thou needest not fear; the bitter medicine will be beneficial to him,
not deadly. The אתּה standing before the double clause, [Pro
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#014), means that he who administers
corporal chastisement to the child, saves him spiritually; for שׁאול
does not refer to death in general, but to death falling upon a man
before his time, and in his sins, vid., [Pro
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#024), cf. [Pro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#026).

[Proverbs 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 23:15</span></span>

The following proverb passes from the educator to the pupil:

15 My son, if thine heart becometh wise,

My heart also in return will rejoice;

16 And my reins will exult

If thy lips speak right things.

Wisdom is inborn in no one. A true Arab. proverb says, "The wise knows
how the fool feels, for he himself was also once a fool;"

(Note: The second part of the saying is, "But a fool knows not how a
wise man feels, for he has never been a wise man." I heard this many
years ago, from the mouth of the American missionary Schaufler, in
Constantinople.)

and folly is bound up in the heart of a child, according to [Pro
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#015), which must be driven out by
severe discipline. 15b, as many others, cf. [Pro
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#019), shows that these "words of the
wise" are penetrated by the subjectivity of an author; the author means:
if thy heart becomes wise, so will mine in return, i.e., corresponding
to it (cf. גּם, [Gen 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006)), rejoice.
The thought of the heart in [Pro 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#015)
repeats itself in [Pro 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#016), with
reference to the utterance of the mouth. Regarding מישׁרים, vid., [Pro
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005). Regarding the "reins," כּליות
(perhaps from כּלה, to languish, [Job
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021)), with which the tender and
inmost affections are connected, vid., Psychologie, p. 268f.

[Proverbs 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 23:17</span></span>

The poet now shows how one attains unto wisdom - the beginning of wisdom
is the fear of God:

17 Let not thine heart strive after sinners,

But after the fear of Jahve all the day.

18 Truly there is a future,

And thy hope shall not come to naught.

The lxx, Jerome, the Venet., and Luther, and the Arab. interpreters,
render 17b as an independent clause: "but be daily in the fear of the
Lord." That is not a substantival clause (cf. [Pro
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#007)), nor can it be an interjectional
clause, but it may be an elliptical clause (Fleischer: from the
prohibitive אל־תקנא is to be taken for the second parallel member the v.
subst. lying at the foundation of all verbs); but why had the author
omitted היה dettim? Besides, one uses the expressions, to act (עשׂה),
and to walk (הלך) in the fear of God, but not the expression to be (היה)
in the fear of God. Thus בּיראת, like בחטּאים, is dependent on
אל־תּקנּא; and Jerome, who translates: Non aemuletur cor tuum
peccatores, sed in timore Domini esto tota die, ought to have continued:
sed timorem Domini tota die; for, as one may say in Latin: aemulari
virtutes, as well as aemulari aliquem, so also in Heb. קנּא ב, of the
envying of those persons whose fortune excites to dissatisfaction,
because one has not the same, and might yet have it, [Pro
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#031); [Pro
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#001), [Pro
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#019), as well as of emulation for a
thing in which one might not stand behind others: envy not sinners, envy
much rather the fear of God, i.e., let thyself be moved with eager
desire after it when its appearance is presented to thee. There is no
O.T. parallel for this, but the Syr. tan and the Greek ζηλοτυποῦν are
used in this double sense. Thus Hitzig rightly, and, among the moderns,
Malbim; with Aben Ezra, it is necessary to take ביראת for באישׁ יראת,
this proverb itself declares the fear of God to be of all things the
most worthy of being coveted.

In [Pro 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#018), Umbreit, Elster,
Zckler, and others interpret the כּי as assigning a reason, and the אם
as conditioning: for when the end (the hour of the righteous judgment)
has come; Bertheau better, because more suitable to the ישׁ and the
אחרית: when an end (an end adjusting the contradictions of the present
time) comes, as no doubt it will come, then thy hope will not be
destroyed; but, on the other hand, the succession of words in the
conclusion (vid., at [Pro 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034))
opposes this; also one does not see why the author does not say directly
כי ישׁ אחרית, but expresses himself thus conditionally.

(Note: The form כּי אם־ does not contradict the connection of the two
particles. This use of the Makkeph is general, except in these three
instances: [Gen 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#004); [Num
35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033); [Neh
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#002).)

If אם is meant hypothetically, then, with the lxx ἐὰν γὰρ τηρήσῃς αὐτὰ
ἔκγονα, we should supply after it תּשׁמרנּה, that had fallen out.
Ewald's: much rather there is yet a future (Dchsel: much rather be happy
there is...), is also impossible; for the preceding clause is positive,
not negative. The particles כּי אם, connected thus, mean: for if (e.g.,
[Lam 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#032)); or also relatively: that
if (e.g., [Jer 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#015)). After a
negative clause they have the meaning of "unless," which is acquired by
means of an ellipsis; e.g., [Isa
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010), it turns not back thither,
unless it has watered the earth (it returns back not before then, not
unless this is done). This "unless" is, however, used like the Lat.
nisi, also without the conditioning clause following, e.g., [Gen
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017), hic locus non est nisi domus
Dei. And hence the expression כי אם, after the negation going before,
acquires the meaning of "but," e.g., 17b: let not thy heart be covetous
after sinners, for thou canst always be zealous for the fear of God,
i.e., much rather for this, but for this. This pleonasm of אם sometimes
occurs where כי is not used confirmatively, but affirmatively: the
"certainly if" forms the transition, e.g., [Kg1
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#006) (vid., Keil's Comm. l.c.), whose
"if" is not seldom omitted, so that כי אם has only the meaning of an
affirmative "certainly," not "truly no," which it may also have, [Sa1
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#034), but "truly yes." Thus כי אם is
used [Jdg 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#007); [Sa2
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#021) (where אם is omitted by the
Kerı̂); [Kg2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020); [Jer
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014); and thus it is also meant here,
18a, notwithstanding that כי אם, in its more usual signification,
"besides only, but, nisi," precedes, as at [Sa1
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#006), cf. 5. The objection by Hitzig,
that with this explanation: "certainly there is a future," [Pro
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#018) and [Pro
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#017) are at variance, falls to the
ground, if one reflects on the Heb. idiom, in which the affirmative
signification of כי is interpenetrated by the confirmative. אחרית used
thus pregnantly, as here ([Pro 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#014)),
is the glorious final issue; the word in itself designates the end into
which human life issues (cf. [Psa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037).); here, the end crowning the
preceding course. Jeremiah ([Jer
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#011)) in this sense connects אחרית
ותקוה \[end and expectation\]. And what is here denied of the תּקיה, the
hope (not as certain Jewish interpreters dream, the thread of life) of
him who zealously strives after the fear of God, is affirmed, at [Psa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#038), of the godless: the latter have
no continuance, but the former have such as is the fulfilling of his
hope.

[Proverbs 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 23:19</span></span>

Among the virtues which flow from the fear of God, temperance is made
prominent, and the warning against excess is introduced by the general
exhortation to wisdom:

19 Hear thou, my son, and become wise,

And direct thy heart straight forward on the way.

20 And be not among wine-drinkers,

And among those who devour flesh;

21 For the drunkard and glutton become poor,

And sleepiness clotheth in rags.

The אתּה, connected with שׁמע, imports that the speaker has to do with
the hearer altogether by himself, and that the latter may make an
exception to the many who do not hear (cf. [Job
33:33](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#033); [Jer
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031)). Regarding אשּׁר, to make to go
straight out, vid., at [Pro 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014); the
Kal, [Pro 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#006), and also the Piel, [Pro
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014), mean to go straight on, and,
generally, to go. The way merely, is the one that is right in contrast
to the many byways. Fleischer: "the way sensu eximio, as the Oriental
mystics called the way to perfection merely (Arab.) âlaṭryḳ; and him who
walked therein, âlsâlak, the walker or wanderer."

(Note: Rashi reads בדרך לבך (walk), in the way of thy heart (which has
become wise), and so Heidenheim found it in an old MS; but בדרך is
equivalent to בדרך בינה, [Pro 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#006).)

אל־תּתי ב, as at [Pro 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#026), the
"Words of the Wise," are to be compared in point of style. The
degenerate and perverse son is more clearly described, [Deu
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#020), as זולל וסבא. These two
characteristics the poet distributes between 20a and 20b. סבא means to
drink (whence סבא, drink = wine, [Isa
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)) wine or other intoxicating
drinks; Arab. sabâ, vinum potandi causa emere. To the יין here added,
בּשׂר in the parallel member corresponds, which consequently is not the
fleshly body of the gluttons themselves, but the prepared flesh which
they consume at their luxurious banquets. The lxx incorrectly as to the
word, but not contrary to the sense, "be no wine-bibber, and stretch not
thyself after picknicks (συμβολαῖς), and buying in of flesh (κρεῶν τε
ἀγορασμοῖς)," whereby זללי is translated in the sense of the Aram. זבני
(Lagarde). זלל denotes, intransitively, to be little valued (whence
זולל, opp. יקר, [Jer 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019)),
transitively to value little, and as such to squander, to lavish
prodigally; thus: qui prodigi sunt carnis sibi; למו is dat. commodi.
Otherwise Gesenius, Fleischer, Umbreit, and Ewald: qui prodigi sunt
carnis suae, who destroy their own body; but the parallelism shows that
flesh is meant wherewith they feed themselves, not their own flesh
(בּשׂר למו, like חמת־למו, [Psa 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)),
which, i.e., its health, they squander. זולל also, in phrase used in
[Deu 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#020) (cf. with Hitzig the
formula φάγος καὶ οἰνοπότης, [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019)), denotes not the dissolute
person, as the sensualist, πορνοκόπος (lxx), but the συμβολοκόπος
(Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion), κρεωβόρος (Venet.), זלל בּסר (Onkelos),
i.e., flesh-eater, ravenous person, glutton, in which sense it is
rendered here, by the Syr. and Targ., by אסוט (אסיט), i.e., ἄσωτος.
Regarding the metaplastic fut. Niph. יוּרשׁ (lxx πτωχεύσει), vid., at
[Pro 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#013), cf. [Pro
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025). נוּמה (after the form of
בּוּשׁה, דּוּגה, צוּרה) is drowsiness, lethargy, long sleeping, which
necessarily follows a life of riot and revelry. Such a slothful person
comes to a bit of bread ([Pro 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#017));
and the disinclination and unfitness for work, resulting from night
revelry, brings it about that at last he must clothe himself in
miserable rags. The rags are called קרע and ῥάκος, from the rending
(tearing), Arab. ruk'at, from the patching, mending. Lagarde, more at
large, treats of this word here used for rags.

[Proverbs 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 23:22</span></span>

The parainesis begins anew, and the division is open to question. [Pro
23:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022) can of themselves be
independent distichs; but this is not the case with [Pro
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#025), which, in the resumption of the
address and in expression, leans back on [Pro
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022). The author of this appendix may
have met with [Pro 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#023) and [Pro
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#024) (although here also his style,
as conformed to that of [Pro 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#009), is
noticeable, cf. 23b with [Pro 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#002)),
but [Pro 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022) and [Pro
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#025) are the form which he has given
to them.

Thus [Pro 23:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022) are a whole: -

22 Hearken to thy father, to him who hath begotten thee,

And despise not thy mother when she has grown old.

23 Buy the truth, and sell it not,

Wisdom and discipline and understanding.

24 The father of a righteous man rejoiceth greatly;

(And) he that is the father of a wise man - he will rejoice.

25 Let thy father and thy mother be glad;

And her that bare thee exult.

The octastich begins with a call to childlike obedience, for שׁמע ל, to
listen to any one, is equivalent to, to obey him, e.g., [Psa
81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009), [Psa
81:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#014) (cf. "hearken to his voice,"
[Psa 95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007)). זה ילדך is a relative
clause (cf. [Deu 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018), without זה or
אשׁר), according to which it is rightly accentuated (cf. on the
contrary, [Psa 78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054)). 22b, strictly
taken, is not to be translated neve contemne cum senuerit matrem tuam
(Fleischer), but cum senuerit mater tua, for the logical object to
אל־תּבוּז is attracted as subj. of זקנה (Hitzig). There now follows the
exhortation comprehending all, and formed after [Pro
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007), to buy wisdom, i.e., to shun no
expense, no effort, no privation, in order to attain to the possession
of wisdom; and not to sell it, i.e., not to place it over against any
earthly possession, worldly gain, sensual enjoyment; not to let it be
taken away by any intimidation, argued away by false reasoning, or
prevailed against by enticements into the way of vice, and not to become
unfaithful to it by swimming with the great stream ([Exo
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002)); for truth, אמת, is that which
endures and proves itself in all spheres, the moral as well as the
intellectual. In 23b, in like manner as [Pro
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003); [Pro
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#004), a threefold object is given to
קנה instead of אמת: there are three properties which are peculiar to
truth, the three powers which handle it: חכמה is knowledge solid,
pressing into the essence of things; מוּסר is moral culture; and בּינה
the central faculty of proving and distinguishing (vid., [Pro
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003)). Now [Pro
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#024) says what consequences are for
the parents when the son, according to the exhortation of [Pro
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#023), makes truth his aim, to which
all is subordinated. Because in אמת the ideas of practical and
theoretical truth are inter-connected. צדּיק and חכם are also here
parallel to one another. The Chethı̂b of 24a is גּול יגוּל, which
Schultens finds tenable in view of (Arab.) jal, fut jajûlu (to turn
round; Heb. to turn oneself for joy) but the Heb. usus loq. knows
elsewhere only גּיל יגיל, as the Kerı̂ corrects. The lxx, misled by the
Chethı̂b, translates καλῶς ἐκτρέφει (incorrect ἐκτρυφήσει), i.e., גּדּל
יגדּל. In 24b, וישׂמח is of the nature of a pred. of the conclusion (cf.
[Gen 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#024); [Psa
115:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#007)), as if the sentence were: has
one begotten a wise man, then (cf. [Pro
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#021)) he has joy of him; but the Kerı̂
effaces this Vav apodosis, and assigns it to יולד as Vav copul. - an
unnecessary mingling of the syntactically possible, more emphatic
expression. This proverbial whole now rounds itself off in [Pro
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#025) by a reference to [Pro
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022) - the Optative here
corresponding to the Impr. and Prohib. there: let thy father and thy
mother rejoice (lxx εὐφρανέσθω), and let her that bare thee exult (here
where it is possible the Optat. form ותגל).

[Proverbs 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 23:26</span></span>

This hexastich warns against unchastity. What, in chap. 1-9, extended
discourses and representations exhibited to the youth is here repeated
in miniature pictures. It is the teacher of wisdom, but by him Wisdom
herself, who speaks:

26 Give me, my son, thine heart;

And let thine eyes delight in my ways.

27 For the harlot is a deep ditch,

And the strange woman a narrow pit.

28 Yea, she lieth in wait like a robber,

And multiplieth the faithless among men

We have retained Luther's beautiful rendering of [Pro
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#026),

(Note: The right punctuation of 26a is תּנה־בני לבּך, as it is found in
the editions: Ven. 1615; Basel 1619; and in those of Norzi and
Michaelis.)

in which this proverb, as a warning word of heavenly wisdom and of
divine love, has become dear to us. It follows, as Symmachus and the
Venet., the Chethı̂b תּרצנה (for תרצינה, like [Exo
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016); [Job
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012)), the stylistic appropriateness
of which proceeds from [Pro 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007), as
on the other hand the Kerı̂ תּצּרנה (cf. [Sa1
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#027)) is supported by [Pro
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#012), cf. [Pro
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#002). But the correction is
unnecessary, and the Chethı̂b sounds more affectionate, hence it is with
right defended by Hitzig. The ways of wisdom are ways of correction, and
particularly of chastity, thus placed over against "the ways of the
harlot," [Pro 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#024). Accordingly the
exhortation, [Pro 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#026), verifies
itself; warning, by [Pro 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#027), cf.
[Pro 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#014), where עמקּה was written,
here as at [Job 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#022), with the long
vowel עמוּקה (עמקה). בּאר צרה interchanges with שׁוּחה עמוקה, and means,
not the fountain of sorrow (Lwenstein), but the narrow pit. בּאר is fem.
gen., [Pro 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#021)., and צר means
narrow, like troit (old French, estreit), from strictus. The figure has,
after [Pro 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#014), the mouth of the
harlot in view. Whoever is enticed by her syren voice falls into a deep
ditch, into a pit with a narrow mouth, into which one can more easily
enter than escape from. [Pro 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#028)
says that it is the artifice of the harlot which draws a man into such
depth of wickedness and guilt. With אף, which, as at [Jdg
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#029), belongs not to היא but to the
whole sentence, the picture of terror is completed. The verb חתף (whence
Arab. ḥataf, death, natural death) means to snatch away. If we take חתף
as abstr.: a snatching away, then it would here stand elliptically for
חתף (בּעל) אישׁ, which in itself is improbable (vid., [Pro
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022), עכס) and also unnecessary,
since, as מלך, עבד, הלך, etc. show, such abstracta can pass immediately
into concreta, so that חתף thus means the person who snatches away,
i.e., the street robber, latro (cf. חטף .fc(, Arab. khaṭaf, [Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009), rightly explained by Kimchi as
cogn.). In 28b, תוסיף cannot mean abripit (as lxx, Theodotion, and
Jerome suppose), for which the word תּספּה (תּאסף) would have been used.

(Note: The Targ. translates 28b (here free from the influence of the
Peshito) in the Syro-Palestinian idiom by וצאד אבניּא שׁברי, i.e., she
seizes thoughtless sons.)

But this verbal idea does not harmonize with the connection; תוסיף
means, as always, addit (auget), and that here in the sense of
multiplicat. The same thing may be said of בּוגדים as is said ([Pro
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#015)) of תּוקעים. Hitzig's objection,
"הוסיף, to multiply, with the accusative of the person, is not at all
used," is set aside by [Pro 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#004). But
we may translate: the faithless, or: the breach of faith she increases.
Yet it always remains a question whether בּאדם is dependent on בוגדים,
as [Ecc 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#009), cf. [Sa2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003), on the verb of ruling (Hitzig),
or whether, as frequently בּאדם, e.g., [Psa
78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060), it means inter homines (thus
most interpreters). Uncleanness leads to faithlessness of manifold
kinds: it makes not only the husband unfaithful to his wife, but also
the son to his parents, the scholar to his teacher and pastor, the
servant (cf. the case of Potiphar's wife) to his master. The adulteress,
inasmuch as she entices now one and now another into her net, increases
the number of those who are faithless towards men. But are they not,
above all, faithless towards God? We are of opinion that not בוגדים, but
תוסיף, has its complement in באדם, and needs it: the adulteress
increases the faithless among men, she makes faithlessness of manifold
kinds common in human society. According to this, also, it is
accentuated; ובוגדים is placed as object by Mugrasch, and באדם is
connected by Mercha with תוסיף.

[Proverbs 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 23:29</span></span>

The author passes from the sin of uncleanness to that of drunkenness;
they are nearly related, for drunkenness excites fleshly lust; and to
wallow with delight in the mire of sensuality, a man, created in the
image of God, must first brutalize himself by intoxication. The Mashal
in the number of its lines passes beyond the limits of the distich, and
becomes a Mashal ode.

29 Whose is woe? Whose is grief?

Whose are contentions, whose trouble, whose wounds without cause?

Whose dimness of eyes?

30 Theirs, who sit late at the wine,

Who turn in to taste mixed wine.

31 Look not on the wine as it sparkleth red,

As it showeth its gleam in the cup,

Glideth down with ease.

32 The end of it is that it biteth like a serpent,

And stingeth like a basilisk.

33 Thine eyes shall see strange things,

And thine heart shall speak perverse things;

34 And thou art as one lying in the heart of the sea,

And as one lying on the top of a mast.

35 "They have scourged me-it pained me not;

They have beaten me - I perceived it not.

When shall I have wakened from sleep?

Thus on I go, I return to it again."

The repeated למי

(Note: We punctuate למי אוי, for that is Ben Asher's punctuation, while
that of his opponent Ben Naphtali is למי־אוי. Vid., Thorath Emeth, p.
33.)

asks who then has to experience all that; the answer follows in [Pro
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#030). With אוי, the אבוי occurring
only here accords; it is not a substantive from אבה (whence אבון) after
the form of צחק, in the sense of egestas; but, like the former \[אוי\],
an interjection of sorrow (Venet. τίνι αἲ, τίνι φεῦ). Regarding מדינים
(Chethı̂b מדונים), vid., at [Pro 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014).
שׂיח signifies (vid., at [Pro 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#022))
meditation and speech, here sorrowful thought and sorrowful complaint
([Sa1 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#016); [Psa
55:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#018); cf. הגה, הגיג), e.g., over the
exhausted purse, the neglected work, the anticipated reproaches, the
diminishing strength. In the connection פּצעים חנּם (cf. [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019)) the accus. adv. חנם (French
gratuitement) represents the place of an adjective: strokes which one
receives without being in the situation from necessity, or duty to
expect them, strokes for nothing and in return for nothing (Fleischer),
wounds for a long while (Oetinger). חכללוּת עינים is the darkening
(clouding) of the eyes, from חצל, to be dim, closed, and transferred to
the sensation of light: to be dark (vid., at [Gen
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#012); [Psa
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008)); the copper-nose of the drunkard
is not under consideration; the word does not refer to the reddening,
but the dimming of the eyes, and of the power of vision. The answer,
[Pro 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#030), begins, in conformity with
the form of the question, with ל (write למאחרים, with Gaja to ל,
according to Metheg-Setzung, 20, Michlol 46b): pain, and woe, and
contention they have who tarry late at the wine (cf. [Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011)), who enter (viz., into the
wine-house, [Ecc 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#004), the house of
revelry) "to search" mingled drink (vid., at [Pro
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#002); [Isa
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022)). Hitzig: "they test the mixing,
as to the relation of the wine to the water, whether it is correct." But
לחקור is like גּבּרים, [Isa 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022),
meant in mockery: they are heroes, viz., heroes in drinking; they are
searchers, such, namely, as seek to examine into the mixed wine, or
also: thoroughly and carefully taste it (Fleischer).

The evil consequences of drunkenness are now registered. That one may
not fall under this common sin, the poet, [Pro
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#031), warns against the attraction
which the wine presents to the sight and to the sense of taste: one must
not permit himself to be caught as a prisoner by this enticement, but
must maintain his freedom against it. התאדּם, to make, i.e., to show
oneself red, is almost equivalent to האדים; and more than this, it
presents the wine as itself co-operating and active by its red play of
colours (Fleischer). Regarding the antiptosis (antiphonesis): Look not
on the wine that is..., vid., at [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003); yet here, where ראה means not
merely "to see," but "to look at," the case is somewhat different. In
31b, one for the most part assumes that עינו signifies the eye of the
wine, i.e., the pearls which play on the surface of the wine
(Fleischer). And, indeed, Hitzig's translation, after [Num
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#007) : when it presents its appearance
in the cup, does not commend itself, because it expresses too little. On
the other hand, it is saying too much when Bttcher maintains that עין
never denotes the mere appearance, but always the shining aspect of the
object. But used of wine, עין appears to denote not merely aspect as
such, but its gleam, glance; not its pearls, for which עיני would be the
word used, but shining glance, by which particularly the bright glance,
as out of deep darkness, of the Syro-Palestinian wine is thought of,
which is for the most part prepared from red (blue) grapes, and because
very rich in sugar, is thick almost like syrup. Jerome translates עינו
well: (cum splenduerit in vitro) color ejus. But one need not think of a
glass; Bttcher has rightly said that one might perceive the glittering
appearance also in a metal or earthen vessel if one looked into it. The
Chethı̂b בכיס is an error of transcription; the Midrash makes the remark
on this, that בּכּיס fits the wine merchant, and בּכּוס the wine
drinker. From the pleasure of the eye, 31c passes over to the pleasures
of the taste: (that, or, as it) goeth down smoothly (Luther); the
expression is like [Ecc 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#010). Instead
of הלך (like jâry, of fluidity) there stands here התהלך, commonly used
of pleasant going; and instead of למישׁרים with ל, the norm בּמישׁרים
with ב of the manner; directness is here easiness, facility (Arab.
jusr); it goes as on a straight, even way unhindered and easily down the
throat.

(Note: The English version is, "when it moveth itself aright," which one
has perceived in the phenomenon of the tears of the wine, or of the
movement in the glass. Vid., Ausland, 1869, p. 72.)

[Pro 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#032) shows how it issues with
the wine, viz., with those who immoderately enjoy it. Is אחריתו \[its
end\] here the subject, as at [Pro
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#004)? We must in that case interpret
ישּׁך and יפרשׁ as attributives, as the Syr. and Targ. translate the
latter, and Ewald both. The issue which it brings with it is like the
serpent which bites, etc., and there is nothing syntactically opposed to
this (cf. e.g., [Psa 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012)); the
future, in contradistinction to the participle, would not express
properties, but intimations of facts. But the end of the wine is not
like a serpent, but like the bite of a serpent. The wine itself, and
independent of its consequences, is in and of itself like a serpent. In
accordance with the matter, אחריתו may be interpreted, with Hitzig
(after Jerome, in novissimo), as acc. adverb. = באחריתו, [Jer
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011). But why did not the author more
distinctly write this word 'בא? The syntactic relation is like [Pro
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#021) : אחריתו is after the manner of
a substantival clause, the subject to that which follows as its virtual
predicate: "its end is: like a serpent it biteth = this, that it biteth
like a serpent." Regarding צפעני, serpens regulus (after Schultens, from
צפע = (Arab.) saf', to breathe out glowing, scorching), vid., at [Isa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008). The Hiph. הפרישׁ Schultens here
understands of the division of the liver, and Hitzig, after the lxx,
Vulgate, and Venet., of squirting the poison; both after the Arab.
farth. But הפרישׁ, Syr. afrês, also signifies, from the root-idea of
dividing and splitting, to sting, poindre, pointer, as Rashi and Kimchi
gloss, whence the Aram. פּרשׁ, an ox-goad, with which the ancients
connect פרשׁ (of the spur), the name for a rider, eques, and also a
horse (cf. on the contrary, Fleischer in Levy, W.B. ii. 574); a
serpent's bite and a serpent's sting (Lat. morsus, ictus, Varro: cum
pepugerit colubra) are connected together by the ancients.

(Note: However, we will not conceal it, that the post-bibl. Heb. does
not know הפרישׁ in the sense of to prick, sting (the Midrash explains
the passage by יפרישׁ בין לחיים, i.e., it cuts off life); and the
Nestorian Knanishu of Superghan, whom I asked regarding aphrish, knew
only of the meanings "to separate" and "to point out," but not "to
sting.")

The excited condition of the drunkard is now described. First, [Pro
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#033) describes the activity of his
imagination as excited to madness. It is untenable to interpret זרות
here with Rashi, Aben Ezra, and others, and to translate with Luther:
"so shall thine eyes look after other women" (circumspicient mulieres
impudicas, Fleischer, for the meaning to perceive, to look about for
something, to seek something with the eyes, referring to [Gen
41:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#033)). For זרות acquires the meaning
of mulieres impudicae only from its surrounding, but here the parallel
תּהפּכות (perverse things) directs to the neut. aliena (cf. [Pro
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028), רעות), but not merely in the
sense of unreal things (Ralbag, Meri), but: strange, i.e., abnormal,
thus bizarre, mad, dreadful things. An old Heb. parable compares the
changing circumstances which wine produces with the manner of the lamb,
the lion, the swine, the monkey; here juggles and phantoms of the
imagination are meant, which in the view and fancy of the drunken man
hunt one another like monkey capers. Moreover, the state of the drunken
man is one that is separated from the reality of a life of sobriety and
the safety of a life of moderation, 34a: thou act like one who lies in
the heart of the sea. Thus to lie in the heart, i.e., the midst, of the
sea as a ship goes therein, [Pro
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#019), is impossible; there one must
swim but swimming is not lying, and to thing on a situation like that of
Jonah; [Jon 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#005), one must think also
of the ship; but שׁכב does not necessarily mean "to sleep," and,
besides, the sleep of a passenger in the cabin on the high sea is of
itself no dangerous matter. Rightly Hitzig: on the depth of the sea (cf.
[Jon 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004)) - the drunken man, or the
man overcome by wine ([Isa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007)), is
like one who has sunk down into the midst of the sea; and thus drowned,
or in danger of being drowned, he is in a condition of intellectual
confusion, which finally passes over into perfect unconsciousness, cut
off from the true life which passes over him like one dead, and in this
condition he has made a bed for himself, as שׁכב denotes. With בלב,
בּראשׁ stands in complete contrast: he is like one who lies on the top
of the mast. חבּל, after the forms דּבּר, שׁלּם, is the sail-yard
fastened by ropes, חבלים ,sepo ([Isa
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#023)). To lay oneself down on the
sail-yard happens thus to no one, and it is no place for such a purpose;
but as little as one can quarter him who is on the ridge of the roof, in
the 'Alja, because no one is able to lie down there, so little can he in
the bower \[Mastkorb\] him who is here spoken of (Bttcher). The poet
says, but only by way of comparison, how critical the situation of the
drunkard is; he compares him to one who lies on the highest sail-yard,
and is exposed to the danger of being every moment thrown into the sea;
for the rocking of the ship is the greater in proportion to the height
of the sail-yard. The drunkard is, indeed, thus often exposed to the
peril of his life; for an accident of itself not great, or a stroke, may
suddenly put an end to his life.

The poet represents the drunken man as now speaking to himself. He has
been well cudgelled; but because insensible, he has not felt it, and he
places himself now where he will sleep out his intoxication. Far from
being made temperate by the strokes inflicted on him, he rejoices in the
prospect, when he has awaked out of his sleep, of beginning again the
life of drunkenness and revelry which has become a pleasant custom to
him. חלה means not only to be sick, but generally to be, or to become,
affected painfully; cf. [Jer 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003),
where חלוּ is not the 3rd pl. mas. of חיל, but of חלה. The words מתי
אקיץ are, it is true, a cry of longing of a different kind from [Job
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004). The sleeping man cannot forbear
from yielding to the constraint of nature: he is no longer master of
himself, he becomes giddy, everything goes round about with him, but he
thinks with himself: Oh that I were again awake! and so little has his
appetite been appeased by his sufferings, that when he is again
awakened, he will begin where he left off yesterday, when he could drink
no more. מתי is here, after Nolde, Fleischer, and Hitzig, the relative
quando (quum); but the bibl. usus loq. gives no authority for this. In
that case we would have expected הקיצותי instead of אקיץ. As the
interrog. מתי is more animated than the relat., so also אוסיף אבקשׁנּוּ
is more animated ([Sa1 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#003)) than אוסיף
לבקּשׁ. The suffix of אבקשׁנו refers to the wine: raised up, he will
seek that which has become so dear and so necessary to him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 24](pro024)

</div>
