<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro017)  [Next](pro019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001)

[Proverbs 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 18:1</span></span>

This series of proverbs now turns from the fool to the separatist:

The separatist seeketh after his own pleasure;

Against all that is beneficial he showeth his teeth.

The reflexive נפרד has here the same meaning as the Rabbinical פּרשׁ
מן־הצּבּוּר, to separate oneself from the congregation, Aboth ii. 5;
נפרד denotes a man who separates himself, for he follows his own
counsel, Arab. mnfrd (mtfrrd) brâyh, or jḥys almḥḥl (seorsum ab aliis
secedens). Instead of לתּאוה, Hitzig, after Jerome, adopts the
emendation לתאנה, "after an occasion" (a pretext), and by נפרד thinks of
one pushed aside, who, thrown into opposition, seeks to avenge himself.
But his translation of 1b, "against all that is fortunate he gnasheth
his teeth," shows how much the proverb is opposed to this
interpretation. נפרד denotes one who willingly ([Jdg
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#011)), and, indeed, obstinately
withdraws himself. The construction of יבקּשׁ with ל (also [Job
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#006)) is explained by this, that the
poet, giving prominence to the object, would set it forward: a pleasure
(תאוה, as Arab. hawan, unstable and causeless direction of the mind to
something, pleasure, freak, caprice), and nothing else, he goes after
who has separated himself (Fl.); the effort of the separatist goes out
after a pleasure, i.e., the enjoyment and realization of such; instead
of seeking to conform himself to the law and ordinance of the community,
he seeks to carry out a separate view, and to accomplish some darling
plan: libidinem sectatur sui cerebri homo. With this 1b accords.
תּוּשׁיּה (vid., at [Pro 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007)) is
concretely that which furthers and profits. Regarding התגּלּע, vid., at
[Pro 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#014). Thus putting his
subjectivity in the room of the common weal, he shows his teeth, places
himself in fanatical opposition against all that is useful and
profitable in the principles and aims, the praxis of the community from
which he separates himself. The figure is true to nature: the polemic of
the schismatic and the sectary against the existing state of things, is
for the most part measureless and hostile.

[Proverbs 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 18:2</span></span>

2 The fool hath no delight in understanding;

But only that his heart may reveal itself therein.

The verb חפץ forms the fut. יחפּץ as well as יחפּץ; first the latter
from חפץ, with the primary meaning, to bow, to bend down; then both
forms as intransitive, to bend oneself to something, to be inclined to
something, Arab. 'ṭf. (Fl.). תּבוּנה is here the intelligence which
consists in the understanding of one's own deficiency, and of that which
is necessary to meet it. The inclination of the fool goes not out after
such intelligence, but (כּי אם־; according to Ben-Naphtali, כי־אם) only
that his heart, i.e., the understanding which he thinks that he already
possesses, may reveal itself, show itself publicly. He thinks thereby to
show himself in his true greatness, and to render a weighty service to
the world. This loquacity of the fool, proceeding from
self-satisfaction, without self-knowledge, has already, [Pro
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#023), and often, been reprimanded.

[Proverbs 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 18:3</span></span>

The group beginning with [Pro 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)
terminates in two proverbs ([Pro 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#006)
and [Pro 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#007)), related to the
concluding verse of the foregoing:

3 If a godless man cometh, then cometh also contempt;

And together with disgrace, shame.

J. D. Michaelis, and the most of modern critics, read רשׁע; then,
contempt etc., are to be thought of as the consequences that follow
godlessness; for that קלון means (Hitzig) disgracefulness, i.e.,
disgraceful conduct, is destitute of proof; קלון always means disgrace
as an experience. But not only does the Masoretic text punctuate רשׁע,
but also all the old translators, the Greek, Aramaic, and Latin, have
done so. And is it on this account, because a coming naturally seems to
be spoken of a person? The "pride cometh, then cometh shame," [Pro
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#002), was in their recollection not
less firmly, perhaps, than in ours. They read רשׁע, because בוּז does
not fittingly designate the first of that which godlessness effects, but
perhaps the first of that which proceeds from it. Therefore we adhere to
the opinion, that the proverb names the fiends which appear in the
company of the godless wherever he goes, viz., first בוז, contempt ([Psa
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)), which places itself haughtily
above all due subordination, and reverence, and forbearance; and then,
with the disgrace \[turpitudo\], קלון, which attaches itself to those
who meddle with him ([Isa 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#018)),
there is united the shame, הרפּה ([Psa
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)), which he has to suffer from him
who has only always expected something better from him. Fleischer
understands all the three words in the passive sense, and remarks,
"עם־קלון חרפה, a more artificial expression for קלון וחרפה, in the
Turkish quite common for the copula wāw, e.g., swylh ṭbrâk, earth and
water, 'wrtylh âr, the man and the woman." But then the expression would
be tautological; we understand בוז and חרפה of that which the godless
does to others by his words, and קלון of that which he does to them by
his conduct. By this interpretation, עם is more than the representative
of the copula.

[Proverbs 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 18:4</span></span>

4 Deep waters are the words from a man's mouth,

A bubbling brook, a fountain of wisdom.

Earlier, we added to hominis the supplement sc. sapientis, but then an
unnecessary word would be used, and that which is necessary omitted.
Rather it might be said that אישׁ is meant in an ideal sense; but thus
meant, אישׁ, like גּבר, denotes the valiant man, but not man as he ought
to be, or the man of honour; and besides, a man may be a man of honour
without there being said of him what this proverb expresses. Ewald comes
nearer the case when he translates, "deep waters are the heart-words of
many." Heart-words - what an unbiblical expression! The lxx, which
translates λόγος ἐν καρδίᾳ, has not read דברי לב, but דבר בלב (as [Pro
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#005), עצה בלב־). But that "of many" is
certainly not a right translation, yet right in so far as אישׁ (as at
[Pro 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#014)) is thought of as made
prominent: the proverb expresses, in accordance with the form of
narrative proverbs which present an example, what occurs in actual life,
and is observed. Three different things are said of the words from a
man's mouth: they are deep waters, for their meaning does not lie on the
surface, but can be perceived only by penetrating into the secret
motives and aims of him who speaks; they are a bubbling brook, which
freshly and powerfully gushes forth to him who feels this flow of words,
for in this brook there never fails an always new gush of living water;
it is a fountain or well of wisdom, from which wisdom flows forth, and
whence wisdom is to be drawn. Hitzig supposes that the distich is
antithetic; מים עמקּים, or rather מי מעמקּים, "waters of the deep," are
cistern waters; on the contrary, "a welling brook is a fountain of
wisdom." But עמק means deep, not deepened, and deep water is the
contrast of shallow water; a cistern also may be deep (cf. [Pro
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#014)), but deep water is such as is
deep, whether it be in the ocean or in a ditch. 4b also does not suggest
a cistern, for thereby it would be indicated that the description, דברי
פי־אישׁ, is not here continued; the "fountain of wisdom" does not form a
proper parallel or an antithesis to this subject, since this much rather
would require the placing in contrast of deep and shallow, of exhausted
(drained out) and perennial. And: the fountain is a brook, the well a
stream - who would thus express himself! We have thus neither an
antithetic nor a synonymous (lxx after the phrase ἀναπηδῶν, Jerome,
Venet., Luth.), but an integral distich before us; and this leads us to
consider what depths of thought, what riches of contents, what power of
spiritual and moral advancement, may lie in the words of a man.

[Proverbs 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 18:5</span></span>

5 To favour the person of the godless is not good,

And to oppress the righteous in judgment.

As [Pro 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004) has one subject, so [Pro
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#005) has one predicate. The form is
the same as [Pro 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#026). שׂאת פּני (cf.
[Pro 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023)), προσωποληψία, acceptio
personae, is this, that one accepts the פני, i.e. the personal
appearance of any one (πρόσωπον λαμβάνει), i.e., regards it as
acceptable, respectable, agreeable, which is a thing in itself not
wrong; but in a judge who ought to determine according to the facts of
the case and the law, it becomes sinful partiality. הטּות, in a forensic
sense, with the accus. of the person, may be regarded in a twofold way:
either as a turning aside, מדּין, [Isa
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#002), from following and attaining
unto the right, or as an oppression, for the phrase הטּה משׁפּט \[to
pervert justice\] (cf. [Pro 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#023)) is
transferred to the person who experiences the oppression = perversion of
the law; and this idea perhaps always underlies the expression,
wherever, as e.g., [Mal 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005), no
addition brings with it the other. Under [Pro
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#015) is a fuller explanation of
לא־טוב.

[Proverbs 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 18:6</span></span>

6 The lips of the fool engage in strife,

And his mouth calleth for stripes.

We may translate: the lips of the fool cause strife, for בּוא ב, to come
with anything, e.g., [Psa 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013), is
equivalent to bring it (to bring forward), as also: they engage in
strife; as one says בּוא בדמים: to be engaged in bloodshed, [Sa1
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#026). We prefer this intrant
(ingerunt se), with Schultens and Fleischer. יבאוּ for תּבאנה, a
synallage generis, to which, by means of a "self-deception of the
language" (Fl.), the apparent masculine ending of such duals may have
contributed. The stripes which the fool calleth for (קרא ל, like [Pro
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#003)) are such as he himself carries
off, for it comes a verbis ad verbera. The lxx: his bold mouth calleth
for death (פיו ההמה מות יקרא); למהלמות has, in codd. and old editions,
the Mem raphatum, as also at 19:29; the sing. is thus מהלוּם, like מנוּל
to מנעליו, for the Mem dagessatum is to be expected in the inflected
מהלם, by the passing over of the ō into ǔ.

[Proverbs 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 18:7</span></span>

7 The mouth of the fool is to him destruction,

And his lips are a snare to his soul.

As [Pro 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#006) corresponds to [Pro
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#027) of the foregoing group, so this
[Pro 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#007) corresponds to [Pro
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#028). Regarding מחתּה־לּו, vid., [Pro
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#003). Instead of פי כּסיל, is to be
written פּי־כסיל, according to Torath Emeth, p. 40, Cod. 1294, and old
editions.

[Proverbs 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 18:8</span></span>

A pair of proverbs regarding the flatterer and the slothful:

8 The words of the flatter are as dainty morsels,

And they glide down into the innermost parts.

An "analogy, with an epexegesis in the second member" (Fl.), which is
repeated in [Pro 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#022). Ewald,
Bertheau, Hitzig, and others, are constrained to interpret המו as
introducing a contrast, and in this sense they give to מתלהמים all kinds
of unwarrantable meanings. Ewald translates: a burning (להם, cogn. להב),
and offers next: as whispering (להם, cogn. רעם, נהם); Ch. B. Michaelis,
Bertheau, and others: as sporting (להם, cogn. להה); Hitzig: like soft
airs (להם, cogn. Arab. hillam, flaccus, laxus). All these
interpretations are without support. The word להם has none of all these
significations; it means, as the Arab. lahima warrants, deglutire. But
Bttcher's explanation also: "as swallowed down, because spoken with
reserve," proceeds, like those others, from the supposed syntactically
fine yet false supposition, that 8b is an antithetic "dennoch"
\[tamen\]. In that case the poet would have written והם ירדים (cf. והוא,
as the beginning of a conditional clause, [Pro
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#029); [Pro
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#003)). But והוא, והם, with the finite
following, introduces neither here nor at [Deu
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003); [Jdg
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#034); [Psa
95:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#010), cf. [Gen
43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023), a conditional clause. Thus 8b
continues the clause 8a by one standing on the same line; and thus we do
not need to invent a meaning for כמתלהמים, which forms a contrast to the
penetrating into the innermost parts. The relation of the parts of the
proverb is rightly given by Luther:

The words of the slanderer are stripes,

And they go through the heart of one.

He interprets להם as transposed from הלם (Rashi and others); but stripes
cannot be called מתלהמים - they are called, 6b, מהלמות. This
interpretation of the word has always more support than that of
Symmachus: ὡς ἀκέραιοι; Jerome: quasi simplicia; Aquila, xxvi. 22:
γοητικοί; which last, as also that of Capellus, Clericus, and Schultens:
quasi numine quodam afflata, seems to support itself on the Arab. âhm
iv. inspirare. But in reality âhm does not mean afflare; it means
deglutire, and nothing else. The Jewish lexicographers offer nothing
worth considering; Kimchi's חלקים, according to which the Venet.
translates μαλθακιζόμενοι, is fanciful; for the Talm. הלם, striking =
hitting, suitable, standing well, furnishes no transition to "smooth"
and "soft." Immanuel compares âhm = בלע; and Schultens, who is followed
by Gesenius and others, has already, with perfect correctness,
explained: tanquam quae avidissime inglutiantur. Thus also Fleischer:
things which offer themselves to be eagerly gulped down, or which let
themselves be thus swallowed. But in this way can one be truly just to
the Hithpa.? The Arab. âlthm (stronger form, âltkm, according to which
van Dyk translates mthl uḳam ḥlwt, like sweet morsels) means to swallow
into oneself, which is not here appropriate. The Hithpa. will thus have
here a passive signification: things which are greedily swallowed.
Regarding נרגּן from רגן, vid., at [Pro
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#028). המו refers to the words of the
flatterer, and is emphatic, equivalent to aeque illa, etiam illa, or
illa ipsa. ירד is here connected with the obj. accus. (cf. [Pro
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#012)) instead of with אל, [Pro
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#027). חדרי, penetralia, we had already
at [Pro 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#027); the root-word is (Arab.)
khdr, to seclude, to conceal, different from ḥdr, demittere, and ḥkhr
(cogn. חזר), to finish, circumire. בּטן is the inner part of the body
with reference to the organs lying there, which mediate not only the
life of the body, but also that of the mind - in general, the internal
part of the personality. The lxx does not translate this proverb, but
has in its stead [Pro 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#015), in a
different version, however, from that it gives there; the Syr. and the
Targ. have thereby been drawn away from the Hebr. text.

[Proverbs 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 18:9</span></span>

9 He also who showeth himself slothful in his business,

Is a brother to him who proceedeth to destroy.

The Hithpa. התרפּה signifies here, as at [Pro
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#010), to show oneself slack, lazy,
negligent. מלאכה is properly a commission for another, as a king has a
messenger, ambassador, commissioner to execute it; here, any business,
whether an undertaking in commission from another, or a matter one
engages in for himself. He who shows himself slack therein, produces in
his way, viz., by negligence, destruction, as truly as the בּעל משׁחית,
who does it directly by his conduct. Thus one is named, who is called,
or who has his own delight in it, to destroy or overthrow. Jerome,
incorrectly limiting: sua opera dissipantis. Hitzig well compares [Mat
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030). In the variation, [Pro
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#024), the destroyer is called אישׁ
משׁחית, the connection of the words being adject.; on the contrary, the
connection of בעל משׁחית is genit. (cf. [Pro
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#024); [Pro
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#002), etc.), for משׁחית as frequently
means that which destroys = destruction. Von Hofmann (Schriftbew. ii. 2,
403) understands 'אישׁ מ of the street robber, 'בעל מ of the captain of
robbers; but the designation for the latter must be 'שׂר מ, though at
[Kg1 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#024) he is called by the name
שׂר גּדוּד. The form of the word in the proverb here is more original
than at 38:24. There חבר \[companion\] is used, here אח \[brother\], a
general Semitic name of him who, or of that which, is in any way related
to another, cf. [Job 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029). Fleischer
compares the Arab. proverb: âlshbht âkht alkhṭyât, scepticism is the
sister of sin.

[Proverbs 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 18:10</span></span>

Two proverbs, of the fortress of faith, and of the fortress of
presumption:

10 A strong tower is the name of Jahve;

The righteous runneth into it, and is high.

The name of Jahve is the Revelation of God, and the God of Revelation
Himself, the creative and historical Revelation, and who is always
continually revealing Himself; His name is His nature representing
itself, and therefore capable of being described and named, before all
the Tetragramm, as the Anagramm of the overruling and inworking
historical being of God, as the Chiffre of His free and all-powerful
government in grace and truth, as the self-naming of God the Saviour.
This name, which is afterwards interwoven in the name Jesus, is מגדּל־עז
([Psa 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004)), a strong high tower
bidding defiance to every hostile assault. Into this the righteous
runneth, to hide himself behind its walls, and is thus lifted (perf.
consec.) high above all danger (cf. ישׂגּב, [Pro
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#025)). רוּץ אל means, [Job
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026), to run against anything, רוץ,
seq. acc., to invest, blockade anything, רוץ בּ, to hasten within;
Hitzig's conjecture, ירוּם riseth up high, instead of ירוּץ, is a freak.
רוץ בּ is speedily בוא בּ, the idea the same as [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005); [Psa
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021).

[Proverbs 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 18:11</span></span>

11 The possession of the righteous is his strong fort,

And is like a high wall in his imagination.

Line first = [Pro 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#015). משׂכּית from
שׂכה, Chald. סכה(whence after Megilla 14a, יסכּה, she who looks), R.
שׂך, cogn. זך, to pierce, to fix, means the image as a medal, and thus
also intellectually: image (conception, and particularly the
imagination) of the heart ([Psa 73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007)),
here the fancy, conceit; Fleischer compares (Arab.) tṣwwr, to imagine
something to oneself, French se figurer. Translators from the lxx to
Luther incorrectly think on שׂכך (סכך), to entertain; only the Venet. is
correct in the rendering: ἐν φαντασίᾳ αὐτοῦ; better than Kimchi, who,
after [Ezr 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#012), thinks on the chamber
where the riches delighted in are treasured, and where he fancies
himself in the midst of his treasures as if surrounded by an
inaccessible wall.

[Proverbs 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 18:12</span></span>

We place together [Pro 18:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#012), in
which the figure of a secure fortress returns:

[Pro 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#012)

This proverb is connected with the preceding of the rich man who trusts
in his mammon.

Before destruction the heat of man is haughty;

And humility goeth before honour.

Line first is a variation of [Pro
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018), and line second is similar to
[Pro 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#033).

[Pro 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#013)

13 If one giveth an answer before he heareth,

It is to him as folly and shame.

The part. stands here differently from what it does at [Pro
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#018), where it is subj., and at [Pro
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#014), where it is pred. of a simple
sentence; it is also here, along with what appertains to it in
accordance with the Semitic idiom, subj. to 13b (one who answers ... is
one to whom this...); but, in accordance with our idiom, it becomes a
hypothetical antecedent. For "to answer" one also uses השׁיב without
addition; but the original full expression is השׁיב דּבר, reddere
verbum, referre dictum (cf. ענה דּבר, [Jer
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#020), absol. in the cogn., [Pro
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028)); דבר one may not understand of
the word to which, but of the word with which, the reply is made. היא לו
comprehends the meaning: it avails to him (ducitur ei), as well as it
reaches to him (est ei). In Agricola's Fnfhundert Sprchen this proverb
is given thus: Wer antwortet ehe er hret, der zaiget an sein torhait und
wirdt ze schanden \[he who answers before he hears shows his folly, and
it is to him a shame\]. But that would require the word to be יבושׁ,
pudefiet; (היא לו) כּלמּה means that it becomes to him a ground of
merited disgrace. "כּלמּה, properly wounding, i.e., shame (like atteinte
son honneur), from כּלם (cogn. הלם), to strike, hit, wound" (Fl.).
Sirach (11:8) warns against such rash talking, as well as against the
rudeness of interrupting others.

[Pro 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#014)

14 The spirit of a man beareth his sickness;

But a broken spirit, who can bear it?

The breath of the Creator imparting life to man is spoken of as spiritus
spirans, רוּח (רוּח חיּים), and as spiritus spiratus, נפשׁ (נפשׁ חיּה);
the spirit (animus) is the primary, and the soul (anima) the secondary
principle of life; the double gender of רוח is accounted for thus: when
it is thought of as the primary, and thus in a certain degree (vid.,
Psychol. p. 103ff.) the manly principle, it is mas. ([Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003); [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012), etc.). Here the change of
gender is in the highest degree characteristic, and אישׁ also is
intentionally used (cf. [Sa1 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#015))
instead of אדם, 16a: the courageous spirit of a man which sustains or
endures (כּלכּל R. כל, comprehendere, prehendere; Luther, "who knows how
to contain himself in his sufferings;" cf. [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012), "may the free Spirit hold me")
the sickness \[Siechthum\] (we understand here "siech" in the old
meaning = sick) with self-control, is generis masculini; while, on the
contrary, the רוּח נכאה (as [Pro
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#013); [Pro
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022)), brought down from its
manliness and superiority to disheartened passivity, is genere feminino
(cf. [Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012) with [Pro
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019)). Fleischer compares the Arab.
proverb, thbât âlnfs bâlghdhâ thbât alrwh balghnâ, the soul has firmness
by nourishment, the spirit by music.

(Note: In the Arab. language, influenced by philosophy, rwh, the anima
vitalis, and nfs, the anima rationalis, are inverted; vid., Baudissin's
Translationis antiquae Arab. libri Jobi quae supersunt (1870), p. 34.)

The question מי ישּׂאנּה is like [Mar
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050) : if the salt becomes tasteless,
wherewith shall one season it? There is no seasoning for the spice that
has become insipid. And for the spirit which is destined to bear the
life and fortune of the person, if it is cast down by sufferings, there
is no one to lift it up and sustain it. But is not God the Most High the
lifter up and the bearer of the human spirit that has been crushed and
broken? The answer is, that the manly spirit, 14a, is represented as
strong in God; the discouraged, 14b, as not drawing from God the
strength and support he ought to do. But passages such as [Isa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002) do not bring it near that we
think of the רוח נכאה as alienated from God. The spirit is נשׂא, the
bearer of the personal and natural life with its functions, activities,
and experiences. If the spirit is borne down to powerless and helpless
passivity, then within the sphere of the human personality there is no
other sustaining power that can supply its place.

[Pro 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#015)

15 The heart of a man of understanding gaineth knowledge,

And the ear of the wise seeketh after knowledge.

נבון may be also interpreted as an adj., but we translate it here as at
[Pro 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#033), because thus it
corresponds with the parallelism; cf. לב צדּיק, [Pro
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028), and לב חכם, [Pro
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#023), where the adject.
interpretation is excluded. The gaining of wisdom is, after [Pro
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#016), referred to the heart: a heart
vigorous in embracing and receiving it is above all necessary, and just
such an one possesses the נבון, which knows how to value the worth and
usefulness of such knowledge. The wise, who are already in possession of
such knowledge, are yet at the same time constantly striving to increase
this knowledge: their ear seeks knowledge, eagerly asking where it is to
be found, and attentively listening when the opportunity is given of
מצא, obtaining it.

[Pro 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#016)

16 The gift of a man maketh room for him,

And bringeth him before the great.

That מתּן may signify intellectual endowments, Hitzig supposes, but
without any proof for such an opinion. Intellectual ability as the means
of advancement is otherwise designated, [Pro
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#029). But Hitzig is right in this,
that one mistakes the meaning of the proverb if he interprets מתן in the
sense of שׂחד (vid., at [Pro 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#008)):
mtn is an indifferent idea, and the proverb means that a man makes free
space, a free path for himself, by a gift, i.e., by this, that he shows
himself to be agreeable, pleasing where it avails, not niggardly but
liberal. As a proverb expresses it:

Mit dem Hut in der Hand

Kommt man durchs ganze Land

\[with hat in hand one goes through the whole land\], so it is said here
that such liberality brings before the great, i.e., not: furnishes with
introductions to them; but helps to a place of honour near the great,
i.e., those in a lofty position (cf. לפני, [Pro
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#029); עם, [Psa
113:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008)). It is an important part of
practical wisdom, that by right liberality, i.e., by liberal giving
where duty demands it, and prudence commends it, one does not lose but
gains, does not descend but rises; it helps a man over the difficulties
of limited, narrow circumstances, gains for him affection, and helps him
up from step to step. The ā of מתּן is, in a singular way (cf. מתּנה,
מתּנת), treated as unchangeable.

[Pro 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017)

17 He that is first in his controversy is right;

But there cometh another and searcheth him thoroughly -

an exhortation to be cautious in a lawsuit, and not to justify without
more ado him who first brings forward his cause, and supports it by
reasons, since, if the second party afterwards search into the reasons
of the first, they show themselves untenable. הראשׁון בּריבו are to be
taken together; the words are equivalent to אשׁר יבא בריבו בראשׁונה: qui
prior cum causa sua venit, i.e., eam ad judicem defert (Fl.). הראשׁון
may, however, also of itself alone be qui prior venit; and בריבו will be
taken with צדיק: justus qui prior venit in causa sua (esse videtur). The
accentuation rightly leaves the relation undecided. Instead of יבא (יבא)
the Kerı̂ has וּבא, as it elsewhere, at one time, changes the fut. into
the perf. with ו (e.g., [Pro 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#004);
[Jer 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#021)); and, at another time, the
perf. with ו into the fut. (e.g., [Psa
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#010); [Isa
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#029)). But here, where the perf.
consec. is not so admissible, as [Pro
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#011); [Pro
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#004), the fut. ought to remain
unchanged. רעהוּ is the other part, synon. with בעל דין חברו, Sanhedrin
7b, where the אזהרה לבית־דין (admonition for the court of justice) is
derived from [Deu 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016), to hear the
accused at the same time with the accuser, that nothing of the latter
may be adopted beforehand. This proverb is just such an audiatur et
altera pars. The status controversiae is only brought fairly into the
light by the hearing of the altera pars: then comes the other and
examines him (the first) to the very bottom. חקר, elsewhere with the
accus. of the thing, e.g., ריב ,., thoroughly to search into a strife,
[Job 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#016), is here, as at [Job
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#011), connected with the accus. of
the person: to examine or lay bare any one thoroughly; here, so that the
misrepresentations of the state of the matter might come out to view
along with the reasons assigned by the accuser.

[Pro 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018)

18 The lot allayeth contentions,

And separateth between the mighty,

i.e., erects a partition wall between them - those contending (הפריד
בּין, as at [Kg2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011), cf. Arab. frḳ
byn); עצוּמים are not opponents who maintain their cause with weighty
arguments (עצּמות, [Isa 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021)), qui
argumentis pollent (vid., Rashi), for then must the truth appear in the
pro et contra; but mighty opponents, who, if the lot did not afford a
seasonable means of reconciliation, would make good their demands by
blows and by the sword (Fl.). Here it is the lot which, as the judgment
of God, brings about peace, instead of the ultima ratio of physical
force. The proverb refers to the lot what the Epistle to the Heb; [Heb
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016), refers to the oath, vid., at
[Pro 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033). Regarding מדינים and its
altered forms, vid., p. 145.

[Pro 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019)

19 A brother toward whom it has been acted perfidiously resists more
than a strong tower;

And contentions are like the bar of a palace.

Luther rightly regarded the word נושׁע, according to which the lxx,
Vulg., and Syr. translated frater qui adjuvatur a fratre, as an
incorrect reading; one would rather expect אח מושׁיע, "a brother who
stands by," as Luther earlier translated; and besides, נושׁע does not
properly mean adjuvari, but salvari. His translation -

Ein verletzt Bruder helt herter denn eine feste Stad,

Und Zanck helt herter, denn rigel am Palast

\[a brother wounded resisteth more than a strong city, and strife
resisteth more than bolts in the palace\], is one of his most happy
renderings. מקּרית־עז in itself only means ὑπὲρ πόλιν ὀχυράν (Venet.);
the noun-adjective (cf. [Isa 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010)) to
be supplied is to be understood to עז: עז הוּא or קשׁה הוא (Kimchi). The
Niph. נפשׁע occurs only here. If one reads נפשׁע, then it means one who
is treated falsely = נפשׁע בּו, like the frequently occurring קמי, my
rising up ones = קמים עלי, those that rise up against me; but Codd.
(Also Baer's Cod. jaman.) and old editions have נפשׁע, which, as we have
above translated, gives an impersonal attributive clause; the former:
frater perfidiose tractatus (Fl.: mala fide offensus); the latter:
perfide actum est, scil. בּו in eum = in quem perfide actum. אח is,
after [Pro 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#017), a friend in the
highest sense of the word; פשׁע means to break off, to break free, with
ב or על of him on whom the action terminates. That the פּשׁע is to be
thought of as אח of the אח נפשׁע is obvious; the translation, "brothers
who break with one another" (Gesen.), is incorrect: אח is not
collective, and still less is נפשׁע a reciprocum. The relation of אח is
the same as that of אלּוּף, [Pro
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#028). The Targum (improving the
Peshito) translates אחא דמת עוי מן אחוי, which does not mean: a brother
who renounces (Hitzig), but who is treated wickedly on the part of, his
brother. That is correct; on the contrary, Ewald's "a brother resists
more than..." proceeds from a meaning of פשׁע which it has not; and
Bertheau gives, with Schultens, an untenable

(Note: Among the whole Heb. synon. for sinning, there exists no
reflexive Niph.; and also the Arab. fsḳ has no ethical signification.
נסכּל only, in the sense of fool, is found.)

reflexive meaning to the Niph. (which as denom. might mean "covered with
crime," Venet. πλημμεληθείς), and, moreover, one that is too weak, for
he translates, "a brother is more obstinate then...." Hitzig corrects
אחז פּשׁע, to shut up sin = to hold it fettered; but that is not correct
Heb. It ought to be עצר, כּבשׁ, or רדות. In 19a the force of the
substantival clause lies in the מן (more than, i.e., harder = more
difficult to be gained), and in 19b in the כּ; cf. [Mic
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#004), where they are interchanged. The
parallelism is synonymous: strifes and lawsuits between those who had
been friends form as insurmountable a hindrance to their reconciliation,
are as difficult to be raised, as the great bars at the gate of a castle
(Fl.). The point of comparison is not only the weight of the cross-beam
(from ברח, crosswise, across, to go across the field), but also the
shutting up of the access. Strife forms a partition wall between such as
once stood near each other, and so much thicker the closer they once
stood.

With [Pro 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019), the series of
proverbs which began with that of the flatterer closes. The catchword
אח, which occurred at its commencement, 9b, is repeated at its close,
and serves also as a landmark of the group following [Pro
18:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#020). The proverb of the breach of
friendship and of contentions is followed by one of the reaction of the
use of the tongue on the man himself.

[Proverbs 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 18:20</span></span>

With [Pro 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019), the series of
proverbs which began with that of the flatterer closes. The catchword
אח, which occurred at its commencement, 9b, is repeated at its close,
and serves also as a landmark of the group following [Pro
18:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#020). The proverb of the breach of
friendship and of contentions is followed by one of the reaction of the
use of the tongue on the man himself.

[Pro 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#020)

20 Of the fruit which a man's mouth bringeth is his heart satisfied;

By the revenue of his lips is he filled.

He will taste in rich measure of the consequences not merely of the good
([Pro 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#014), cf. [Pro
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#002)), but of whatever he has spoken.
This is an oxymoron like [Mat 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011),
that not that which goeth into the mouth, but that which cometh out of
it, defileth a man. As at [Joh 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)
the conduct of a man, so here his words are called his βρῶμα. Not merely
the conduct ([Pro 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#031); [Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)), but also the words are
fruit-bringing; and not only do others taste of the fruit of the words
as of the actions of a man, whether they be good or bad, but above all
he himself does so, both in this life and in that which is to come.

[Pro 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#021)

21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue;

And whoever loveth it shall eat its fruit.

The hand, יד, is so common a metaphor for power, that as here a hand is
attributed to the tongue, so e.g., [Isa
47:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#014) to the flame, and [Psa
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016) to Hades. Death and life is the
great alternative which is placed, [Deu
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015), before man. According as he
uses his tongue, he falls under the power of death or attains to life.
All interpreters attribute, 21b, ואהביה to the tongue: qui eam (linguam)
amant vescentur (יאכל, distrib. sing., as [Pro
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018), [Pro
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#035), etc.) fructu ejus. But "to love
the tongue" is a strange and obscure expression. He loves the tongue,
says Hitzig, who loves to babble. Euchel: he who guards it carefully,
or: he who takes care of it, i.e., who applies himself to right
discourse. Combining both, Zckler: who uses it much, as εὐλογῶν or
κακολογῶν. The lxx translates, οἱ κρατοῦντες αὐτῆς, i.e., אחזיה; but אחז
means prehendere and tenere, not cohibere, and the tongue kept in
restraint brings forth indeed no bad fruit, but it brings no fruit at
all. Why thus? Does the suffix of ואהביה, perhaps like [Pro
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017), Chethı̂b, refer to wisdom, which,
it is true, is not named, but which lies everywhere before the poet's
mind? At [Pro 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#003) we ventured to make
חכמה the subject of 3b. Then 21b would be as a miniature of [Pro
8:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017). Or is ואהביה a mutilation of
ואהב יהוה: and he who loves Jahve ([Psa
97:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#010)) enjoys its (the tongue's)
fruit?

[Pro 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022)

22 Whatso hath found a wife hath found a good thing,

And hath obtained favour from Jahve.

As ואהביה, 21b, reminds us of [Pro
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017), so here not only 22b, but also
22a harmonizes with [Pro 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#035) (cf.
[Pro 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#002)). A wife is such as she
ought to be, as [Pro 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#014), אישׁ, a
man is such as he ought to be; the lxx, Syr., Targ., and Vulgate supply
bonam, but "gnomic brevity and force disdains such enervating
adjectives, and cautious limitations of the idea" (Fl.). Besides, אשׁה
טובה in old Hebr. would mean a well-favoured rather than a
good-dispositioned wife, which later idea is otherwise expressed, [Pro
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#014); [Pro
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010). The Venet. rightly has γυναῖκα,
and Luther ein Ehefraw, for it is a married woman that is meant. The
first מצא is perf. hypotheticum, Gesen. 126, Anm. 1. On the other hand,
[Ecc 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026), "I found, מוצא אני, more
bitter than death the woman," etc.; wherefore, when in Palestine one
married a wife, the question was wont to be asked: או מוצא מצא, has he
married happily (after מצא of the book of Proverbs) or unhappily (after
מוצא of Ecclesiastes) (Jebamoth 63b)?

(Note: Cf. Gendlau's Sprichwrter u. Redensarten deutsch-jdischer Vorzeit
(1860), p. 235.)

The lxx adds a distich to [Pro 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022),
"He that putteth away a good wife putteth away happiness; and he that
keepeth an adulteress, is foolish and ungodly." He who constructed this
proverb \[added by the lxx\] has been guided by מצא to מוציא ([Ezr
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#003)); elsewhere ἐκβάλλειν (γυναῖκα),
[Gal 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#030), Sir. 28:15, is the
translation of גּרשׁ. The Syr. has adopted the half of that distich, and
Jerome the whole of it. On the other hand, [Pro
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#023), [Pro
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#024), and [Pro
19:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#001), are wanting in the lxx. The
translation which is found in some Codd. is that of Theodotion (vid.,
Lagarde).

[Pro 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#023)

23 The poor uttereth suppliant entreaties;

And the rich answereth rudenesses.

The oriental proverbial poetry furnishes many parallels to this. It
delights in the description of the contrast between a suppliant poor man
and the proud and avaricious rich man; vid., e.g., Samachschari's
Goldene Halsbnder, No. 58. תּחנוּנים, according to its meaning, refers
to the Hithpa. התחנּן, misericordiam alicujus pro se imploravit; cf. the
old vulgar "barmen," i.e., to seek to move others to Erbarmen
\[compassion\] (רחמים). עזּות, dura, from עז (synon. קשׁה), hard, fast,
of bodies, and figuratively of an unbending, hard, haughty disposition,
and thence of words of such a nature (Fl.). Both nouns are accus. of the
object, as Job 40:27, תחנונים with the parallel רכּות. The proverb
expresses a fact of experience as a consolation to the poor to whom, if
a rich man insults him, nothing unusual occurs, and as a warning to the
rich that he may not permit himself to be divested of humanity by
mammon. A hard wedge to a hard clod; but whoever, as the Scripture
saith, grindeth the poor by hard stubborn-hearted conduct, and grindeth
his bashful face ([Isa 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#015)),
challenges unmerciful judgment against himself; for the merciful, only
they shall obtain mercy, αὐτοὶ ἐλεηθήσονται ([Mat
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)).

[Pro 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#024)

24 A man of many friends cometh off a loser;

But there is a friend more faithful than a brother.

Jerome translates the commencing word by vir, but the Syr., Targ. by
אית, which is adopted by Hitzig, Bttcher, and others. But will a German
poet use in one line "itzt" \[same as jetzt = now\], and in the next
"jetzt"? and could the Hebrew poet prefer to ישׁ its rarer, and her
especially not altogether unambiguous form אישׁ (cf. to the contrary,
[Ecc 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#015))? We write אישׁ, because the
Masora comprehends this passage, with [Sa2
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#019); [Mic
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#010), as the סבירין ישׁ 'ג, i.e., as
the three, where one ought to expect ישׁ, and is thus exposed to the
danger of falling into error in writing and reading; but erroneously אשׁ
is found in all these three places in the Masora magna of the Venetian
Bible of 1526; elsewhere the Masora has the defectiva scriptio with like
meaning only in those two other passages. While אישׁ = ישׁ, or properly
ישׁ, with equal possibility of אשׁ,

(Note: One sees from this interchange how softly the י was uttered; cf.
Wellhausen's Text der B. Samuel (1871) (Preface). Kimchi remarks that we
say אקטל for אקטל, because we would otherwise confound it with יקטל.)

and it makes no material difference in the meaning of 24a whether we
explain: there are friends who serve to bring one to loss: or a man of
many friends comes to loss, - the inf. with ל is used in substantival
clauses as the expression of the most manifold relations, Gesen. 132,
Anm. 1 (cf. at [Hab 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017)), here in
both cases it denotes the end, as e.g., [Psa
92:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#008), to which it hastens with many
friends, or with the man of many friends. It is true that אישׁ (like
בּעל) is almost always connected only with genitives of things; but as
one says אישׁ אלהים: a man belongs to God, so may one also say אישׁ
רעים: a man belongs to many friends; the common language of the people
may thus have named a man, to whom, because he has no definite and
decided character, the rule that one knows a man by his friends is not
applicable, a so-called every-man's-friend, or all-the-world's-friend.
Theodotion translates ἀνὴρ ἑταιριῶν τοῦ ἑταιρεύσασθαι; and thus also the
Syr., Targ., and Jerome render (and among the moderns, Hitzig) התרעע as
reflexive in the sense of to cherish social intercourse; but this
reflexive is התרעה, [Pro 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#024). That
התרועע is either Hithpa. of רוּע, to exult, [Psa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#010); 65:14, according to which the
Venet. translates (contrary to Kimchi) ὥστε ἀλαλάζειν: such an one can
exult, but which is not true, since, according to 24b, a true friend
outweighs the many; or it is Hithpa. of רעע, to be wicked, sinful (Fl.:
sibi perniciem paraturus est); or, which we prefer, warranted by [Isa
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#019), of רעע, to become brittle
(Bttcher and others) - which not only gives a good sense, but also a
similar alliteration with רעים, as [Pro
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#029); [Pro
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#020). In contradistinction to רע,
which is a general, and, according to the usage of the language (e.g.,
17b), a familiar idea, the true friend is called, in the antithetical
parallel member, אהב ([Pro 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#006)); and
after [Pro 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#017), דּבק מאח, one who
remains true in misfortune. To have such an one is better than to have
many of the so-called friends; and, as appears from the contrast, to him
who is so fortunate as to have one such friend, there comes a blessing
and safety. Immanuel has given the right explanation: "A man who sets
himself to gain many friends comes finally to be a loser (סופו להשּׁבר),
for he squanders his means, and is impoverished in favour of others."
And Schultens: At est amicus agglutinatus prae fratre. Rarum et carum
esse genus insinuatur, ac proinde intimam illam amicitiam, quae
conglutinet compingatque corda, non per multos spargendam, sed
circumspecte et ferme cum uno tantum ineundam. Thus closes this group of
proverbs with the praise of friendship deepened into spiritual
brotherhood, as the preceding, [Pro
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019), with a warning against the
destruction of such a relation by a breach of trust not to be made good
again.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 19](pro019)

</div>
