<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro007)  [Next](pro009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001)

[Proverbs 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 8:1</span></span>

The author has now almost exhausted the ethical material; for in this
introduction to the Solomonic Book of Proverbs he works it into a
memorial for youth, so that it is time to think of concluding the circle
by bending back the end to the beginning. For as in the beginning, [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020)., so also here in the end, he
introduces Wisdom herself as speaking. There, her own testimony is
delivered in contrast to the alluring voice of the deceiver; here, the
daughter of Heaven in the highways inviting to come to her, is the
contrast to the adulteress lurking in the streets, who is indeed not a
personification, but a woman of flesh and blood, but yet at the same
time as the incarnate ἀπάτη of worldly lust. He places opposite to her
Wisdom, whose person is indeed not so sensibly perceptible, but who is
nevertheless as real, coming near to men in a human way, and seeking to
win them by her gifts.

1 Doth not Wisdom discourse,

And Understanding cause her voice to be heard?

2 On the top of the high places in the way,

In the midst of the way, she has placed herself.

3 By the side of the gates, at the exit of the city,

At the entrance to the doors, she calleth aloud.

As הנּה points to that which is matter of fact, so הלא calls to a
consideration of it (cf. [Pro 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#022));
the question before the reader is doubly justified with reference to
[Pro 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020). With חכמה, תבונה is
interchanged, as e.g., [Pro 2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001);
such names of wisdom are related to its principal name almost as אלהים,
עליון, and the like, to יהוה. In describing the scene, the author, as
usual, heaps up synonyms which touch one another without coming
together.

[Pro 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#002)

By מרמים Hitzig understands the summit of a mountain, and therefore
regards this verse as an interpolation; but the "high places" are to be
understood of the high-lying parts of the city. There, on the way which
leads up and down, she takes her stand. עלי = Arab. 'ly, old and poetic
for על, signifies here "hard by, close to," properly, so that something
stands forward over the edge of a thing, or, as it were, passes over its
borders (Fl.). The בּית, Hitzig, as Bertheau, with lxx, Targ., Jerome,
interpret prepositionally as a strengthening of בּין (in the midst); but
where it once, [Eze 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027), occurs in
this sense, it is fully written בּית ל. Here it is the accus. loci of
the substantive; "house of the ascent" (Syr. bêth urchotho) is the place
where several ways meet, the uniting point, as אם הדרך ([Eze
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026)), the point of departure, exit;
the former the crossway, as the latter the separating way. Thus
Immanuel: the place of the frequented streets; Meri: the place of the
ramification (more correctly, the concentration) of the ways. נצּבה
signifies more than קמה (she raises herself) and עמדה (she goes
thither); it means that she plants herself there.

[Pro 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#003)

In this verse Bertheau finds, not inappropriately, the designations of
place: on this side, on that side, and within the gate. ליד, at the
hand, is equivalent to at the side, as [Psa
140:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#006). לפי, of the town, is the same
as לפּתח, [Pro 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#014), of the house: at
the mouth, i.e., at the entrance of the city, thus where they go out and
in. There are several of these ways for leaving and entering a city, and
on this account מבּוא פתחים are connected: generally where one goes out
and in through one of the gates (doors). מבוא, fully represented by the
French avenue, the space or way which leads to anything (Fl.). There she
raises her voice, which sounds out far and wide; vid., concerning תּרנּה
(Graec. Venet. incorrectly, after Rashi, ἀλαλάξουσι), at [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020).

[Proverbs 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 8:4</span></span>

Now begins the discourse. The exordium summons general attention to it
with the emphasis of its absolute truth:

4 "To you, ye men, is my discourse addressed,

And my call is to the children of men!

5 Apprehend, O ye simple ones, what wisdom is;

And, ye fools what understanding is.

6 Hear, for I will speak princely things,

And the opening of my lips is upright.

7 For my mouth uttereth truth,

And a wicked thing is an abomination to my lips.

8 The utterances of my mouth are in rectitude,

There is nothing crooked or perverse in them.

9 To the men of understanding they are all to the point,

And plain to those who have attained knowledge."

Hitzig rejects this section, [Pro
8:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#004), as he does several others in
chap. 8 and 9, as spurious. But if this preamble, which reminds us of
Elihu, is not according to every one's taste, yet in respect of the
circle of conception and thought, as well as of the varying development
of certain fundamental thoughts, it is altogether after the manner of
the poet. The terminology is one that is strange to us; the translation
of it is therefore difficult; that which is given above strives at least
not to be so bad as to bring discredit on the poet. The tautology and
flatness of [Pro 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#004) disappears when
one understands אישׁים and בּני אדם like the Attic ἄνδρες and ἄνθρωποι;
vid., under [Isa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009); [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003) (where אישׁים, as here and [Psa
141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004), is equivalent to בּני אישׁ,
[Psa 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003); [Psa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003)). Wisdom turns herself with her
discourses to high and low, to persons of standing and to the
proletariat. The verbal clause 4a interchanges with a noun clause 4b, as
frequently a preposition with its noun (e.g., [Pro
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#008)) completes the whole predicate of
a semistich (Fl.).

[Pro 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#005)

Regarding ארמה, calliditas, in a good sense, vid., at [Pro
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#004); regarding פּתאים, those who are
easily susceptible of good or bad, according to the influence that is
brought to bear upon them, vid., also [Pro
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#004); and regarding כּסילים, the
intellectually heavy, dull persons in whom the flesh burdens the mind,
vid., at [Pro 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#022). לב is parallel
with ערמה, for the heart (according to its Semitic etymon, that which
remains fast, like a kernel, the central-point) is used for the
understanding of which it is the seat (Psychol. p. 249), or heartedness
= intelligence (cf. חסר־לב, [Pro 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032)
= ἄνους or ἄλογος). We take ערמה and לב as objective, as we have
translated: that which is in both, and in which they consist. Thus
הבּין, which is a favourite word with this author, has both times the
simple transitive meaning of the gain of understanding into the nature
and worth of both; and we neither need to interpret the second הבינוּ in
the double transitive meaning, "to bring to understanding," nor, with
Hitzig, to change in into הכינוּ

(Note: Vid., the Hebr. Zeitschrift, החלוץ, 1856, p. 112.) direct, i.e.,
applicate.

[Pro 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#006)

That to which Wisdom invites, her discourse makes practicable, for she
speaks of נגידים. Hitzig interprets this word by conspicua, manifest
truths, which the Graec. Venet. understands to be ἐναντία, after
Kimchi's interpretation: truths which one makes an aim and object (נגד)
on account of their worth. Frst, however, says that נגיד, from נגד,
Arab. najad, means to be elevated, exalted, and thereby visible (whence
also הגּיד, to bring to light, to bring forward); and that by נגידים, as
the plur. of this נגיד, is to be understood princeps in the sense of
principalia, or πραεσταντια (lxx σεμνά; Theodot. ἡγεμονικά; Jerome, de
rebus magnis) (cf. νόμος βασιλικός of the law of love, which surpasses
the other laws, as kings do their subjects), which is supported by the
similar expression, [Pro 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#020). But
that we do not need to interpret נגידים as abstr., like מישׁרים, and as
the acc. adverb.: in noble ways, because in that case it ought to be
נגידות (Berth.), is shown by [Pro
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#020), and also [Pro
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#013); cf. on this neuter use of the
masc., Ewald, 172a. "The opening of my lips (i.e., this, that they open
themselves, not: that which they disclose, lay open) is upright" is to
be regarded as metonymia antecedentis pro conseq.: that which I announce
is...; or also as a poetic attribution, which attributes to a subject
that which is produced by it (cf. [Pro
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#017)): my discourse bearing itself
right, brings to light (Fl.). [Pro
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#016), cf. 31, is parallel both in the
words and the subject; מישׁרים, that which is in accordance with fact
and with rectitude, uprightness (vid., at [Pro
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003)), is a word common to the
introduction (chap. 1-9), and to the first appendix to the first series
of Solomonic Proverbs (Prov 22:17-24:22), with the Canticles. In [Sol
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016), also, as where (cf. [Pro
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003); [Job
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#030)), the word palate \[Gaumen\] is
used as the organ of speech.

[Pro 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#007)

כּי continues the reason (begun in [Pro
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#006)) for the Hearken! (cf. [Pro
1:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#015); [Pro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016).); so that this second reason is
co-ordinated with the first (Fl.). Regarding אמת, vid., at [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003); הגה, here of the palate (cf. [Psa
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#030)), as in [Pro
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028) of the heart, has not hitherto
occurred. It signifies quiet inward meditation, as well as also (but
only poetically) discourses going forth from it (vid., at [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)). The contrary of truth, i.e.,
moral truth, is רשׁע, wickedness in words and principles - a segolate,
which retains its Segol also in pausa, with the single exception of [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016).

[Pro 8:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#008)

The בּ of בּצדק is that of the close connection of a quality with an
action or matter, which forms with a substantive adverbia as well as
virtual adjectiva, as here: cum rectitudine (conjuncta i. e. vera) sunt
omnia dicta oris mei (Fl.); it is the ב of the distinctive attribute
(Hitzig), certainly related to the ב essentiae ([Pro
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#026), according to which Schultens and
Bertheau explain), which is connected with the abstract conception
(e.g., [Psa 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#004)), but also admits the
article designating the gender (vid., at [Psa
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#004)). The opposite of צדק (here in
the sense of veracitas, which it means in Arab.) is נפתּל ועקּשׁ,
dolosum ac perversum. עקּשׁ (cf. Gesen. 84, 9) is that which is
violently bent and twisted, i.e., estranged from the truth, which is, so
to speak, parodied or caricatured. Related to it in meaning, but
proceeding from a somewhat different idea, is נפתל. פּתל, used primarily
of threads, cords, ropes, and the like, means to twist them, to twine
them over and into one another, whence פּתיל, a line or string made of
several intertwisted threads (cf. Arab. ftı̂lt, a wick of a candle or
lamp); Niph., to be twisted, specifically luctari, of the twisting of
the limbs, and figuratively to bend and twist oneself, like the crafty
(versutus) liars and deceivers, of words and thoughts which do not
directly go forth, but by the crafty twistings of truth and rectitude,
opp. ישׁר, נכון (Fl.). There is nothing of deception of error in the
utterances of wisdom; much rather they are all נכצים, straight out from
her (cf. [Isa 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002)), going directly
out, and without circumlocution directed to the right end for the
intelligent, the knowing (cf. [Neh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029)); and ישׁרים, straight or even,
giving no occasion to stumble, removing the danger of erring for those
who have obtained knowledge, i.e., of good and evil, and thus the
ability of distinguishing between them (Gesen. 134, 1) - briefly, for
those who know how to estimate them.

[Proverbs 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 8:10</span></span>

Her self-commendation is continued in the resumed address:

10 "Receive my instruction, and not silver,

And knowledge rather than choice gold!

11 For wisdom is better than corals,

And all precious jewels do not equal her.

12 I, Wisdom, inhabit prudence,

And the knowledge of right counsels is attainable by me."

Instead of ולא־כּסף influenced by קחוּ, is ואל־כסף with תּקחוּ to be
supplied; besides, with most Codd. and older editions, we are to
accentuate קחוּ מוּסרי with the erasure of the Makkeph. "Such negations
and prohibitions," Fleischer remarks, "are to be understood
comparatively: instead of acquiring silver, rather acquire wisdom.
Similar is the old Arabic 'l-nâr w-l'-'l-'âr, the fire, and not the
disgrace! Also among the modern Arabic proverbs collected by Burckhardt,
many have this form, e.g., No. 34, alḥajamat balafas wala alḥajat
alanas, Better to let oneself be cut with the axe then to beg for the
favour of another" 10b is to be translated, with Jerome, Kimchi, and
others: and knowledge is more precious than fine gold (נבחר, neut.: auro
pretiosius); and in view of [Pro
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#016), this construction appears to be
intended. But Fleischer has quite correctly affirmed that this
assertatory clause is unsuitably placed as a parallel clause over
against the preceding imperative clause, and, what is yet more
important, that then [Pro 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#011) would
repeat idem per idem in a tautological manner. We therefore, after the
Aramaic and Greek translators, take כסף נבחר together here as well as at
[Pro 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#019), inasmuch as we carry
forward the קחו: et scientiam prae auro lectissimo, which is also
according to the accentuation. Equally pregnant is the מן in מחרוּץ of
the passage [Pro 3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014), which is
here varied.

[Pro 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#012)

Ver. 12 follows [Pro 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#011) = [Pro
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#015) as a justification of this
estimating of wisdom above all else in worth. Regarding אני with Gaja,
vid., the rule which the accentuation of this word in the three
so-called metrical books follows in Merx' Archiv, 1868, p. 203 (cf.
Baer's Torath Emeth, p. 40). We translate: ego sapientia involo
sollertiam, for the verb שׁכן is construed with the accusative of the
object, [Pro 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#021); [Pro
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#030); 37:3 (cf. גוּר, [Psa
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#005)), as well as with ב, [Gen
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#002), Ps. 69:37. Wisdom inhabits
prudence, has settled down, as it were, and taken up her residence in
it, is at home in its whole sphere, and rules it. Bertheau not
unsuitably compares οἰκῶν with μόνος ἔχων, [Ti1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016). Regarding מזמּות, vid., [Pro
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#004); [Pro
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#002). It denotes well-considered,
carefully thought out designs, plans, conclusions, and דּעת is here the
knowledge that is so potent. This intellectual power is nothing beyond
wisdom, it is in her possession on every occasion; she strives after it
not in vain, her knowledge is defined according to her wish. Wisdom
describes herself here personally with regard to that which she bestows
on men who receive her.

[Proverbs 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 8:13</span></span>

Far remote is the idea that 13a is dependent on אמצא (I acquire)
(Lwenstein, Bertheau). With this verse begins a new series of thoughts
raising themselves on the basis of the fundamental clause 13a. Wisdom
says what she hates, and why she hates it:

13 "The fear of Jahve is to hate evil;

Pride and arrogancy, and an evil way

And a deceitful mouth, do I hate."

If the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom ([Pro
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010); [Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)), then wisdom, personally
considered, stands before all else that is to be said of her in a
relation of homage or reverence toward God corresponding to the fear of
God on the part of man; and if, as the premiss 13a shows, the fear of
God has as its reverse side the hatred of evil, then there arises what
Wisdom says in שׂנאתי (I hate) of herself. Instead of the n. actionis
שׂנאת (hatred), formed in the same way with יראת, which, admitting the
article, becomes a substantive, the author uses, in order that he might
designate the predicate as such (Hitzig), rather the n. actionis שׂנאת
as מלאת, [Jer 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010). קראת, [Jdg
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001), is equivalent to שׂנאת like
יבּשׁת, the becoming dry, יכלת, the being able; cf. (Arab.) shanat,
hating, malât, well-being, ḳarât, reading (Fl.). The evil which Wisdom
hates is now particularized as, [Pro
6:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016), the evil which Jahve hates.
The virtue of all virtues is humility; therefore Wisdom hates, above
all, self-exaltation in all its forms. The paronomasia גּאה וגאון (pride
and haughtiness) expresses the idea in the whole of its contents and
compass (cf. [Isa 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006); [Isa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001), and above at [Pro
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#027)). גּאה (from גּאה, the nominal
form), that which is lofty = pride, stands with גּאון, as [Job
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010), גבהּ, that which is high =
arrogance. There follows the viam mali, representing the sins of walk,
i.e., of conduct, and os fullax (vid., at [Pro
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#012)), the sins of the mouth. Hitzig
rightly rejects the interpunctuation רע, and prefers רע. In consequence
of this Dech (Tiphcha init.), וּפי תהפּכת have in Codd. and good
editions the servants Asla and Illuj (vid., Baer's Torath Emeth, p. 11);
Aben-Ezra and Moses Kimchi consider the Asla erroneously as disjunctive,
and explain וּפי by et os = axioma meum, but Asla is conjunctive, and
has after it the ת raphatum.

[Proverbs 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 8:14</span></span>

After Wisdom has said what she hates, and thus what she is not, she now
says what she is, has, and promises:

14 "Mine is counsel and promotion;

I am understanding, mine is strength.

15 By me kings reign,

And rulers govern justly.

16 By me princes rule, and nobles -

All judges of the earth."

Whoever gives anything must himself possess it; in this sense Wisdom
claims for herself counsel, promotion (in the sense of offering and
containing that which is essentially and truly good; vid., concerning
תּוּשׁיּה, [Pro 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007)), and energy
(vid., [Ecc 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#019)). But she does not
merely possess בּינה; this is much rather her peculiar nature, and is
one with her. That [Pro 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#014) is formed
after [Job 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#013), [Job
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#016) (Hitzig) is possible, without
there following thence any argument against its genuineness. And if [Pro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#015)., and [Isa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001); [Isa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001), stand in intentional reciprocal
relation, then the priority is on the side of the author of the
Proverbs. The connection gives to the laconic expression its intended
comprehensiveness. It is not meant that Wisdom has the highest places in
the state to give, but that she makes men capable of holding and
discharging the duties of these.

[Pro 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#015)

Here we are led to think of legislation, but the usage of the language
determines for the Po. חקק only the significations of commanding,
decreeing, or judging; צדק is the object accus., the opposite of
חקקי־און (decrees of unrighteousness), [Isa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001). רזן is a poetic word, from רזן =
Arab. razuna, to be heavy, weighty, then to be firm, incapable of being
shaken, figuratively of majestic repose, dignity (cf. Arab. wqâr and
כּבוד) in the whole external habitus, in speech and action such as
befits one invested with power (Fl.).

[Pro 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#016)

We may not explain the second clause of this verse: et ad ingenua
impelluntur quicunque terrae imperant, for נדיב is adj. without such a
verbal sense. But besides, נדיבים is not pred., for which it is not
adapted, because, with the obscuring of its ethical signification (from
נדב, to impel inwardly, viz., to noble conduct, particularly to
liberality), it also denotes those who are noble only with reference to
birth, and not to disposition ([Isa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008)). Thus נדיבים is a fourth synonym
for the highly exalted, and כל־שׁפטי ארץ is the summary placing together
of all kinds of dignity; for שׁפט unites in itself references to
government, administration of justice, and rule. כל is used, and not וכל
- a so-called asyndeton summativum. Instead of ארץ (lxx) there is found
also the word צדק (Syr., Targ., Jerome, Graec. Venet., adopted by Norzi
after Codd. and Neapol. 1487). But this word, if not derived from the
conclusion of the preceding verse, is not needed by the text, and gives
a summary which does not accord with that which is summed up (מלכים,
רזנים, שׂרים, נדיבים); besides, the Scripture elsewhere calls God
Himself שׁופט צדק ([Psa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005); [Jer
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020)). The Masoretic reading

(Note: If the Masoretes had read שׁפטי צדק, then would they have added
the remark לית ("it does not further occur"), and inserted the
expression in their Register of Expressions, which occurs but once,
Masora finalis, p. 62.)

of most of the editions, which is also found in the Cod. Hillel (ספר
הללי)

(Note: One of the most ancient and celebrated Codd of the Heb.
Scriptures, called Hillel from the name of the man who wrote it. Vid.,
Streack's Prolegomena, p. 112. It was written about a.d. 600.)

merits the preference.

[Proverbs 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 8:17</span></span>

The discourse of Wisdom makes a fresh departure, as at [Pro
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#013) : she tells how, to those who
love her, she repays this love:

17 "I love them that love me,

And they that seek me early find me.

18 Riches and honour are with me,

Durable riches and righteousness.

19 Better is my fruit than pure and fine gold,

And my revenue (better) than choice silver.

20 In the way of righteousness do I walk,

In the midst of the paths of justice.

21 To give an inheritance to them that love me

And I fill their treasuries."

The Chethı̂b אהביה (ego hos qui eam amant redamo), Gesenius, Lehrgeb.
196, 5, regards as a possible synallage (eam = me), but one would rather
think that it ought to be read (יהוה =) 'אהבי ה. The ancients all have
the reading אהבי. אהב (= אאהב, with the change of the éě into ê, and the
compression of the radical א; cf. אמר, תּבא, [Pro
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010)) is the form of the fut. Kal,
which is inflected תּאהבוּ, [Pro 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#022).
Regarding שׁחר (the Graec. Venet. well: οἱ ὀρθρίζοντές μοι), vid., [Pro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028), where the same epenthet. fut.
form is found.

[Pro 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#018)

In this verse part of [Pro 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#016) is
repeated, after which אתּי is meant of possession (mecum and penes me).
Regarding הון, vid., [Pro 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#013);
instead of the adjective יקר there, we have here עתק. The verb עתק brev
signifies promoveri, to move forwards, whence are derived the meanings
old (cf. aetas provecta, advanced age), venerable for age, and noble,
free (cf. עתּיק, [Isa 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009), and Arab.
'atyḳ, manumissus), unbound, the bold. Used of clothing, עריק ([Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018)) expresses the idea of venerable
for age. עתק used of possessions and goods, like the Arab. 'âtak,
denotes such goods as increase during long possession as an inheritance
from father to son, and remain firm, and are not for the first time
gained, but only need to be inherited, opes perennes et firmae
(Schultens, Gesenius' Thesaur., Fleischer), although it may be also
explained (which is, however, less probable with the form עתק) of the
idea of the venerable from opes superbae (Jerome), splendid opulence.
צדקה is here also a good which is distributed, but properly the
distributing goodness itself, as the Arab. ṣadaḳat, influenced by the
later use of the Hebrew צדקה (δικαιοσύνη = ἐλεημοσύνη), denotes all that
which God of His goodness causes to flow to men, or which men bestow
upon men (Fl.). Righteousness is partly a recompensative goodness, which
rewards, according to the law of requital, like with like; partly
communicative, which, according to the law of love without merit, and
even in opposition to it, bestows all that is good, and above all,
itself; but giving itself to man, it assimilates him to itself (vid.,
[Psa 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)), so that he becomes צדיק,
and is regarded as such before God and men, [Pro
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#019).

The fruit and product of wisdom (the former a figure taken from the
trees, [Pro 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018); the latter from the
sowing of seed, [Pro 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009)) is the gain
and profit which it yields. With חרוּץ, [Pro
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#010); [Pro
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014), פּז is here named as the place
of fine gold, briefly for זהב מוּפז, solid gold, gold separated from the
place of ore which contains it, or generally separated gold, from פּזז,
violently to separate metals from base mixtures; Targ. דּהבא אובריזין,
gold which has stood the fire-test, obrussa, of the crucible, Greek
ὄβρυζον, Pers. ebrı̂z, Arab. ibrı̂z. In the last clause of this verse, as
also in 10b, נבחר is to be interpreted as pred. to תבוּאתי, but the
balance of the meaning demands as a side-piece to the מחרוץ ומפז (19a)
something more than the mere כּסף. In 20f. the reciprocal love is placed
as the answer of love under the point of view of the requiting
righteousness. But recompensative and communicative righteousness are
here combined, where therefore the subject is the requital of worthy
pure love and loving conduct, like with like. Such love requires
reciprocal love, not merely cordial love, but that which expresses
itself outwardly.

[Pro 8:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#020)

In this sense, Wisdom says that she acts strictly according to justice
and rectitude, and adds (21) wherein this her conduct manifests itself.
The Piel הלּך expresses firm, constant action; and בּתוך means that she
turns from this line of conduct on no side. להנחיל is distinguished from
בּהנחיל, as ut possidendam tribuam from possidendam tribuendo; the
former denotes the direction of the activity, the latter its nature and
manner; both combine if we translate ita ut....

(Note: Biesenthal combines the etymologically obscure הנחיל with נחל: to
make to flow into, so that נחל denotes inheritance in contradistinction
to acquisition; while נחלה, in contradistinction to ירשּׁה, denotes the
inheritance rather of many than of the individual.)

Regarding the origin of ישׁ, vid., at [Pro
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007); it denotes the being founded,
thus substantia, and appears here, like the word in mediaeval Latin and
Romanic (Ital. sustanza, Span. substancia), and like οὐσία and ὕπαρξις
(τὰ ὑπάρχοντα) in classic Greek, to denote possessions and goods. But
since this use of the word does not elsewhere occur (therefore Hitzig
explains ישׁ = ישׁ לי, I have it = presto est), and here, where Wisdom
speaks, ישׁ connects itself in thought with תּוּשׁיּה, it will at least
denote real possession (as we also are wont to call not every kind of
property, but only landed property, real possession), such possession as
has real worth, and that not according to commercial exchange and price,
but according to sound judgment, which applies a higher than the common
worldly standard of worth. The Pasek between אהבי and ישׁ is designed to
separate the two Jods from each other, and has, as a consequence, for
להנחיל אהבי the accentuation with Tarcha and Mercha (vid.,
Accentssystem, vi. 4; cf. Torath Emeth, p. 17, 3). The carrying forward
of the inf. with the finite, 21b, is as [Pro
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#027); [Pro
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002), and quite usual.

[Proverbs 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 8:22</span></span>

Wisdom takes now a new departure, in establishing her right to be heard,
and to be obeyed and loved by men. As the Divine King in [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) opposes to His adversaries the
self-testimony: "I will speak concerning a decree! Jahve said unto me:
Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten Thee;" so Wisdom here unfolds
her divine patent of nobility: she originates with God before all
creatures, and is the object of God's love and joy, as she also has the
object of her love and joy on God's earth, and especially among the sons
of men:

"Jahve brought me forth as the beginning of His way,

As the foremost of His works from of old."

The old translators render קנני (with Kametz by Dech; vid., under [Psa
118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)) partly by verbs of creating
(lxx ἔκτισε, Syr., Targ. בּראני), partly by verbs of acquiring (Aquila,
Symmachus, Theodotion, Venet. ἐκτήσατο; Jerome, possedit); Wisdom
appears also as created, certainly not without reference to this
passage, Sir. 1:4, προτέρα πάντων ἕκτισται σοφία; 1:9, αὐτὸς ἕκτισεν
αὐτήν; 24:8, ὁ κτίσας με. In the christological controversy this word
gained a dogmatic signification, for they proceeded generally on the
identity of σοφία ὑποστατική (sapientia substantialis) with the
hypostasis of the Son of God. The Arians used the ἔκτισέ με as a proof
of their doctrine of the filius non genitus, sed factus, i.e., of His
existence before the world began indeed, but yet not from eternity, but
originating in time; while, on the contrary, the orthodox preferred the
translation ἐκτήσατο, and understood it of the co-eternal existence of
the Son with the Father, and agreed with the ἔκτισε of the lxx by
referring it not to the actual existence, but to the position, place of
the Son (Athanasius: Deus me creavit regem or caput operum suorum;
Cyrill.: non condidit secundum substantiam, sed constituit me totius
universi principium et fundamentum). But (1) Wisdom is not God, but is
God's; she has personal existence in the Logos of the N.T., but is not
herself the Logos; she is the world-idea, which, once projected, is
objective to God, not as a dead form, but as a living spiritual image;
she is the archetype of the world, which, originating from God, stands
before God, the world of the idea which forms the medium between the
Godhead and the world of actual existence, the communicated spiritual
power in the origination and the completion of the world as God designed
it to be. This wisdom the poet here personifies; he does not speak of
the person as Logos, but the further progress of the revelation points
to her actual personification in the Logos. And (2) since to her the
poet attributes an existence preceding the creation of the world, he
thereby declares her to be eternal, for to be before the world is to be
before time. For if he places her at the head of the creatures, as the
first of them, so therewith he does not seek to make her a creature of
this world having its commencement in time; he connects her origination
with the origination of the creature only on this account, because that
priori refers and tends to the latter; the power which was before heaven
and earth were, and which operated at the creation of the earth and of
the heavens, cannot certainly fall under the category of the creatures
around and above us. Therefore (3) the translation with ἔκτισεν has
nothing against it, but it is different from the κτίσις of the heavens
and the earth, and the poet has intentionally written not בּראני, but
קנני. Certainly קנה, Arab. knâ, like all the words used of creating,
refers to one root-idea: that of forging (vid., under [Gen
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#022)), as ברא does to that of cutting
(vid., under [Gen 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)); but the mark
of a commencement in time does not affix itself to קנה in the same way
as it does to ברא, which always expresses the divine production of that
which has not hitherto existed. קנה comprehends in it the meanings to
create, and to create something for oneself, to prepare, parare (e.g.,
[Psa 139:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#013)), and to prepare something
for oneself, comparare, as κτίζειν and κτᾶσθαι, both from kshi, to
build, the former expressed by struere, and the latter by sibi struere.
In the קנני, then, there are the ideas, both that God produced wisdom,
and that He made Himself to possess it; not certainly, however, as a man
makes himself to possess wisdom from without, [Pro
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007). But the idea of the bringing
forth is here the nearest demanded by the connection. For ראשׁית דּרכּו
is not equivalent to בּראשׁית דרכו (Syr., Targ., Luther), as Jerome also
reads: Ita enim scriptum est: adonai canani bresith dercho (Ep. cxl. ad
Cyprian.); but it is, as [Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019)
shows, the second accusative of the object (lxx, Aquila, Symmachus,
Theodotion). But if God made wisdom as the beginning of His way, i.e.,
of His creative efficiency (cf. [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014) and [Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)), the making is not to be thought
of as acquiring, but as a bringing forth, revealing this creative
efficiency of God, having it in view; and this is also confirmed by the
חוללתי (genita sum; cf. [Gen 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001),
קניתי, genui) following. Accordingly, קדם מפעליו (foremost of His works)
has to be regarded as a parallel second object. accusative. All the old
translators interpret קדם as a preposition \[before\], but the usage of
the language before us does not recognise it as such; this would be an
Aramaism, for קדם, [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007),
frequently מן־קדם (Syr., Targ.), is so used. But as קדם signifies
previous existence in space, and then in time (vid., Orelli, Zeit und
Ewigkeit, p. 76), so it may be used of the object in which the previous
existence appears, thus (after Sir. 1:4): προτέραν τῶν ἔργων αὐτοῦ
(Hitzig).

[Proverbs 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 8:23</span></span>

A designation of the When? expressed first by מאז ([Isa
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#008), cf. [Isa
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021)), is further unfolded:

"From everlasting was I set up,

From the beginning, from the foundations of the earth."

That נסּכתּי cannot be translated: I was anointed = consecrated, vid.,
at [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006). But the translation also:
I was woven = wrought (Hitzig, Ewald, and previously one of the Greeks,
ἐδιάσθην), does not commend itself, for רקּם ([Psa
139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015)), used of the embryo, lies far
from the metaphorical sense in which נסך = Arab. nasaj, texere, would
here be translated of the origin of a person, and even of such a
spiritual being as Wisdom; נסדתּי, as the lxx reads (ἐθεμελιωσέ με), is
not once used of such. Rightly Aquila, κατεστάθην; Symmachus,
προκεχείρισμαι; Jerome, ordinata sum. Literally, but unintelligibly, the
Gr. Venet. κέχυμαι, according to which (cf. Sir. 1:10) Bttcher: I was
poured forth = formed, but himself acknowledging that this figure is not
suitable to personification; nor is it at all likely that the author
applied the word, used in this sense of idols, to the origin of Wisdom.
The fact is, that נסך, used as seldom of the anointing or consecration
of kings, as סוּך, passes over, like יצק (הצּיק), צוּק (מצוּק, a
pillar), and יצג (הצּיג), from the meaning of pouring out to that of
placing and appointing; the mediating idea appears to be that of the
pouring forth of the metal, since נסיך, [Dan
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#008), like נסך, signifies a molten
image. The Jewish interpreters quite correctly remark, in comparing it
with the princely name נסיך \[cf. [Psa
83:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#012)\] (although without etymological
insight), that a placing in princely dignity is meant. Of the three
synonyms of aeternitas a parte ante, מעולם points backwards into the
infinite distance, מראשׁ into the beginning of the world, מקּדמי־ארץ not
into the times which precede the origin of the earth, but into the
oldest times of its gradual arising; this קדמי it is impossible to
render, in conformity with the Hebr. use of language: it is an extensive
plur. of time, Bttcher, 697. The מן repeated does not mean that the
origin and greatness of Wisdom are contemporaneous with the foundation
of the world; but that when the world was founded, she was already an
actual existence.

[Proverbs 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 8:24</span></span>

This her existence before the world began is now set forth in yet more
explicit statements:

24 "When there were as yet no floods was I brought forth,

When as yet there were not fountains which abounded with water;

25 For before the mountains were settled,

Before the hills was I brought forth,

26 While as yet He had not made land and plains,

And the sum of the dust of the earth."

The description is poetical, and affords some room for imagination. By
תּהומות are not intended the unrestrained primeval waters, but, as also
[Pro 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#020), the inner waters, treasures
of the earth; and consequently by מעינות, not the fountains of the sea
on this earth (Ewald, after [Job
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#016)), but he springs or places of
springs (for מעין is n. loci to עין, a well as an eye of the earth;
vid., [Gen 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)), by means of which
the internal waters of the earth communicate themselves to the earth
above (cf. [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011) with [Gen
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025)). נכבּדּי־מים(abounding with
water) is a descriptive epitheton to מעינות, which, notwithstanding its
fem. plur., is construed as masc. (cf. [Pro
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016)). The Masora does not distinguish
the thrice-occurring נכבדי according to its form as written ([Isa
23:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008)). The form נכבּדּי (which, like
בּתּים, would demand Metheg) is to be rejected; it is everywhere to be
written נכבּדּי nettirw (Ewald, 214b) with Pathach, with Dagesh
following; vid., Kimchi, Michlol 61b. Kimchi adds the gloss מעיני מים
רבים, which the Gr. Venet., in accordance with the meaning of נכבד
elsewhere, renders by πηγαῖς δεδοξασμένων ὑδάτων (as also Bttcher: the
most honoured = the most lordly); but Meri, Immanuel, and others rightly
judge that the adjective is here to be understood after [Gen
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#002); [Job
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#021) (but in this latter passage כבד
does not mean "to be numerous"): loaded = endowed in rich measure.

[Pro 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025)

Instead of בּאין, in (yet) non-existence (24), we have here טרם, a
subst. which signifies cutting off from that which already exists (vid.,
at [Gen 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005)), and then as a particle
nondum or antequam, with בּ always antequam, and in [Pro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#026) עד־לא, so long not yet (this also
originally a substantive from עדה, in the sense of progress). With
הטבּעוּ (were settled) (as [Job 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#006),
from טבע, to impress into or upon anything, imprimere, infigere) the
question is asked: wherein? Not indeed: in the depths of the earth, but
as the Caraite Ahron b. Joseph answers, אל קרקע הים, in the bottom of
the sea; for out of the waters they rise up, [Psa
104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008) (cf. at [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009)).

[Pro 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#026)

ארץ וחוּצות is either, connecting the whole with its part: terra cum
campis, or ארץ gains by this connection the meaning of land covered with
buildings, while חוצות the expanse of unoccupied land, or the free field
outside the towns and villages (cf. בּר, Arab. barrytt) (Fl.), vid.,
[Job 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#010); [Job
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017) (where we have translated "in
the steppe far and wide"); and regarding the fundamental idea, vid.,
above at [Pro 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016). Synonymous with
ארץ, as contrast to חוצות, is תּבל, which like יבוּל (produce, wealth)
comes from יבל, and thus denotes the earth as fruit-bearing (as אדמה
properly denotes the humus as the covering of earth). Accordingly, with
Ewald, we may understand by ראשׁ עפרות, "the heaps of the many clods of
the fertile arable land lying as if scattered on the plains." Hitzig
also translates: "the first clods of the earth." We do not deny that
עפרות may mean clods of earth, i.e., pieces of earth gathered together,
as [Job 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#006), עפרת זהב, gold ore,
i.e., pieces of earth or ore containing gold. But for clods of earth the
Heb. language has the nouns רגב and מגרפה; and if we read together
עפרות, plur. of the collective עפר (dust as a mass), which comes as from
a n. unitatis עפרה, and ראשׁ, which, among its meanings in poetry as
well as in prose, has also that of the sum, i.e., the chief amount or
the total amount (cf. the Arab. râs âlmâl, the capital, τὸ κεφάλαιον),
then the two words in their mutual relation yield the sense of the sum
of the several parts of the dust, as of the atoms of dust (Cocceius;
Schultens, summam pluverum orbis habitabilis); and Fleischer rightly
remarks that other interpretations, as ab initio pulveris orbis,
praecipus quaeque orbis terrarum, caput orbis terrarum (i.e., according
to Rashi, the first man; according to Umbreit, man generally), leave the
choice of the plur. עפרות unintelligible. Before these creatures
originated, Wisdom was, as she herself says, and emphatically repeats,
already born; חוללתּי is the passive of the Pilel חולל, which means to
whirl, to twist oneself, to bring forth with sorrow (Aquila, Theodotion,
ὠδινήθην; Graec. Venet. 24a, πέπλασμαι, 25b, ὠδίνημαι), then but poet.
generally to beget, to bring forth ([Pro
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#023); [Pro
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010)).

[Proverbs 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 8:27</span></span>

But not only did her existence precede the laying of the foundation of
the world; she was also actively taking part in the creative work:

"When He prepared the heavens, I was there,

When He measured out a circle for the mirror of the multitude of
waters."

Again a sentence clothed with two designations of time. The adv. of
place שׁם is used, chiefly poetically, for אז, eo tempore (Arab. thumm,
in contradistinction to thamm, eo loco); but here it has the
signification of place, which includes that of time: Wisdom was there
when God created the world, and had then already long before that come
into existence, like as the servant of Jahve, [Isa
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016), with just such a שׁם אני, says
that He is there from the time that the history of nations received a
new direction, beginning with Cyrus. הכין signifies to give a firm
position or a definite direction. Thus [Job
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#027) of Wisdom, whom the Creator
places before Himself as a pattern (ideal); here, as [Jer
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012); [Psa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007), of the setting up, restoring
throughout the whole world. In the parallel member, חוּג, corresponding
to שׁמים, appears necessarily to designate the circle or the vault of
the heavens ([Job 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#014)), which,
according to the idea of the Hebrews, as in Homer, rests as a half-globe
on the outermost ends of the disc of the earth surrounded with water,
and thus lies on the waters. Vid., Hupfeld under [Psa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002). This idea of the ocean girdling
the earth is introduced into the O.T. without its being sanctioned by
it. The lxx (καὶ ὅτε ἀφώριζε τὸν ἑαυτοῦ θρόνον ἐπ ̓ ἀνέμων) appears to
understand תהום of the waters above; but תהום never has this meaning, ים
([Job 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008); [Job
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030)) might rather be interpreted of
the ocean of the heavens. The passage in accordance with which this
before us is to be expounded is [Job
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#010) : He has set a limit for the
surface of the waters, i.e., describing over them a circle setting
bounds to their region. So here, with the exchange of the functions of
the two words; when He marked out a circle over the surface of the
multitude of waters, viz., to appoint a fixed region (מקוה, [Gen
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010)) for them, i.e., the seas,
fountains, rivers, in which the waters under the heavens spread over the
earth. חקק signifies incidere, figere, to prescribe, to measure off, to
consign, and directly to mark out, which is done by means of firm
impressions of the graver's tools. But here this verb is without the
Dagesh, to distinguish between the infinitive and the substantive חקּו
(his statute or limit); for correct texts have בּחקו (Michlol 147a); and
although a monosyllable follows, yet there is no throwing back of the
tone, after the rule that words terminating in o in this case maintain
their ultima accentuation (e.g., משׂמו אל, [Num
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#023)). Fleischer also finally decides
for the explanation: quum delinearet circulum super abysso, when He
marked out the region of the sea as with the circle.

[Proverbs 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 8:28</span></span>

In [Pro 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#028), [Pro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#029), these two features of the figure
of the creation of the world return (the beginning of the firmament, and
the embankment of the under waters); hence we see that the discourse
here makes a fresh start with a new theme:

28 "When He made firm the ether above,

When He restrained the fountains of the waters;

29 When He set to the sea its bounds,

That the waters should not pass their limits

When He settled the pillars of the earth;

30 Then was I with Him as director of the work,

And was delighted day by day,

Rejoicing always before Him,

31 Rejoicing in His earth,

And having my delight in the children of men."

We have, with Symmachus, translated שׁחקים (from שׁחק, Arab. shaḳ, to
grind, to make thin) by αἰθέρα, for so the fine transparent strata of
air above the hanging clouds are called - a poetic name of the firmament
רקיע. The making firm עמּץ is not to be understood locally, but
internally of the spreading out of the firmament over the earth settled
for continuance (an expression such as [Psa
78:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023)). In 28b the Masora notices the
plur. עינות instead of עינות with לית as unicum (cf. Michlol 191a); the
transition of the sound is as in גּלית from galajta. The inf. עזוז
appears on the first look to require a transitive signification, as the
lxx and the Targ., the Graec. Venet. and Luther (da er festiget die
Brnnen der tieffen = when He makes firm the fountains of the deep) have
rendered it. Elster accordingly believes that this signification must be
maintained, because בּ here introduces creative activity, and in itself
is probably the transitive use of עזז, as the Arab. 'azz shows: when He
set His עז against the מים עזּים ([Isa
43:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#016)). But the absence of the subject
is in favour of the opinion that here, as everywhere else, it is
intransitive; only we may not, with Hitzig, translate: when the
fountains of the flood raged wildly; but, since 28b, if not a creative
efficiency, must yet express a creative work, either as Ewald, with
reference to מעוז, fortress: when they became firm, or better as
Fleischer, with reference to מים עזים: when they broke forth with power,
with strong fulness. Whether the suff. of חקּו, 29a, refers back to the
sea or to Jahve, is decided after the parallel פּיו. If this word is
equivalent to its coast (cf. [Psa
104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)), then both suffixes refer to
the sea; but the coast of the sea, or of a river, is called שׂפה, not
פּה, which only means ostium (mouth), not ora. Also [Isa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#007) will require to be translated: by
the mouth of the Nile, and that פי, [Psa
133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002), may denote the under edge,
arises from this, that a coat has a mouth above as well as below, i.e.,
is open. Thus both suff. are to be referred to God, and פיו d is to be
determined after [Job 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#012). The
clause beginning with ומים corresponds in periodizing discourse to a
clause with ut, Ewald, 338. בּחוּקו is the same form, only written
plene, as [Pro 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027), בּחקו = בּחקּו =
בּחקקו.

(Note: One might regard it as modified from בחקקו; but that שׁוּרי, [Psa
102:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#012), is modified from שׁררי, or
הורי, [Gen 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026), from הררי, is by no
means certain.)

[Pro 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)

In this sentence, subordinating to itself these designations of time,
the principal question is as to the meaning of אמון, Hofmann's
interpretation (Schriftbew. i. 97) "continually" (inf. absol. in an
adverbial sense) is a judicious idea, and אמן, to endure, remains indeed
in אמת (stability); but in this sense, which נאמן represents, it is not
otherwise used. Also מהימנתּא (believing, trusting) of the Targ. (Graec.
Venet. πίστις, as if the word used were אמוּן) is linguistically
inadmissible; the Hebr. האמין corresponds to the Aram. haimēn. One of
these two only is possible: אמון means either opifex or alumnus. The
meaning alumnus (Aquila, τιθηνουμένη; Meri and Malbim, אמון בחיק האל, ἐν
τῷ κόλπῳ τοῦ Θεοῦ) would derive the word from אמן, to support, make
firm, take care of; the form ought to have a passive sense (Symm. Theod.
ἐστηριγμένη), as גּדול sa ,)חם, twined, pressed, strong, great, and be
pointed נקד (with a moveable ā, different from the form בּגוד, חמוץ,
[Isa 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)); and אמון, in the meaning
nursling, foster-child, favourite (Schultens, Euchel, Elster, and
others, also Rashi and Kimchi, who all find in אמון the meaning of
education, גידול), would place itself with אמוּן, fostered, [Lam
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005), אמן, fosterer, אמנת ,reret,
foster-mother. This is the meaning of the word according to the
connection, for Wisdom appears further on as the child of God; as such
she had her joy before Him; and particularly God's earth, where she
rejoiced with the sons of men, was the scene of her mirth. But on this
very account, because this is further said, we also lose nothing if אמון
should be interpreted otherwise. And it is otherwise to be interpreted,
for Wisdom is, in consequence of קנני ([Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)), and חוללתי, which is twice used
([Pro 8:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#024)), God's own child; but
the designation אמון would make Him to be the אמן of Wisdom; and the
child which an אמן bears, [Num 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012),
and fosters, [Est 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#007), is not his own.
Hence it follows that אמון in this signification would be an ἅπαξ
λεγόμενον; on the other hand, it really occurs elsewhere, [Jer
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#015) (vid., Hitzig l.c.), in the
sense of opifex. This sense, which recommends itself to Ewald, Hitzig,
Bertheau, and Zckler, lies also at the foundation of the ἁρμόζουσα of
the lxx, מתקנא of the Syr., the cuncta componens of Jerome, and the
designation of Wisdom as ἡ τῶν πάντων τεχνῖτις of the Book of Wisdom
7:21. The workmaster is called אמון, for which, [Sol
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#002), אמן, or rather אמּן (ommân),
Aram. and Mishn. אוּמן; not, perhaps, as he whom one entrusts with
something in whom one confides or may confide in a work (vid.,
Fleischer, loc), but from אמן, to be firm, as one who is strong in his
art, as perhaps also the right hand, which has the name ימין as being
the artifex among the members. The word occurs also as an adjective in
the sense of "experienced, skilful," and does not form a fem. according
to the use of the word in this case before us, only because handicraft
(אוּמנוּת) belongs to men, and not to women; also in the Greek,
δημιουργός, in the sense of τὰ δημόσια (εἰς τὸ δημόσιον) ἐργαζόμενος,
has no fem.; and in Lat., artifex is used as a substantive (e.g., in
Pliny: artifex omnium natura), like an adj. of double gender. It is thus
altogether according to rule that we read אמון and not אמונה (after the
form בּגודה); also we would make a mistake if we translated the word by
the German "Werkmeisterin" work-mistress, directress (Hitzig), for it is
intended to be said that she took up the place of a workmaster with Him,
whereby chiefly the artistic performances of a חרשׁ artificer are
thought of. This self-designation of Wisdom is here very suitable; for
after she has said that she was brought forth by God before the world
was, and that she was present when it was created, this אמון now answers
the question as to what God had in view when He gave to Wisdom her
separate existence, and in what capacity she assisted in the creation of
the world: it was she who transferred the creative thoughts originally
existing in the creative will of God, and set in motion by His creative
order, from their ideal into their real effectiveness, and, as it were,
artistically carried out the delineations of the several creatures; she
was the mediating cause, the demiurgic power which the divine creative
activity made use of, as is said, [Pro
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019), "Jahve has by Wisdom founded the
earth," and as the Jerusalem Targ. [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001), in connection with [Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022), translates: בחוּכמא ברא יי ית
שׁמיּא וית ארעא.

But - this is now the question - does the further unfolding of the
thoughts here agree with this interpretation of אמון? That we may not
misunderstand what follows, we must first of all represent to ourselves,
that if אמון meant the foster-child, Wisdom could not yet, in what
follows, be thought of as a little child ([Num
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012)), for that would be an idea
without any meaning; to rejoice \[spielen = play\] is certainly quite in
accordance with youth, as [Sa2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#014)
shows (where שׂחק לפני is said of the sportive combat of youthful
warriors before the captain), not exclusively little children. So, then,
we must guard against interpreting שׁעשׁוּעים, with the lxx and Syr., in
the sense of שׁעשׁוּעיו - an interpretation which the Targ., Jerome, the
Graec. Venet., and Luther have happily avoided; for mention is not made
here of what Wisdom is for Jahve, but of what she is in herself. The
expression is to be judged after [Psa
109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004) (cf. [Gen
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002)), where Hitzig rightly
translates, "I am wholly prayer;" but Bttcher, in a way characteristic
of his mode of interpretation, prefers, "I am ointment" (vid., Neue
Aehrenlese, No. 1222). The delight is meant which this mediating
participation in God's creating work imparted to her - joy in the work
in which she was engaged. The pluralet. שׁעשׁועים is to be understood
here, not after [Jer 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020), but after
[Isa 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008); [Psa
119:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#070), where its root-word, the
Pilpel שׁעשׁע (proceeding from the primary meaning of caressing,
demulcere), signifies intransitively: to have his delight somewhere or
in anything, to delight oneself - a synonym to the idea of play (cf.
Aram. שׁעא, Ethpe. to play, Ethpa. to chatter); for play is in contrast
to work, an occupation which has enjoyment in view. But the work, i.e.,
the occupation, which aims to do something useful, can also become a
play if it costs no strenuous effort, or if the effort which it costs
passes wholly into the background in presence of the pleasure which it
yields. Thus Wisdom daily, i.e., during the whole course of creation,
went forth in pure delight; and the activity with which she translated
into fact the creative thoughts was a joyful noise in the sight of God,
whose commands she obeyed with childlike devotion; cf. [Sa2
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#021), where David calls his dancing
and leaping before the ark of the covenant a 'שׂחק לפני ה. But by
preference, her delight was in the world, which is illustrated from the
Persian Minokhired, which personifies Wisdom, and, among other things,
says of her: "The creation of the earth, and its mingling with water,
the springing up and the growth of the trees, all the different colours,
the odour, the taste, and that which is pleasing in everything - all
that is chiefly the endowment and the performance of Wisdom."

(Note: Vid., Spiegel's Grammatik der prsisprache, p. 162, cf. 182.)

She also there says that she was before all celestial and earthly
beings, the first with Ormuzd, and that all that is celestial and
earthly arose and also remains in existence by her. But the earth was
the dearest object of her delight in the whole world; to help in
establishing it ([Pro 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019)) was her
joyful occupation; to fashion it, and to provide it with the
multiplicity of existences designed for it, was the most pleasant part
of her creative activity. For the earth is the abode of man, and the
heart-pleasure of Wisdom was with (את־, prep.) the children of men; with
them she found her high enjoyment, these were her peculiar and dearest
sphere of activity.

[Pro 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#031)

Since the statements of Wisdom, as to her participation in the creation
of the world, are at this point brought to a close, in this verse there
is set forth the intimate relation into which she thus entered to the
earth and to mankind, and which she has continued to sustain to the
present day. She turned her love to the earth for the sake of man, and
to man not merely as a corporeal, but especially as a spiritual being,
to whom she can disclose her heart, and whom, if he receives her, she
can bring back to God (Book of Wisdom 7:27). There are not here express
references to Gen 1 or Gen 2. In יום יום (day for day, as [Gen
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#010), cf. [Est
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#004), יום ויום) we have not to think of
the six days of creation. But inasmuch as the whole description goes
down to בּני אדם as its central-point, it denotes that creation came to
its close and its goal in man. The connection of תּבל ארץ is as [Job
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#012), where ארצה for ארץ is wholly,
as לילה, חרסה, and the like, an original accusative.

[Proverbs 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 8:32</span></span>

After that Wisdom has shown in [Pro
8:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022) how worthy her fellowship is
of being an object of desire from her mediating place between God and
the world, she begins with this verse (as [Pro
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#024); [Pro
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#007)) the hortatory (parnetische)
concluding part of her discourse:

"And now, ye sons, hearken unto me,

And salvation to those who keep my ways!"

The lxx omits [Pro 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#033), and obviates
the disturbing element of ואשׁרי, 32b, arising from its ו, by a
transposition of the stichs. But this ואשרי is the same as the καὶ
μακάριος, [Mat 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#006); the organic
connection lies hid, as Schleiermacher (Hermeneutik, p. 73) well
expresses it, in the mere sequence; the clause containing the proof is
connected by ו with that for which proof is to be assigned, instead of
subordinating itself to it with כּי. Such an exclamatory clause has
already been met with in [Pro 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013),
there אדם follows as the governed genitive, here a complete sentence
(instead of the usual participial construction, שׁמרי דרכי) forms this
genitive, Gesen. 123, 3, Anm. 1.

[Proverbs 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 8:33</span></span>

The summons 32a, and its reason 32b, are repeated in these verses which
follow:

33 "Hear instruction, and be wise,

And withdraw not.

34 Blessed is the man who hears me,

Watching daily at my gates,

Waiting at the posts of my doors!

35 For whosoever findeth me has found life,

And has obtained favour from Jahve;

36 And whosoever misseth me doeth wrong to himself;

All they who hate me love death."

The imper. וחכמוּ, 33a (et sapite), is to be judged after [Pro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004), וחיה, cf. the Chethı̂b, [Pro
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#020); one sees this from the words
ואל־תּפרעוּ which follow, to which, after [Pro
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#032), as at [Pro
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#013), to אל־תּרף, מוּסר is to be
placed as object: and throw not to the winds (ne missam faciatis; vid.,
regarding פרע at [Pro 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#025)), viz.,
instruction (disciplinam).

[Pro 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#034)

The אשׁרי here following שׁמעוּ is related to it as assigning a motive,
like the ואשׁרי ([Pro 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#032)) following
שׁמעו; according to the Masora, we have to write אשׁרי with Mercha, and
on the first syllable Gaja (vid., Baer's Torath Emeth, pp. 26, 29; cf.
under [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)). לשׁקד signifies to
watch, not in the sense of ad vigilandum, but vigilando, as [Isa
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022); [Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001); Ewald, 380d. In
contradistinction to העיר and הקיץ, which denote watching as the
consequence of wakefulness or an interruption of sleep, שׁקד signifies
watching as a condition, and that as one which a person willingly
maintains (Psychol. p. 275), the intentional watching (cf. Arab.
shaḳidha, to fix penetrating eyes upon anything), with על of the place
and object and aim ([Jer 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006); cf. העיר
על, [Job 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006)). The plurals דּלתות
(fores, as חמות, [Jer 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018), maenia)
and פתחים are amplifying plurs. of extension, suggesting the idea of a
palace or temple; מזוּזת (postes portae, in quibus cardines ejus
moventur, from זוּז, to move hither and thither) is intended to indicate
that he to whom the discourse refers holds himself in closest nearness
to the entrance, that he might not miss the moment when it is opened, or
when she who dwells there presents herself to view. "The figure is
derived from the service of a court: Wisdom is honoured by her
disciples, as a queen or high patroness; cf. Samachschari's Golden
Necklaces, Pr. 35: Blessed is the man who knocks only at God's door, and
who departs not a nail's breadth from God's threshold" (Fl.).

[Pro 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#035)

This verse gives the reason for pronouncing those happy who honour
Wisdom. The Chethı̂b is כי מצאי מצאי חיּים, but the passing over into the
sing. 35b is harsh and objectionable; the Kerı̂ rightly regards the
second מצאי as a mistaken repetition of the first, and substitutes כי
מצאי מצא חיים, with which the וחטאי ([Pro
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036)) of the antithesis agrees.
Regarding מצאי, for which, less accurately, מצאי (only with the Dech
without Metheg) is generally written, vid., Accentuationssystem, vii. 2.
הפיק, to get out = reach, exchanged with מצא, [Pro
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013) (vid., there); according to its
etymon, it is connected with מן, of him from or by whom one has reached
anything; here, as [Pro 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#002); [Pro
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022), God's favour, favorem a Jova
impetravit.

[Pro 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036)

חטאי may, it is true, mean "my sinning one = he who sins against me (חטא
לי)," as קמי is frequently equivalent to קמים עלי; but the contrast of
מצאי places it beyond a doubt that חטא stands here in its oldest
signification: to miss something after which one runs ([Pro
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#002)), seeks ([Job
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024)), at which one shoots (Hiph. [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016)), etc., id non attingere quod
petitur, Arab. âkhṭa, to miss, opposite to âṣab, to hit (Fl.). Just
because it is the idea of missing, which, ethically applied, passes over
into that of sin and guilt (of fault, mistake, false step, "Fehls,
Fehlers, Fehltritts"), חטא can stand not only with the accusative of the
subject in regard to which one errs, [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016), but also with the accusative of
the subject which one forfeits, i.e., misses and loses, [Pro
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002), cf. [Hab
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010); so that not only מאס נפשׁו, [Pro
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#032) (animam suam nihili facit), but
also חוטא נפשׁו, [Pro 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002) (animam
suam pessumdat), is synonymous with חמס נפשׁו (animae suae h. e. sibi
ipsi injuriam facit). Whoever misses Wisdom by taking some other way
than that which leads to her, acts suicidally: all they who wilfully
hate (Piel) wisdom love death, for wisdom is the tree of life, [Pro
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018); wisdom and life are one, 35a, as
the Incarnate Wisdom saith, [Joh 8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051),
"If a man keep my sayings, he shall never see death." In the Logos,
Wisdom has her self-existence; in Him she has her personification, her
justification, and her truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 9](pro009)

</div>
