<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro027)  [Next](pro029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)

[Proverbs 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 28:1</span></span>

1 The godless flee without any one pursuing them;

But the righteous are bold like a lion.

We would misinterpret the sequence of the accents if we supposed that it
denoted רשׁע as obj.; it by no means takes ואין־רדף as a parenthesis.
רשׁע belongs thus to נסוּ as collective sing. (cf. e.g., [Isa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004));

(Note: The Targum of [Pro 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001) is, in
Bereschith rabba, c. 84, ערק רשּׁיעא ולא רריפין להּ; that lying before
us is formed after the Peshito.)

in 1b, יבטח, as comprehensive or distributive (individualizing)
singular, follows the plur. subject. One cannot, because the word is
vocalized כּכפיר and not כּכּפיר, regard יבטח as an attributive clause
thereto (Ewald, like Jerome, quasi leo confidens); but the article,
denoting the idea of kind, does not certainly always follow כ. We say,
indifferently, כּארי or כּארי, כּלּביא or כּלביא, and always כּאריה, not
כּאריה. In itself, indeed, יבטח may be used absolutely: he is confident,
undismayed, of the lion as well as of the leviathan, [Job
40:23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023). But it is suitable thus without
any addition for the righteous, and נסו and יבטח correspond to each
other as predicates, in accordance with the parallelism; the
accentuation is also here correct. The perf. נסו denotes that which is
uncaused, and yet follows: the godless flee, pursued by the terrible
images that arise in their own wicked consciences, even when no external
danger threatens. The fut. יבטח denotes that which continually happens:
the righteous remains, even where external danger really threatens, bold
and courageous, after the manner of a young, vigorous lion, because
feeling himself strong in God, and assured of his safety through Him.

[Proverbs 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 28:2</span></span>

There now follows a royal proverb, whose key-note is the same as that
struck at [Pro 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#002), which states how
a country falls into the οὐκ ἀγαθόν of the rule of the many:

Through the wickedness of a land the rulers become many;

And through a man of wisdom, of knowledge, authority continues.

If the text presented בּפשׁע as Hitzig corrects, then one might think of
a political revolt, according to the usage of the word, [Kg1
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#019), etc.; but the word is בּפּשׁע,

(Note: Thus to be written with Gaja here and at [Pro
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#006), after the rule of
Metheg-Setzung, 42.)

and פּשׁע (from פּשׁע, dirumpere) is the breaking through of limits
fixed by God, apostasy, irreligion, e.g., [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005). But that many rulers for a land
arise from such a cause, shows a glance into the Book of Hosea, e.g.,
[Hos 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#016) : "They return, but not to
the Most High (sursum); they are become like a deceitful bow; their
princes shall then fall by the sword;" and [Hos
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004) : "They set up kings, but not by
me; they have made princes, and I knew it not." The history of the
kingdom of Israel shows that a land which apostatizes from revealed
religion becomes at once the victim of party spirit, and a subject of
contention to many would-be rulers, whether the fate of the king whom it
has rejected be merited or not. But what is now the contrast which 2b
brings forward? The translation by Bertheau and also by Zckler is
impossible: "but through intelligent, prudent men, he (the prince)
continueth long." For 2a does not mean a frequent changing of the
throne, which in itself may not be a punishment for the sins of the
people, but the appearance at the same time of many pretenders to the
throne, as was the case in the kingdom of Israel during the interregnum
after the death of Jeroboam II, or in Rome at the time of the thirty
tyrants; יאריך must thus refer to one of these "many" who usurp for a
time the throne. בּאדם may also mean, [Pro
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#028), inter homines; but אדם, with
the adjective following, e.g., [Pro
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#007); [Pro
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#023); [Pro
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#018); [Pro
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#016), always denotes one; and that
translation also changes the כּן into a "so," "then" introducing the
concluding clause, which it altogether disregards as untranslatable. But
equally impossible is Bttcher's: "among intelligent, prudent people, one
continues (in the government)," for then the subject-conception on which
it depends would be slurred over. Without doubt כּן is here a
substantive, and just this subject-conception. That it may be a
substantive has been already shown at [Pro
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#019). There it denoted integrity
(properly that which is right or genuine); and accordingly it means
here, not the status quo (Fleischer: idem rerum status), but
continuance, and that in a full sense: the jurisdiction (properly that
which is upright and right), i.e., this, that right continues and is
carried on in the land. Similarly Heidenheim, for he glosses כן by מכון
הארץ; and Umbreit, who, however, unwarned by the accent, subordinates
this כן \[in the sense of "right"\] to ידע as its object. Zckler, with
Bertheau, finds a difficulty in the asyndeton מבין ידע. But these words
also, [Neh 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029), stand together as a
formula; and that this formula is in the spirit and style of the Book of
Proverbs, passages such as [Pro 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#025);
[Pro 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#007)

(Note: The three connected words ובאדם מבין ידע have, in Lwenstein, the
accents Mercha, Mercha, Mugrash; but the Venetian, 1515, 20, Athias, v.
d. Hooght, and Hahn, have rightly Tarcha, Mercha, Mugrash, - to place
two Merchas in Ben-Naphtali's manner.)

show. A practical man, and one who is at the same time furnished with
thorough knowledge, is thus spoken of, and prudence and knowledge of
religious moral character and worth are meant. What a single man may do
under certain circumstances is shown in [Pro
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#022); [Ecc
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#015). Here one has to think of a man
of understanding and spirit at the helm of the State, perhaps as the
nearest counsellor of the king. By means of such an one, right continues
long (we do not need to supply להיות after "continues long"). If, on the
one side, the State falls asunder by the evil conduct of the inhabitants
of the land, on the other hand a single man who unites in himself sound
understanding and higher knowledge, for a long time holds it together.

[Proverbs 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 28:3</span></span>

A proverb of a tyrant here connects itself with that of usurpers:

A poor man and an oppressor of the lowly -

A sweeping rain without bringing bread.

Thus it is to be translated according to the accents. Fleischer
otherwise, but also in conformity with the accents: Quales sunt vir
pauper et oppressor miserorum, tales sunt pluvia omnia secum abripiens
et qui panem non habent, i.e., the relation between a poor man and an
oppressor of the needy is the same as that between a rain carrying all
away with it and a people robbed thereby of their sustenance; in other
words: a prince or potentate who robs the poor of their possessions is
like a pouring rain which floods the fruitful fields - the separate
members of the sentence would then correspond with each other after the
scheme of the chiasmus. But the comparison would be faulty, for גּבר רשׁ
and אין לחם fall together, and then the explanation would be idem per
idem. A "sweeping rain" is one which has only that which is bad, and not
that which is good in rain, for it only destroys instead of promoting
the growth of the corn; and as the Arab, according to a proverb compared
by Hitzig, says of an unjust sultan, that he is a stream without water,
so an oppressor of the helpless is appropriately compared to a rain
which floods the land and brings no bread. But then the words, "a poor
man and an oppressor of the lowly," must designate one person, and in
that case the Heb. words must be accentuated, גבר רשׁ ועשׁק דלים (cf.
[Pro 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#004)). For, that the oppressor of
the helpless deports himself toward the poor man like a sweeping rain
which brings no bread, is a saying not intended to be here used, since
this is altogether too obvious, that the poor man has nothing to hope
for from such an extortioner. But the comparison would be appropriate if
3a referred to an oppressive master; for one who belongs to a master, or
who is in any way subordinated to him, has before all to expect from him
that which is good, as a requital for his services, and as a proof of
his master's condescending sympathy. It is thus asked whether "a poor
man and an oppressor of the lowly" may be two properties united in the
person of one master. This is certainly possible, for he may be
primarily a poor official or an upstart (Zckler), such as were the Roman
proconsuls and procurators, who enriched themselves by impoverishing
their provinces (cf. lxx [Pro 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#015));
or a hereditary proprietor, who seeks to regain what he has lost by
extorting it from his relatives and workmen. But רשׁ (poor) is not
sufficient to give this definite feature to the figure of the master;
and what does this feature in the figure of the master at all mean? What
the comparison 3b says is appropriate to any oppressive ruler, and one
does not think of an oppressor of the poor as himself poor; he may find
himself in the midst of shattered possessions, but he is not poor; much
rather the oppressor and the poor are, as e.g., at [Pro
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#013), contrasted with each other.
Therefore we hold, with Hitzig, that רשׁ of the text is to be read rosh,
whether we have to change it into ראשׁ, or to suppose that the Jewish
transcriber has here for once slipped into the Phoenician writing of the
word;

(Note: The Phoen. writes רש (i.e., רשׁ, rus); vid., Schrder's Phnizische
Gram. p. 133; cf. Gesen. Thes. under ראשׁ.)

we do not interpret, with Hitzig, גּבר ראשׁ in the sense of ἄνθρωπος
δυνάστης, Sir. 8:1, but explain: a man (or master = גּביר) is the head
(cf. e.g., [Jdg 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#008)), and oppresses
the helpless. This rendering is probable, because גּבר רשׁ, a poor man,
is a combination of words without a parallel; the Book of Proverbs does
not once use the expression אישׁ רשׁ, but always simply רשׁ (e.g., [Pro
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#006); [Pro
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#013)); and גּבר is compatible with
חכם and the like, but not with רשׁ. If we stumble at the isolated
position of ראשׁ, we should consider that it is in a certain measure
covered by דלים; for one has to think of the גבר, who is the ראשׁ, also
as the ראשׁ of these דלים, as one placed in a high station who numbers
poor people among his subordinates. The lxx translates ἀνδρεῖος ἐν
ἀσεβείαις as if the words of the text were גּבּור רשׁע (cf. the
interchange of גּבר and גּבּור in both texts of [Psa
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)), but what the lxx read must
have been גּבּור להרשׁיע ([Isa 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022));
and what can גּבּור here mean? The statement here made refers to the
ruinous conduct of a גּבר, a man of standing, or גּביר, a high lord, a
"wicked ruler," [Pro 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#015). On the
contrary, what kind of rain the rule of an ideal governor is compared
to, [Psa 72:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001) tells.

[Proverbs 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 28:4</span></span>

4 They who forsake the law praise the godless;

But they who keep the law become angry with them,

viz. the godless, for רשׁע is to be thought of collectively, as at [Pro
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001). They who praise the godless turn
away from the revealed word of God ([Psa
73:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#011)); those, on the contrary, who
are true to God's word ([Pro 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#018))
are aroused against them (vid., regarding גרה, [Pro
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#018)), they are deeply moved by their
conduct, they cannot remain silent and let their wickedness go
unpunished; התגּרה is zeal (excitement) always expressing itself,
passing over into actions (syn. התעורר, [Job
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008)).

[Proverbs 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 28:5</span></span>

A similar antithetic distich:

Wicked men understand not what is right;

But they who seek Jahve understand all.

Regarding the gen. expression אנשׁי־רע, vid., under [Pro
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014). He who makes wickedness his
element, falls into the confusion of the moral conception; but he whose
end is the one living God, gains from that, in every situation of life,
even amid the greatest difficulties, the knowledge of that which is
morally right. Similarly the Apostle John ([Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020)): "ye have an unction from the
Holy One, and ye know all things" (οἴδατε πάντα): i.e., ye need to seek
that knowledge which ye require, and which ye long after, not without
yourselves, but in the new divine foundation of your personal life; from
thence all that ye need for the growth of your spiritual life, and for
the turning away from you of hostile influences, will come into your
consciences. It is a potential knowledge, all-comprehensive in its
character, and obviously a human relative knowledge, that is here meant.

[Proverbs 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 28:6</span></span>

What is stated in this proverb is a conclusion from the preceding, with
which it is also externally connected, for רשׁ (= ראשׁ), רשׁע, רע, and
now רשׁ, follow each other:

Better a poor man who walketh in his innocence,

Than a double-going deceiver who is rich thereby.

A variation of [Pro 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#001).
Stainlessness, integritas vitae, as a consequence of unreserved devotion
to God, gives to a man with poverty a higher worth and nobility than
riches connected with falsehood which "halts between two opinions" ([Kg1
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021)), and appears to go one way,
while in reality it goes another. The two ways דּדכים (cf. Sir. 2:12,
οὐαί ἁμαρτωλῷ ... ἐπιβαίνοντι ἐπὶ δύο τρίβους) are, as [Pro
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#018), not ways going aside to the
right or to the left of the right way, but the evil way which the
deceiver truly walks in, and the good way which he pretends to walk in
(Fleischer); the two ways of action placed over against one another, by
one of which he masks the other.

[Proverbs 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 28:7</span></span>

7 He who keepeth instruction is a wise son;

But he that is a companion of profligates bringeth his father into
shame.

We have translated תורה at [Pro 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#004)
by "law;" here it includes the father's instruction regarding the right
way of life. נוצר תּורה, according to the nearest lying syntax, has to
be taken as pred. זוללים are such as squander their means and destroy
their health, vid., under [Pro 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#020).
רעה signifies, as frequently from the idea of (cf. [Pro
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#003)) pasturing, or properly of
tending, to take care of, and to have fellowship with. יכלים shall put
to shame denotes both that he himself does disgrace to him, and that he
brings disgrace to him on the part of others.

[Proverbs 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 28:8</span></span>

This verse continues a series of proverbs (commencing in [Pro
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#007)) beginning with a participle:

He who increaseth his wealth by interest and usury,

Gathereth it for one who is benevolent toward the lowly.

Wealth increased by covetous plundering of a neighbour does not remain
with him who has scraped it together in so relentless a manner, and
without considering his own advantage; but it goes finally into the
possession of one who is merciful towards the poor, and thus it is
bestowed in a manner that is pleasing to God (cf. [Pro
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022); [Job
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#016).). The Kerı̂, which drops the
second ב, appears to wish to mitigate the sharpness of the distinction
of the second idea supposed in its repetition. But [Lev
25:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035), where an Israelite is
forbidden to take usury and interest from his brother, the two are
distinguished; and Fleischer rightly remarks that there נשׁך means usury
or interest taken in money, and תרבית usury or interest taken in kind;
i.e., of that which one has received in loan, such as grain, or oil,
etc., he gives back more than he has received. In other words: נשׁך is
the name of the interest for the capital that is lent, and מרבּית, or,
as it is here called תרבית, the more, the addition thereto, the increase
(Luther: ubersatz). This meaning of gain by means of lending on interest
remains in נשׁך; but תרבית, according to the later usus loq., signifies
gain by means of commerce, thus business-profit, vid., Baba Meza, v. 1.
Instead of יקבּצנּוּ, more recent texts have the Kal

(Note: If, as Hitzig, after J. H. Michaelis, remarks, the word were
Ben-Asher's יקבּצנּוּ, then it would be thus rightly punctuated by
Clodius and the moderns. Kimchi, in the Wrterbuch under קבץ, adduces
this word as Ben-Asher's. But the Masora knows nothing of it. It marks
יקבּצנּוּ, [Jer 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010), with לית as
unicum, and thus supposes for the passages before us יקבּצנּוּ, which
certainly is found in MSS, and is also marked on the margin with לית as
unicum.)

יקבּצנּוּ. לחונן also is, as [Pro
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#031); [Pro
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017), part. Kal, not inf. Poel: ad
largiendum pauperibus (Merc., Ewald, Bertheau), for there the person of
him who presents the gift is undefined; but just this, that it is
another and better-disposed, for whom, without having it in view, the
collector gathers his stores, is the very point of the thought.

[Proverbs 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 28:9</span></span>

9 He who turneth away his ear not to hear of the law,

Even his prayer is an abomination.

Cf. [Pro 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008) and the argument [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022). Not only the evil which such an
one does, but also the apparent good is an abomination, an abomination
to God, and eo ipso also in itself: morally hollow and corrupt; for it
is not truth and sincerity, for the whole soul, the whole will of the
suppliant, is not present: he is not that for which he gives himself out
in his prayer, and does not earnestly seek that which he presents and
expresses a wish for in prayer.

[Proverbs 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 28:10</span></span>

A tristich beginning with a participle:

He who misleads the upright into an evil way,

He shall fall into his own pit;

But the innocent shall inherit that which is good.

In the first case, [Pro 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027) is
fulfilled: the deceiver who leads astray falls himself into the
destruction which he prepared for others, whether he misleads them into
sin, and thus mediately prepares destruction for them, or that he does
this immediately by enticing them into this or that danger; for בּדרך רע
may be understood of the way of wicked conduct, as well as of the
experience of evil, of being betrayed, robbed, or even murdered. That
those who are misled are called ישׁרים, explains itself in the latter
case: that they are such as he ought to show respect towards, and such
as deserved better treatment, heightens the measure of his guilt. If we
understand being morally led astray, yet may we not with Hitzig here
find the "theory" which removes the punishment from the just and lays it
on the wicked. The clause [Pro 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#008) is
not here applicable. The first pages of the Scripture teach that the
deceiver does not by any means escape punishment; but certainly the
deceiver of the upright does not gain his object, for his diabolical joy
at the destruction of such an one is vain, because God again helps him
with the right way, but casts the deceiver so much the deeper down. As
the idea of דרך רע has a twofold direction, so the connections of the
words may be genitival (via mali) as well as adjectival (via mala).
בּשׁחוּתו is not incorrectly written for בּשׁוּחתו, for שׁחית occurs
(only here) with שׁחוּת as its warrant both from שׁחה, to bend, to sink;
cf. לזוּת under [Pro 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#024). In line
third, opposite to "he who misleads," stand "the innocent" (pious), who,
far from seeking to entice others into the evil way and bring them to
ruin, are unreservedly and honestly devoted to God and to that which is
good; these shall inherit good (cf. [Pro
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#035)); even the consciousness of
having made no man unhappy makes them happy; but even in their external
relations there falls to them the possession of all good, which is the
divinely ordained reward of the good.

[Proverbs 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 28:11</span></span>

11 A rich man deems himself wise;

But a poor man that hath understanding searcheth him out,

or, as we have translated, [Pro 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017),
goes to the bottom of him, whereby is probably thought of the case that
he seeks to use him as a means to an ignoble end. The rich man appears
in his own eyes to be a wise man, i.e., in his self-delusion he thinks
that he is so; but if he has anything to do with a poor man who has
intelligence, then he is seen through by him. Wisdom is a gift not
depending on any earthly possession.

[Proverbs 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 28:12</span></span>

We take [Pro 28:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012) together. A
proverb regarding riches closes this group, as also the foregoing is
closed, and its commencement is related in form and in its contents to
[Pro 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#002) :

12 When righteous men triumph, the glory is great;

And when the godless rise, the people are searched for.

The first line of this distich is parallel with [Pro
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002); cf. [Pro
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#010), [Pro
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#011) : when the righteous rejoice,
viz., as conquerors (cf. e.g., [Psa
60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008)), who have the upper hand, then
תּפארת, bright prosperity, is increased; or as Fleischer, by comparison
of the Arab. yawm alazynt (day of ornament = festival day), explains: so
is there much festival adornment, i.e., one puts on festival clothes,
signum pro re signata: thus all appears festal and joyous, for
prosperity and happiness then show themselves forth. רבּה is adj. and
pred. of the substantival clause; Hitzig regards it as the attribute:
"then is there great glory;" this supposition is possible (vid., [Pro
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#026), and under [Psa
89:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#051)), but here it is purely
arbitrary. 28a is parallel with 12b: "if the godless arise, attain to
power and prominence, these men are spied out, i.e., as we say, after
[Zep 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012), they are searched for as
with lamps. יחפּשׂ אדם is to be understood after Obadiah, [Oba
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006), cf. [Pro
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004) : men are searched out, i.e., are
plundered (in which sense Heidenheim regards חפשׂ as here a
transposition from חשׂף), or, with reference to the secret police of
despotism: they are subjected to espionage. But a better gloss is יסּתר
אדם 28a: the people let themselves be sought for, they keep themselves
concealed in the inside of their houses, they venture not out into the
streets and public places (Fleischer), for mistrust and suspicion
oppress them all; one regards his person and property nowhere safer than
within the four walls of his house; the lively, noisy, variegated life
which elsewhere rules without, is as if it were dead.

[Proverbs 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 28:13</span></span>

13 He that denieth his sin shall not prosper;

But he that acknowledgeth and forsaketh it shall obtain mercy.

Thus is this proverb translated by Luther, and thus it lives in the
mouth of the Christian people. He who falsely disowns, or with
self-deception excuses, if he does not altogether justify his sins,
which are discernible as פּשׁעים, has no success; he remains, after [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), in his conscience and life
burdened with a secret ban; but he who acknowledges (the lxx has
ἐξηγούμενος instead of ἐξομολογούμενος, as it ought to be) and forsakes
(for the remissio does not follow the confessio, if there is not the
accompaniment of nova obedientia) will find mercy (ירחם, as [Hos
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)). In close connection therewith
stands the thought that man has to work out his salvation "with fear and
trembling" ([Phi 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012)).

[Proverbs 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 28:14</span></span>

14 Well is it with the man who feareth always;

But he that is stiff-necked shall fall into mischief.

The Piel פּחד occurs elsewhere only at [Isa
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#013), where it is used of the fear
and dread of men; here it denotes the anxious concern with which one has
to guard against the danger of evil coming upon his soul. Aben Ezra
makes God the object; but rather we are to regard sin as the object, for
while the truly pious is one that "fears God," he is at the same time
one that "feareth evil." The antithesis extends beyond the nearest lying
contrast of fleshly security; this is at the same time more or less one
who hardens or steels his heart (מקשׁה לבּו), viz., against the word of
God, against the sons of God in his heart, and against the affectionate
concern of others about his soul, and as such rushes on to his own
destruction (יפּול בּרעה, as at [Pro
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#020)).

[Proverbs 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 28:15</span></span>

This general ethical proverb is now followed by one concerning the king:

15 A roaring lion and a ravening bear

Is a foolish ruler over a poor people,

i.e., a people without riches and possessions, without lasting sources
of help - a people brought low by the events of war and by calamities.
To such a people a tyrant is a twofold terror, like a ravenous monster.
The lxx translate מושׁל רשׁע by ὃς τυραννεῖ πτωχὸς ὤν, as if רשׁ had
been transferred to this place from [Pro
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#003). But their translation of רשׁע,
[Pro 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#007), wavers between ἀσεβής and
πτωχός, and of the bear they make a wolf זאב, dialectical דּיב. שׁוקק
designates a bear as lingering about, running hither and thither,
impelled by extreme hunger (Venet. ἐπιοῦσα), from שׁקק = שׁוּק, to
drive, which is said of nimble running, as well as of urging impulses
(cf. under [Gen 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)), viz., hunger.

[Proverbs 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 28:16</span></span>

Another proverb of the king:

O prince devoid of understanding and rich in oppression!

He that hateth unrighteous gain continueth long.

The old interpreters from the lxx interpret מעשׁקּות רבו as pred. (as
also Fleischer: princeps qui intelligentiae habet parum idem
oppressionis exercet multum); but why did not the author use the word
הוּא or והוּא instead of this ambiguous inconvenient ו? Hitzig regards
the first term as a nominative absolute, which does not assume a suffix
in the second line. But examples such as 27a, [Pro
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#007), are altogether of a different
sort; there occurs a reference that is in reality latent, and only finds
not expression; the clause following the nominative is related to it as
its natural predicate, but here 15b is an independent clause standing
outside of any syntactical relation to 15a. Heidenheim has acknowledged
that here there lies before us a proverb not in the form of a mere
declaration, but of a warning address, and thus also it is understood by
Ewald, Bertheau, Elster, and Zckler. The accentuation seems to proceed
on the same supposition. It is the only passage in the Book of Proverbs
where נגיד, of the supreme ruler of the people, and where the plur.
תּבוּנות, occur; it is not therefore at all strange if the proverb also
has something strange in its formation. Often enough, proverbs are in
the form of an address to a son, and generally to their reader; why not
also one at least to the king? It is a proverb as when I say: Oh thou
reckless, merry fellow! he who laughs much will sometimes weep long.
Thus here the address is directed to the prince who is devoid of all
wisdom and intelligence, which are necessary for a prince; but on this
account the more earnest in exhortation to say to him that only one who
hates defrauding the people attains an old age; thus that a prince who
plunders the people wantonly shortens his life as a man, and his
position as a ruler (cf. שׁניהם, [Pro
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#022)). The Kerı̂ שׂנא has the tone
thrown back on the penult., as the Chethı̂b שׂנאי would also have it, cf.
למצאי, [Pro 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#009). The relation of a
plur. subj. to a sing. pred. is as at [Pro
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#016). Regarding בּצע, vid., under
[Pro 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#019). A confirmation of this
proverb directing itself to princes if found in [Jer
22:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013), the woe pronounced upon
Jehoiakim. And a glance at the woe pronounced in [Hab
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#012), shows how easily [Pro
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#017) presents itself in connection.

[Proverbs 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 28:17</span></span>

17 A man burdened with the guilt of blood upon his soul

Fleeth to the pit; let no one detain him.

Luther translates: "A man that doeth violence to the blood of any one,"
as if he had read the word עשׁק. Lwenstein persuades himself that עשׁק
may mean "having oppressed," and for this refers to לבוּשׁ, having
clothed, in the Mishna נשׁוּי, רבוּב, Lat. coenatus, juratus; but none
of all these cases are of the same nature, for always the conduct
designated is interpreted as a suffering of that which is done, e.g.,
the drawing on, as a being clothed; the riding, as a being ridden, etc.
Of עשׁק, in the sense of the oppression of another, there is no such
part. pass. as throws the action as a condition back upon the subject.
This is valid also against Aben Ezra, who supposes that עשׁק means
oppressing after the forms אנוּר, שׁדוּד, שׁכוּן, for of שׁכוּן, settled
= dwelling, that which has just been said is true; that אנוּר is
equivalent to אגר, cf. regarding it under [Pro
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001), and that שׁדוּד, [Psa
137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008), is equivalent to שׁדד, is not
true. Kimchi adds, under the name of his father (Joseph Kimchi), also
שׁחוּט, [Jer 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#007) = שׁוחט; but that
"slaughtered" can be equivalent to slaughtering is impossible. Some MSS
have the word עשׂק, which is not inadmissible, but not in the sense of
"accused" (Lwenstein), but: persecuted, exposed to war; for עשׁק
signifies to treat hostilely, and post-bibl. generally to aspire after
or pursue anything, e.g., עסוק בּדברי תורה, R. עשׂ (whence Piel
contrectare, cf. [Isa 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002), according
to which עשׁק appears to be an intensifying of this עשׂה). However,
there is no ground for regarding עשׁק

(Note: Bttcher supposes much rather עשּׁק = מעשּׁק; also, [Pro
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#011), דבּר = מדבּר; but that does not
follow from the defectiva scriptio, nor from anything else.)

as not original, nor in the sense of "hard pressed;" for it is not used
of avenging persecution, but: inwardly pressed, for [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014) עשׁקה also signifies the anguish
of a guilty conscience. Whoever is inwardly bowed down by the blood of a
man whom he has murdered, betakes himself to a ceaseless flight to
escape the avenger of blood, the punishment of his guilt, and his own
inward torment; he flees and finds no rest, till at last the grave (בור
according to the Eastern, i.e., the Babylonian, mode of writing בּר)
receives him, and death accomplishes the only possible propitiation of
the murderer. The exhortation, "let no one detain him," does not mean
that one should not lay hold on the fugitive; but, since תּמך בּ does
not mean merely to hold fast, but to hold right, that one should not
afford him any support, any refuge, any covering or security against the
vengeance which pursues him; that one should not rescue him from the arm
of justice, and thereby invade and disturb the public administration of
justice, which rests on moral foundations; on the other side, the Book
of Prov; [Pro 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011)., has uttered its
exhortation to save a human life whenever it is possible to do so. The
proverb lying before us cannot thus mean anything else than that no one
should give to the murderer, as such, any assistance; that no one should
save him clandestinely, and thereby make himself a partaker of his sin.
Grace cannot come into the place of justice till justice has been fully
recognised. Human sympathy, human forbearance, under the false title of
grace, do not stand in contrast to this justice. We must, however,
render אל־יתמכו־בו not directly as an admonition against that which is
immoral; it may also be a declaration of that which is impossible: only
let no one support him, let no one seek to deliver him from the unrest
which drives him from place to place. This is, however, in vain; he is
unceasingly driven about to fulfil his lot. But the translation: nemine
eum sustinente (Fleischer), is inadmissible; a mere declaration of a
fact without any subjective colouring is never אל reven si g seq. fut.

[Proverbs 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 28:18</span></span>

18 He who walketh blamelessly is helped,

And he who is perverse in a double way suddenly perisheth.

The lxx translate תמים by δικαίως (as the accusative of manner), Aquila
and Theodotion by τέλειος; but it may also be translated τέλειον or
τελειότητα, as the object accus. of [Pro
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007). Instead of עקּשׁ דּרכים, [Pro
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#006), there is here נעקּשׁ דּרכים,
obliquely directed in a double way, or reflex bending himself. At [Pro
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#006) we have interpreted the dual
דּרכים rightly, thus בּאחת cannot refer back to one of these two ways;
besides, דּרך as fem. is an anomaly, if not a solecism. בּאחת signifies,
like the Aram. כּחרא, either all at once (for which the Mish. כּאחת,
Aram. כּחרא), or once (= בּפּעם אחת), and it signifies in the passage
before us, not: once, aliquando, as Nolde, with Flacius, explains, but:
all at once, i.e., as Geier explains: penitus, sic ut pluribus casibus
porro non sit opus. Schultens compares:

"Procubuit moriens et humum semel ore momordit."

(Note: Aeneid, xi. 418.)

Rightly Fleischer: repente totus concidet.

[Proverbs 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 28:19</span></span>

19 He who cultivateth his land is satisfied with bread,

And he that graspeth after vanities is satisfied with poverty.

A variation of [Pro 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#011). The pred.
here corresponds to its contrast. On רישׁ (here and at [Pro
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#007)), instead of the more frequent
ראשׁ, cf. [Pro 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004).

[Proverbs 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 28:20</span></span>

To this proverb of the cultivation of the land as the sure source of
support, the next following stands related, its contents being cognate:

20 A strong, upright man is enriched with blessings;

But he that hastens to become rich remains not unpunished.

אישׁ אמוּנים, [Pro 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#006), as well as
אמוּנות 'א, denotes a man bonae fidei; but the former expression refers
the description to a constancy and certainty in the relations of favour
and of friendship, here to rectitude or integrity in walk and conduct;
the plur. refers to the all-sidedness and the ceaselessness of the
activity. בּרכות is related, as at [Pro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#006) : the idea comprehends blessings
on the side of God and of man, thus benedictio rei and benedictio voti.
On the contrary, he who, without being careful as to the means, is in
haste to become rich, remains not only unblessed, but also is not
guiltless, and thus not without punishment; also this לא ינּקה (e.g.,
[Pro 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#029)), frequently met in the
Mishle, is, like ברכות, the union of two ideas, for generally the bibl.
mode of conception and language comprehends in one, sin, guilt, and
punishment.

[Proverbs 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 28:21</span></span>

With a proverb, in the first half of which is repeated the beginning of
the second appendix, [Pro 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023), a new
group commences:

21 Respect of persons is not good;

And for a morsel of bread a man may become a transgressor.

Line first refers to the administration of justice, and line second -
the special generalized - to social life generally. The "morsel of
bread," as example of a bribe by means of which the favour of the judge
is purchased, is too low a conception. Hitzig well: "even a trifle, a
morsel of bread ([Sa1 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#036)), may, as
it awakens favour and dislike within us, thus in general call forth in
the will an inclination tending to draw one aside from the line of
strict rectitude." Geier compares A Gellius' Noct. Att. i. 15, where
Cato says of the Tribune Coelius: Frusto panis conduci potest vel ut
taceat vel ut loquatur.

[Proverbs 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 28:22</span></span>

22 The man of an evil eye hasteneth after riches,

And knoweth not that want shall come upon him.

Hitzig renders 'אישׁ וגו the man of an evil eye as apos. of the subject;
but in that case the phrase would have been אישׁ רע עין נבהל להון (cf.
e.g., [Pro 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#001)). רע עין ([Pro
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#006)) is the jealous, envious,
grudging, and at the same time covetous man. It is certainly possible
that an envious man consumes himself in ill-humour without quietness, as
Hitzig objects; but as a rule there is connected with envy a passionate
endeavour to raise oneself to an equal height of prosperity with the one
who is the object of envy; and this zeal, proceeding from an impure
motive, makes men blind to the fact that thereby they do not advance,
but rather degrade themselves, for no blessing can rest on it;
discontentedness loses, with that which God has assigned to us,
deservedly also that which it has. The pret. נבחל, the expression of a
fact; the part. נבהל, the expression of an habitual characteristic
action; the word signifies praeceps (qui praeceps fertur), with the
root-idea of one who is unbridled, who is not master of himself (vid.,
under [Psa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005), and above at [Pro
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#021)). The phrase wavers between נבהל
(Kimchi, under בהל; and Norzi, after Codd. and old editions) and נבהל
(thus, e.g., Cod. Jaman); only at [Psa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008) נבהל stands unquestioned. חסר
\[want\] is recognised by Symmachus, Syr., and Jerome. To this, as the
authentic reading, cf. its ingenious rendering of Bereschith Rabba, c.
58, to [Gen 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#014). The lxx reads, from
22b, that a חסיד, ἐλεήμων, will finally seize the same riches, according
to which Hitzig reads חסד, disgrace, shame (cf. [Pro
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#010)).

[Proverbs 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 28:23</span></span>

23 He that reproveth a man who is going backwards,

Findeth more thanks than the flatterer.

It is impossible that aj can be the suffix of אחרי; the Talmud, Tamid
28a, refers it to God; but that it signifies: after my (Solomon's)
example or precedence (Aben Ezra, Ahron b. Josef, Venet., J. H.
Michaelis), is untenable - such a name given by the teacher here to
himself is altogether aimless. Others translate, with Jerome: Qui
corripit hominem gratiam postea inveniet apud eum magis, quam ille qui
per linguae blandimenta decipit, for they partly purpose to read
אחרי־כן, partly to give to 'אח the meaning of postea. אחרי, Ewald says,
is a notable example of an adverb. Hitzig seeks to correct this adv. as
at [Neh 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030)., but where, with Keil,
אחרו is to be read; at [Jos 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#007), where
אחרי is to be erased; and at [Deu
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#030), where the traditional text is
accountable. This אחרי may be formed like אזי and מתי; but if it had
existed, it would not be a ἅπαξ λεγ. The accentuation also, in the
passage before us, does not recognise it; but it takes אחרי and אדם
together, and how otherwise than that it appears, as Ibn-Jachja in his
Grammar, and Immanuel

(Note: Abulwald (Rikma, p. 69) also rightly explains אחרי, as a
characterizing epithet, by אחרני (turned backwards).)

have recognised it, to be a noun terminating in aj. It is a formation,
like לפני, [Kg1 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#010) (cf. Olshausen's
Lehrb. p. 428f.), of the same termination as שׁדּי, חגּי, and in the
later Aram.-Heb. זכּי, and the like. The variant אחרי, noticed by
Heidenheim, confirms it; and the distinction between different classes
of men (vid., vol. i. p. 39) which prevails in the Book of Proverbs
favours it. A אדם אחרי is defined, after the manner of Jeremiah ([Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024)): a man who is directed
backwards, and not לפנים, forwards. Not the renegade - for מוכיח, opp.
מחליק לשׁון, does not lead to so strong a conception - but the
retrograder is thus called in German: Rcklufige one who runs backwards
or Rckwendige one who turns backwards, who turns away from the good, the
right, and the true, and always departs the farther away from them
(Immanuel: going backwards in his nature or his moral relations). This
centrifugal direction, leading to estrangement from the fear of Jahve,
or, what is the same thing, from the religion of revelation, would lead
to entire ruin if unreserved and fearless denunciation did not interpose
and seek to restrain it; and he who speaks

(Note: Lwenstein writes מוכיח, after Metheg-Setzung, 43, not
incorrectly; for the following word, although toned on the first
syllable, begins with guttural having the same sound.)

so truly, openly, and earnestly home to the conscience of one who is on
the downward course, gains for himself thereby, on the part of him whom
he has directed aright, and on the part of all who are well disposed,
better thanks (and also, on the part of God, a better reward, [Jam
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019).) than he who, speaking to him,
smooths his tongue to say to him who is rich, or in a high position,
only that which is agreeable. Laudat adulator, sed non est verus amator.
The second half of the verse consists, as often ([Psa
73:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#008); [Job
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#001); cf. Thorath Emeth, p. 51), of
only two words, with Mercha Silluk.

[Proverbs 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 28:24</span></span>

24 He who robbeth his father and mother, and saith:

It is no wrong, Is a companion of the destroyer.

The second line is related to [Pro
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#009). Instead of dominus perditionis
there found, there is here אישׁ משׁחית, vir perdens (perditor); the word
thus denotes a man who destroys, not from revenge, but from lust, and
for the sake of the life of men, and that which is valuable for men;
thus the spoiler, the incendiary, etc. Instead of אח there, here we have
חבר in the same sense. He who robs his parents, i.e., takes to himself
what belongs to them, and regards his doing so as no particular sin,

(Note: Accentuate ואמר אין פשׁע without Makkeph, as in Codd. 1294 and
old editions.)

because he will at last come to inherit it all (cf. [Pro
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#021) with [Pro
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#026)), to to be likened to a man who
allows himself in all offences against the life and property of his
neighbour; for what the deed of such a son wants in external violence,
it makes up in its wickedness, because it is a rude violation of the
tenderest and holiest demands of duty.

[Proverbs 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 28:25</span></span>

25 The covetous stirreth up strife;

But he that trusteth in Jahve is richly comforted.

Line first is a variation of [Pro
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#018); רחב־נפשׁ is not to be
interchanged with רחב־לב, [Pro 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#004).
He is of a wide heart who haughtily puffs himself up, of a wide soul
(cf. with Schultens הרחיב נפשׁו, of the opening up of the throat, or of
revenge, [Isa 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#014); [Hab
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)) who is insatiably covetous; for
לב is the spiritual, and נפשׁ the natural, heart of man, according to
which the widening of the heart is the overstraining of
self-consciousness, and the widening of the soul the overstraining of
passion. Rightly the lxx, according to its original text: ἄπληστος ἀνὴρ
κινεῖ (thus with Hitzig for κρινεῖ) νείκη. Line second is a variation of
[Pro 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#020); [Pro
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#025). Over against the insatiable is
he who trusts in God (וּב טח, with Gaja to the vocal, concluding the
word, for it follows a word accented on the first syllable, and
beginning with a guttural; cf. יא, [Pro
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002); יףּ, [Pro
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#018)), that He will bestow upon him
what is necessary and good for him. One thus contented is easily
satisfied (compare with the word [Pro
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025); [Pro
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#004), and with the matter, [Pro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003); [Pro
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#024)), is externally as well as
internally appeased; while that other, never contented, has no peace,
and creates dispeace around him.

[Proverbs 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 28:26</span></span>

The following proverb assumes the בטח of the foregoing:

(Note: We take the opportunity of remarking that the tendency to form
together certain proverbs after one catchword is found also in German
books of proverbs; vid., Paul, Ueber die urspr. Anord. von Friedanks
Bescheidenheit (1870), p. 12.)

26 He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool;

But he that walketh in wisdom shall escape.

From the promise in the second line, Hitzig concludes that a courageous
heart is meant, but when by itself לב never bears this meaning. He who
trusteth in his own heart is not merely one who is guided solely "by his
own inconsiderate, defiant impulse to act" (Zckler). The proverb is
directed against a false subjectivity. The heart is that fabricator of
thoughts, of which, as of man by nature, nothing good can be said, [Gen
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005); [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021). But wisdom is a gift from above,
and consists in the knowledge of that which is objectively true, that
which is normatively godlike. הלך בּחכמה is he who so walks that he has
in wisdom a secure authority, and has not then for the first time, when
he requires to walk, need to consider, to reckon, to experiment. Thus
walking in the way of wisdom, he escapes dangers to which one is exposed
who walks in foolish confidence in his own heart and its changeful
feelings, thoughts, imaginations, delusions. One who thoughtlessly
boasts, who vainly dreams of victory before the time, is such a person;
but confidence in one's own heart takes also a hundred other forms.
Essentially similar to this proverb are the words of [Jer
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#022)., for the wisdom meant in 26b is
there defined at [Jer 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023).

[Proverbs 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 28:27</span></span>

27 He that giveth to the poor suffereth no want;

But he that covereth his eyes meeteth many curses.

In the first line the pronoun לּו, referring back to the subject noun,
is to be supplied, as at [Pro 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#007)
להּ. He who gives to the poor has no want (מחסּור), for God's blessing
reimburses him richly for what he bestows. He, on the other hand, who
veils (מעלּים( sl, cf. the Hithpa., [Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)) his eyes so as not to see the
misery which calls forth compassion, or as if he did not see the misery
which has a claim on his compassion; he is (becomes) rich in curses,
i.e., is laden with the curses of those whose wants he cared not for;
curses which, because they are deserved, change by virtue of a divine
requital (vid., Sir. 4:5f.; Tob. 4:7) into all kinds of misfortunes
(opp. רב־בּרכות, 20a). מארה is constructed after the form מגרה, מקרה
from ארר.

[Proverbs 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 28:28</span></span>

The following proverb resembles the beginnings [Pro
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#002), [Pro
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012). The proverbs [Pro
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#028); [Pro
29:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#001), form a beautiful square grasp,
in which the first and third, and the second and fourth, correspond to
one another.

28 When the godless rise up, men hide themselves;

And when they perish, the righteous increase.

Line first is a variation of 12b. Since they who hide themselves are
merely called men, people, the meaning of ירבּוּ is probably not this,
that the righteous then from all sides come out into the foreground
(Hitzig), but that they prosper, multiply, and increase as do plants,
when the worms, caterpillars, and the like are destroyed (Fleischer);
Lwenstein glosses ירבּוּ by יגדלו, they become great = powerful, but
that would be Elihu's style, [Job
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#012), which is not in common use; the
names of masters and of those in authority, רב, רבּי, רבּן, רבּנוּת, are
all derived from רבב, not from רבה. The increase is to be understood of
the prosperous growth (to become great = to increase, as perhaps also
[Gen 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010)) of the congregation of the
righteous, which gains in the overthrow of the godless an accession to
its numbers; cf. [Pro 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002), and
especially [Pro 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 29](pro029)

</div>
