<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro006)  [Next](pro008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001)

[Proverbs 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 7:1</span></span>

The introduction first counsels in general to a true appreciation of
these well-considered life-rules of wisdom.

1 My son, keep my words,

And treasure up my commandments with thee.

2 Keep my commandments, and thou shalt live;

And my instruction as the apple of thine eye.

3 Wind them about thy fingers,

Write them on the tablet of thy heart.

The lxx has after [Pro 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001) another
distich; but it here disturbs the connection. Regarding צפן, vid., at
[Pro 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001); אתּך refers, as there, to
the sphere of one's own character, and that subjectively. Regarding the
imper. וחיה, which must here be translated according to its sense as a
conclusion, because it comes in between the objects governed by שׁמר,
vid., at [Pro 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004). There וחיה is
punctuated with Silluk; here, according to Kimchi (Michlol 125a), with
Segol-Athnach, וחיה, as in the Cod. Erfurt. 2 and 3, and in the editions
of Athias and Clodius, so that the word belongs to the class פתחין באתנח
(with short instead of long vowel by the pausal accent): no reason for
this is to be perceived, especially as ([Pro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004)) the Tsere (ê from aj) which is
characteristic of the imper. remains unchanged. Regarding אישׁון העין,
Arab. insân el-'ain, the little man of the eye, i.e., the apple of the
eye, named from the miniature portrait of him who looks into it being
reflected from it, vid., at [Psa 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008);
the ending ôn is here diminutive, like Syr. achuno, little brother,
beruno, little son, and the like. On [Pro
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#003), vid., at [Pro
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#021); [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003). The תפילין שׁל יד

(Note: תפילין, prayer-fillets, phylacteries.)

were wound seven times round the left arm and seven times round the
middle finger. The writing on the table of the heart may be regarded as
referring to [Deu 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#009) (the Mezuzoth).

(Note: = the door-posts, afterwards used by the Jews to denote the
passages of Scripture written on the door-posts.)

[Proverbs 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 7:4</span></span>

The subject-matter of this earnest warning are the admonitions of the
teacher of wisdom, and through him of Wisdom herself, who in contrast to
the world and its lust is the worthiest object of love, and deserves to
be loved with the purest, sincerest love:

4 Say to wisdom: "Thou art my sister!"

And call understanding "Friend;"

5 That they may keep thee from the strange woman,

From the stranger who useth smooth words.

The childlike, sisterly, and friendly relationship serves also to
picture forth and designate the intimate confidential relationship to
natures and things which are not flesh and blood. If in Arabic the poor
is called the brother of poverty, the trustworthy the brother of
trustworthiness, and abu, um (אם), achu, ucht, are used in manifold ways
as the expression for the interchangeable relation between two ideas; so
(as also, notwithstanding Ewald, 273b, in many Hebr. proper names) that
has there become national, which here, as at [Job
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014); [Job
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029), mediated by the connection of
the thoughts, only first appears as a poetic venture. The figurative
words of [Pro 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#004) not merely lead us
to think of wisdom as a personal existence of a higher order, but by
this representation it is itself brought so near, that אם easily
substitutes itself, [Pro 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#003), in the
place of אם. אחתי of Solomon's address to the bride brought home is in
its connection compared with Book of Wisdom 8:2. While the ôth of אחות
by no means arises from abstr. ûth, but achôth is derived from achajath,
מודע (as [Rut 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001), cf. מודעת, [Pro
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#002)), here by Mugrash מודע, properly
means acquaintance, and then the person known, but not in the
superficial sense in which this word and the Arab. ma'arfat are used
(e.g., in the Arabic phrase quoted by Fleischer, kanna aṣḥaab ṣarna
m'aaraf - nous tions amis, nous en sommes plus que de simples
connaissances), but in the sense of familiar, confidential alliance. The
infin. לשׁמרך does not need for its explanation some intermediate
thought to be introduced: quod eo conducet tibi ut (Mich.), but connects
itself immediately as the purpose: bind wisdom to thyself and thyself to
wisdom thus closely that thou mayest therewith guard thyself. As for the
rest, vid., [Pro 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#016); this verse
repeats itself here with the variation of one word.

[Proverbs 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 7:6</span></span>

How necessary it is for the youth to guard himself by the help of wisdom
against the enticements of the wanton woman, the author now shows by a
reference to his own observation.

6 For through the window of my house,

From behind the lattice I looked out;

7 Then saw I among the simple ones,

Discerned among the young people, a youth devoid of understanding.

כּי refers indeed to the immediately following clause, yet it actually
opens up the whole following exemplification. The connection with [Pro
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#005) would be closer if instead of the
extended Semitic construction it were said: nam quum ...prospicerem
vidi, etc. חלּון (from חלל, to bore through) is properly a place where
the wall is bored through. אשׁנב .hguor (from שׁנב = Arab. shaniba, to
be agreeable, cool, fresh) is the window-lattice or lattice-window,
i.e., lattice for drawing down and raising up, which keeps off the rays
of the sun. נשׁקף signifies primarily to make oneself long in order to
see, to stretch up or out the neck and the head, καραδοκεῖν, Arab.
atall, atal'a, and tatall'a of things, imminere, to overtop, to project,
to jut in; cf. Arab. askaf of the ostrich, long and bent, with respect
to the neck stretching it up, sakaf, abstr. crooked length. And בּעד is
thus used, as in Arab. duna, but not b'ad, is used: so placed, that one
in relation to the other obstructs the avenue to another person or
thing: "I looked forth from behind the lattice-window, i.e., with
respect to the persons or things in the room, standing before the
lattice-window, and thus looking out into the open air" (Fleischer).
That it was far in the night, as we learn at [Pro
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#009), does not contradict this looking
out; for apart from the moon, and especially the lighting of the
streets, there were star-lit nights, and to see what the narrator saw
there was no night of Egyptian darkness. But because it was night 6a is
not to be translated: I looked about among those devoid of experience
(thus e.g., Lwenstein); but he saw among these, observed among the
youths, who thus late amused themselves without, a young man whose want
of understanding was manifest from what further happened. Bertheau: that
I might see, is syntactically impossible. The meaning of וארא is not
determined by the אבינה following, but conversely אבינה stands under the
operation of ו (= אבינה, [Neh 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007)),
characterizing the historic aorist. Regarding פּתי, vid., at [Pro
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#004). בּנים is the masc. of בּנות,
Arab. benât in the meaning maiden. בבּנים has in correct texts,
according to the rules of the accents, the ב raphatum.

(Note: Regarding the Targ. of [Pro
7:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#006), vid., Perles, Etymologische
Studien, 1871, p. 9.)

[Proverbs 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 7:8</span></span>

Now follows, whither he saw the young fop \[Laffen\] then go in the
darkness.

8 Going up and down the street near her corner,

And he walked along the way to her house,

9 In the twilight, when the day declined,

In the midst of the night and deep darkness.

We may interpret עבר as appos.: juvenem amentem, ambulantem, or as the
predicate accus.: vidi juvenem ... ambulantem; for that one may so
express himself in Hebrew (cf. e.g., [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001); [Dan
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007)), Hitzig unwarrantably denies. The
passing over of the part. into the finite, 8b, is like [Pro
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014), [Pro
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#017), and that of the inf. [Pro
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#027); [Pro
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#008). שׁוּק, Arab. suk (dimin. suweiḳa,
to separate, from sikkat, street, alley), still means, as in former
times, a broad street, a principal street, as well as an open place, a
market-place where business is transacted, or according to its etymon:
where cattle are driven for sale. On the street he went backwards and
forwards, yet so that he kept near to her corner (i.e., of the woman
whom he waited for), i.e., he never withdrew himself far from the corner
of her house, and always again returned to it. The corner is named,
because from that place he could always cast a look over the front of
the house to see whether she whom he waited for showed herself.
Regarding פּנּהּ for פּנּתהּ, vid., at [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005) : a primary form פּן has never
been in use; פּנּים, [Zac 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010), is
plur. of פּנּהּ. אצל (from אצל, Arab. wasl, to bind) is, as a
substantive, the side (as the place where one thing connects itself with
another), and thus as a preposition it means (like juxta from jungere)
beside, Ital. allato. דּרכו is the object. accus., for thus are
construed verbs eundi (e.g., [Hab
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#012), Num. 30:17, cf. [Pro
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#022)).

[Pro 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#009)

The designations of time give the impression of progress to a climax;
for Hitzig unwarrantably denies that נשׁף means the twilight; the
Talmud, Berachoth 3b, correctly distinguishes תרי נשׁפי two twilights,
the evening and the morning twilight. But the idea is not limited to
this narrow sense, and does not need this, since the root-word נשׁף
(vid., at [Isa 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024)) permits the
extension of the idea to the whole of the cool half (evening and night)
of the entire day; cf. the parallel of the adulterer who veils himself
by the darkness of the night and by a mask on his countenance, [Job
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015) with [Jer
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016). However, the first group of
synonyms, בּנשׁף בּערב יום (with the Cod. Frankf. 1294, to be thus
punctuated), as against the second, appears to denote an earlier period
of the second half of the day; for if one reads, with Hitzig, בּערב יום
(after [Jdg 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#009)), the meaning remains
the same as with בּערב יום, viz., advesperascente die (Jerome), for ערב
= Arab. gharab, means to go away, and particularly to go under, of the
sun, and thus to become evening. He saw the youth in the twilight, as
the day had declined (κέκλικεν, [Luk
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#029)), going backwards and forwards;
and when the darkness of night had reached its middle, or its highest
point, he was still in his lurking-place. אישׁון לילה, apple of the eye
of the night, is, like the Pers. dili scheb, heart of the night, the
poetic designation of the middle of the night. Gusset incorrectly:
crepusculum in quo sicut in oculi pupilla est nigredo sublustris et
quasi mistura lucis ac tenebrarum. אישׁון is, as elsewhere לב,
particularly the middle; the application to the night was specially
suitable, since the apple of the eye is the black part in the white of
the eye (Hitzig). It is to be translated according to the accus., in
pupilla noctis et caligine (not caliginis); and this was probably the
meaning of the poet, for a ב is obviously to be supplied to ואפלה.

[Proverbs 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 7:10</span></span>

Finally, the young man devoid of understanding sees his waiting
rewarded: like meets like.

10 And, lo, a woman coming to meet him,

In the attire of an harlot and of subtle heart.

11 Boisterous is she, and ungovernable;

Her feet have no rest in her own house.

12 At one time before her door, at another in the street,

And again at every corner she places herself on the watch.

"[Pro 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#012) (Hitzig) expresses what is
wont to be, instead of a single event, [Pro
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011), viz., the custom of a street
harlot. But she who is spoken of is not such an one; lurking is not
applicable to her (cf. [Job 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009)),
and, [Pro 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011), it is not meant that
she is thus inclined." But Hitzig's rendering of [Pro
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011), "she was boisterous ... in her
house her feet had no rest," is inaccurate, since neither היאו nor
שׁכנוּ is used. Thus in [Pro 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011) and
[Pro 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#012) the poet gives a
characteristic of the woman, introduced by הנּהו into the frame of his
picture, which goes beyond that which then presented itself to his eyes.
We must with [Pro 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#012) reject also
[Pro 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011); and even that would not be
a radical improvement, since that characteristic lying behind the
evident, that which was then evident begins with וּנצרת לב (and subtle
in heart). We must thus suppose that the woman was not unknown to the
observer here describing her. He describes her first as she then
appeared. שׁית Hitzig regards as equivalent to שׁוית, similitude (from
שׁוה), and why? Because שׁית does not mean "to lay against," but "to
place." But [Exo 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#004) shows the
contrary, and justifies the meaning attire, which the word also has in
[Psa 73:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#006). Meri less suitably compares
[Kg2 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030), but rightly explains תקון
(dressing, ornament), and remarks that שׁית elliptical is equivalent to
בּשׁית. It is not the nominative (Bertheau), but the accusative, as
תבנית, [Psa 144:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#012), Ewald, 279d. How
Hitzig reaches the translation of ונצרת לב by "and an arrow in her
heart" (et saucia corde)

(Note: Virgil's Aeneid, iv. 1.)

one can only understand by reading his commentary. The usage of the
language, [Pro 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023), he remarks, among
other things, would stamp her as a virtuous person. As if a phrase like
נצר לב could be used both sensu bono and sensu malo! One can guard his
heart when he protects it carefully against moral danger, or also when
he purposely conceals that which is in it. The part. נצוּר signifies,
[Isa 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008), besieged (blockaded), [Eze
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#012), protected, guarded, and [Isa
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#006); [Isa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004), concealed, hidden. Ewald, 187b,
refers these three significations in the two passages in Isaiah and in
the passage before us to צרר, Niph. נצר (as נגל); but (1) one would then
more surely take צוּר (cf. נמּול, נבכים) as the verbal stem; (2) one
reaches the idea of the concealed (the hidden) easier from that of the
preserved than from that of the confined. As one says in Lat. homo
occultus, tectus, abstrusus, in the sense of κρυψίνους, so it is said of
that woman נצרת לב, not so much in the sense of retenta cor, h.e. quae
quod in corde haberet non pandebat, Fr. retenue (Cocc.), as in the sense
of custodita cor, quae intentionem cordis mentemque suam callide novit
premere (Mich.): she is of a hidden mind, of a concealed nature; for she
feigns fidelity to her husband and flatters her paramours as her only
beloved, while in truth she loves none, and each of them is to her only
a means to an end, viz., to the indulgence of her worldly sensual
desire. For, as the author further describes here, she is המיּה (fem. of
המה = המי, as [Pro 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#021); [Isa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#002)), tumultuosa, externally as
internally impetuous, because full of intermingling lust and deceit
(opp. ἡσύχιος, [Pe1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004); [Ti1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011)), and סררת, self-willed, not
minding the law of duty, of discretion, or of modesty (from סרר, Arab.
sharr, pervicacem, malum esse). She is the very opposite of the
noiseless activity and the gentle modesty of a true house-wife, rude,
stubborn, and also vagrant like a beast in its season ([Hos
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#014)): in domo ipsius residere
nequeunt pedes ejus; thus not οἰκουρός or οἰκουργός ([Tit
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#005)), far removed from the genuine
woman - like εἴσω ἥσυχον μένειν δόμων

(Note: Eurip. Herac.) - a radt, as they call such a one in Arab. (Wnsche
on [Hos 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001))

or as she is called in Aram. נפקת בּרא.

[Pro 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#012)

This verse shows how she conducts herself when she wanders abroad. It is
no common street-walker who is designated (no "Husterin," Arab. ḳaḥbt,
after which also the female demon-name (Arab.) se'alâ is explained), but
that licentious married wife, who, no better than such a strumpet when
she wanders abroad, hunts after lovers. The alternating פּעם (properly a
stroke) Fleischer compares with the Arab. synonyms, marrt, a going over,
karrt, a going back, una volta, una fiata, une fois (Orelli, Synon. der
Zeit und Ewigkeit, p. 51). Regarding חוּץ, vid., at [Pro
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016) : it is the free space without,
before the house-door, or also before the gate of the city; the
parallelism speaks here and at [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020) more in favour of the former
signification.

[Proverbs 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 7:13</span></span>

After this digression the poet returns to the subject, and further
describes the event as observed by himself.

And she laid hold on him and kissed him;

Put on a bold brow and said to him.

The verb נשׁק is here, after its primary signification, connected with
the dat.: osculum fixit ei. Thus also [Gen
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#026) is construed, and the Dagesh in
לּו is, as there, Dag. forte conj., after the law for which the national
grammarians have coined the technical name אתי מרחיק (veniens e
longinquo, "coming out of the distance," i.e., the attraction of a word
following by one accented on the penult.). The penult.-accenting of
נשׁקה is the consequence of the retrogression of the accent (נסוג אחור),
which, here where the word from the first had the penult, only with
Metheg, and thus with a half a tone, brings with it the dageshing of the
לו following, as the original penultima-accenting of והחזיקה does of the
בו which follows it, for the reading בּו by Lwenstein is contrary to the
laws of punctuation of the Textus receptus under consideration here.

(Note: Vid., Baer's Torath Emeth, p. 29f., and Psalmen-Commentar under
[Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005).)

As בו and לו have received the doubling Dagesh, so on the other hand,
according to Ewald, 193b, it has disappeared from העזה (written with
Raphe according to Kimchi, Michlol 145a). And as נשׁקה has the tone
thrown back, so the proper pausal ותּאמר is accented on the ult., but
without attracting the לו following by dageshing, which is the case only
when the first of the two words terminates in the sound of ā (āh). העז
פניו is said of one who shows firmness of hardness of countenance (Arab.
slabt alwajh), i.e., one who shows shamelessness, or, as we say, an iron
forehead (Fl.).

[Proverbs 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 7:14</span></span>

She laid hold on him and kissed him, both of which actions were
shameless, and then, assuming the passivity and modesty befitting the
woman, and disregarding morality and the law, she said to the youth:

14 "To bring peace-offerings was binding upon me,

To-day have I redeemed my vows.

15 Therefore am I come out to meet thee,

To seek thy face, and have found thee."

We have translated זבחי שׁלמים "peace-offerings," proceeding on the
principle that שׁלם (sing. only [Amo
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#022), and on the Phoenician altar at
Marseilles) denotes contracting friendship with one (from שׁלם, to hold
friendly relationship), and then the gifts having this in view; for the
idea of this kind of offering is the attestation and confirmation of
communion with God. But in view of the derivatives שׁלמנים and שׁלּוּם,
it is perhaps more appropriate to combine שׁלם with שׁלּם, to discharge
perfectly, and to translate it thank-payment-offering, or with v.
Hofmann, a due-offering, where not directly thank-offering; for the
proper eucharistic offering, which is the expression of thanks on a
particular occasion, is removed from the species of the Shelamim by the
addition of the words על־תּודה ([Lev
7:12-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012)). The characteristic of the
Shelamim is the division of the flesh of the sacrifice between Jahve and
His priests on the one side, and the person (or persons) bringing it on
the other side: only one part of the flesh of the sacrifice was Jahve's,
consumed by fire ([Lev 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016)); the
priests received one part; those who brought the offering received back
another part as it were from the altar of God, that they might eat it
with holy joy along with their household. So here the adulteress says
that there was binding upon her, in consequence of a vow she had taken,
the duty of presenting peace-offerings, or offerings that were due;
to-day (she reckons the day in the sense of the dies civilis from night
to night) she has performed her duties, and the שׁלמי נדר have yielded
much to her that she might therewith regale him, her true lover; for
with על־כּן she means to say that even the prospect of the gay festival
which she can prepare for him moved her thus to meet him. This address
of the woman affords us a glimpse into the history of the customs of
those times. The Shelamim meals degenerated in the same manner as our
Kirmsen.

(Note: Kirmse = anniversary of the dedication of a church, village fte.)

Secularization lies doubly near to merrymaking when the law sanctions
this, and it can conceal itself behind the mask of piety. Regarding
שׁחר, a more exact word for בּקּשׁ, vid., at [Pro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028). To seek the countenance of one
is equivalent to to seek his person, himself, but yet not without
reference to the wished-for look \[aspectus\] of the person.

[Proverbs 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 7:16</span></span>

Thus she found him, and described to him the enjoyment which awaited him
in eating and drinking, then in the pleasures of love.

16 "My bed have I spread with cushions,

Variegated coverlets, Egyptian linen;

17 I have sprinkled my couch

With myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.

18 Come then, we will intoxicate ourselves with love till the morning,

And will satisfy ourselves in love."

The noun ערשׂ, from ערשׂ, = Arab. 'arash, aedificare, fabricari,
signifies generally the wooden frame; thus not so much the bed within as
the erected bed-place (cf. Arab. 'arsh, throne, and 'arysh, arbour).
This bedstead she had richly and beautifully cushioned, that it might be
soft and agreeable. רבד, from רב, signifies to lay on or apply closely,
thus either vincire (whence the name of the necklace, [Gen
41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042)) or sternere (different from
רפד, [Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013), which acquires the
meaning sternere from the root-meaning to raise up from under,
sublevare), whence מרבדּים, cushions, pillows, stragulae. Bttcher
punctuates מרבדּים incorrectly; the ב remains aspirated, and the
connection of the syllables is looser than in מרבּה, Ewald, 88d. The
צטבות beginning the second half-verse is in no case an adjective to
מרבדים, in every case only appos., probably an independent conception;
not derived from חטב (cogn. חצב), to hew wood (whence Arab. ḥaṭab,
fire-wood), according to which Kimchi, and with him the Graec. Venet.
(περιξύστοις), understands it of the carefully polished bed-poles or
bed-boards, but from חטב = Arab. khaṭeba, to be streaked, of diverse
colours (vid., under [Psa 144:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#012)),
whence the Syriac machṭabto, a figured (striped, checkered) garment.
Hitzig finds the idea of coloured or variegated here unsuitable, but
without justice; for the pleasantness of a bed is augmented not only by
its softness, but also by the impression which its costliness makes on
the eye. The following אטוּן מצרים stands in an appositional relation to
חטבות, as when one says in Arabic taub-un dı̂bâg'-un, a garment brocade =
of brocade. אטוּן (after the Syr. for אטוּן, as אמוּן) signifies in the
Targum the cord (e.g., [Jer 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006)),
like the Arab. ṭunub, Syr. (e.g., [Isa
54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002)) tûnob; the root is טן, not in
the sense of to bind, to wind (Deitr.), but in the sense of to stretch;
the thread or cord is named from the extension in regard to length, and
אטון is thus thread-work, whether in weaving or spinning.

(Note: Hence perhaps the Greek ὀθόνη, which Fick in his Vergl. Wrterbuch
connects with the Arab. verb-root vadh, to bind, wind, clothe, but not
without making thereto interrogation marks.)

The fame of Egyptian manufactures is still expressed in the Spanish
aclabtea, fine linen cloth, which is equivalent to the modern Arabic
el-ḳobṭı̂je (ḳibṭije); they had there particularly also an intimate
acquaintance with the dye stuffs found in the plants and fossils of the
country (Klemm's Culturgeschichte, v. 308-310).

[Pro 7:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#017)

These verses remind us of expressions in the Canticles. There, at [Pro
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014), are found the three names for
spicery as here, and one sees that מר אהלים are not to be connected
genitively: there are three things, accented as in the title-verse [Pro
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003). The myrrh, מר (Balsamodendron
myrrha), belongs, like the frankincense, to the species of the Amyris,
which is an exotic in Palestine not less than with us; the aromatic
quality in them does not arise from the flowers or leaves, so that [Sol
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#013) leads us to think of a bunch of
myrrh, but from the resin oozing through the bark (Gummi myrrhae or
merely myrrha), consisting of bright glossy red or golden-yellow grains
more or less transparent. אהלים (used by Balaam, [Num
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#006)) is the Semitic Old-Indian name
of the alo, agaru or aguru; the aromatic quality is in the wood of the
Aquilaria agallocha, especially its root (agallochum or lignum aloes)
dried in the earth - in more modern use and commerce the inspissated
juice of its leaves. קנּמון is κιννάμωμον (like מר, a Semitic word

(Note: Myrrh has its name מר from the bitterness of its taste, and קנם
appears to be a secondary formation from קנה, whence קנה, reed; cf. the
names of the cinnamon, cannella, Fr. cannelle. Cinnamum (κίνναμον) is
only a shorter form for cinnamomum. Pliny, Hist. Nat. xii. 19 (42), uses
both forms indiscriminately.)

that had come to the Greeks through the Phoenicians), the cinnamon,
i.e., the inner rind of the Laurus cinnamomum. The myrrh is native to
Arabia; the alo, as its name denotes, is Indian; the cinnamon in like
manner came through Indian travellers from the east coast of Africa and
Ceylon (Taprobane). All these three spices are drugs, i.e., are dry
apothecaries' wares; but we are not on that account to conclude that she
perfumed (Hitzig) her bed with spices, viz., burnt in a censer, an
operation which, according to [Sol
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006), would rather be designated
קטּרתּי. The verb נוּף (only here as Kal) signifies to lift oneself up
(vid., under [Psa 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#013)), and
transitively to raise and swing hither and thither (= חניף); here with a
double accusative, to besprinkle anything out of a vessel moved hither
and thither. According to this sense, we must think of the three aromas
as essences in the state of solution; cf. [Exo
30:22-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#022); [Est
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012). Hitzig's question, "Who would
sprinkle bed-sheets with perfumed and thus impure water?" betrays little
knowledge of the means by which even at the present day clean linen is
made fragrant. The expression רוה דּודים sounds like שׁכר דודים, [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001), although there דודים is probably
the voc., and not, as here, the accus.; רוה is the Kal of רוּה, [Pro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019), and signifies to drink something
copiously in full draughts. The verbal form עלס for עלץ is found besides
only in [Job 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018); [Job
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013); the Hithpa. signifies to enjoy
oneself greatly, perhaps (since the Hithpa. is sometimes used
reciprocally, vid., under [Gen 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025))
with the idea of reciprocity (Targ. חר לצד). We read boohabim with
Chateph-Kametz after Ben-Asher (vid., Kimchi's Lex.); the punctuation
בּאהבים is that of Ben-Naphtali.

[Proverbs 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 7:19</span></span>

The adulteress now deprives the youth of all fear; the circumstances
under which her invitation is given are as favourable as possible.

19 "For the man is not at home,

He has gone on a long journey.

20 He has taken the purse with him:

He will not return home till the day of the full moon."

It is true that the article stands in האישׁ, Arab. alm'ar-fat, i.e.,
serves to define the word: the man, to whom here κατ ̓ ̓ξοχήν and alone
reference can be made, viz., the husband of the adulteress (Fl.); but on
the other side it is characteristic that she does not say אישׁי (as
e.g., [Gen 29:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#032)), but ignores the
relation of love and duty in which she is placed to him, and speaks of
him as one standing at a distance from her (Aben-Ezra). Erroneously
Vogel reads בּבּית after the Targ. instead of בּביתו. We say in Hebr.
אינו בביתו, il n'est pas chez soi, as we say לקח בּידו, il a pris avec
soi (cf. [Jer 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#010)). מרחוק Hitzig
seeks to connect with the verb, which, after [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013); [Isa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#003), is possible; for the Hebr. מרחוק
(ממּרחק), far off, has frequently the meaning from afar, for the measure
of length is determined not from the point of departure outward, but
from the end, as e.g., Homer, Il. ii. 456; ἕκαθεν δέ τε φαίνεται αὐγή,
from afar the gleam is seen, i.e., shines hither from the distance.
Similarly we say in French, il vient du cot du nord, he comes from the
north, as well as il va du cot du nord, he goes northwards. But as we do
not say: he has gone on a journey far off, but: on a distant journey, so
here מרחוק is virtually an adj. (vid., under [Isa
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026)) equivalent to רחוקה ([Num
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010)): a journey which is distant =
such as from it he has a long way back. Michaelis has well remarked
here: ut timorem ei penitus adimat, veluti per gradus incedit. He has
undertaken a journey to a remote point, but yet more: he has taken money
with him, has thus business to detain him; and still further: he has
even determined the distant time of his return. צרור־הכּסף .nruter (thus
to be written after Ben-Asher, vid., Baer's Torath Emeth, p. 41) is the
purse (from צרר, to bind together), not one of many, but that which is
his own. The terminus precedes 20b to emphasize the lateness; vid., on
כּסא under [Psa 81:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#004). Graec. Venet. τῇ
ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ καιροῦ, after Kimchi and others, who derive כסא (כסה) from the
root כס, to reckon, and regard it as denoting only a definite time. But
the two passages require a special idea; and the Syr. ḳêso, which in
[Kg1 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#032); [Ch2
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#010), designates the time from the
15th day of the month, shows that the word denotes not, according to the
Talmud, the new moon (or the new year's day), when the moon's disk
begins to cover itself, i.e., to fill (יתכסה), but the full moon, when
it is covered, i.e., filled; so that thus the time of the night-scene
here described is not that of the last quarter of the moon (Ewald), in
which it rises at midnight, but that of the new moon (Hitzig), when the
night is without moonlight. Since the derivation of the word from כסא
(כסה), to cover, gives the satisfactory idea of the covering or filling
of the moon's disk, we do not seek after any other; Dietrich fixes on
the root-idea of roundness, and Hitzig of vision (כסא = סכה, שׂכה, vid.,
on the contrary, under [Psa 143:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#009)).
The ל is that of time at which, in which, about which, anything is done;
it is more indefinite than בּ would be. He will not return for some
fourteen days.

[Proverbs 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 7:21</span></span>

The result: -

21 She beguiled him by the fulness of her talking,

By the smoothness of her lips she drew him away.

Here is a climax. First she brought him to yield, overcoming the
resistance of his mind to the last point (cf. [Kg1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003)); then drove him, or, as we say,
hurried him wholly away, viz., from the right path or conduct (cf. [Deu
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006), [Deu
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#011)). With הטּתּוּ (= הטּתהוּ) as
the chief factum, the past imperf. is interchanged, 21b. Regarding לקח,
see above, p. 56. Here is the rhetoric of sin (Zckler); and perhaps the
לקח of 20a has suggested this antiphrastic לקח to the author (Hitzig),
as חלק (the inverted לקח, formed like שׁפל, which is the abstr. of שׁפל
as that is of חלק) and תּדּיחנּוּ are reciprocally conditioned, for the
idea of the slippery ([Psa 73:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018))
connects itself with חלק.

[Proverbs 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 7:22</span></span>

What followed: -

22 So he goes after her at once

As an ox which goeth to the slaughter-house,

And as one bereft of reason to the restraint of fetters,

23 As a bird hastens to the net,

Without knowing that his life is at stake -

Till the arrow pierces his liver.

The part. הולך (thus to be accentuated according to the rule in Baer's
Torath Emeth, p. 25, with Mercha to the tone-syllable and Mahpach to the
preceding open syllable) preserves the idea of the fool's going after
her. פּתאם (suddenly) fixes the point, when he all at once resolves to
betake himself to the rendezvous in the house of the adulteress, now a
κεπφωθείς, as the lxx translates, i.e., as we say, a simpleton who has
gone on the lime-twig. He follows her as an ox goes to the
slaughter-house, unconscious that he is going thither to be slaughtered;
the lxx ungrammatically destroying the attributive clause: ὥσπερ δὲ βοῦς
ἐπὶ σφαγὴν ἄγεται. The difficulties in וּכעכס (thus punctuated, after
Kimchi, with a double Segol, and not וכעכס, as is frequently the case)
multiply, and it is not to be reconciled with the traditional text. The
ox appears to require another beast as a side-piece; and accordingly the
lxx, Syr., and Targ. find in עכס a dog (to which from אויל they also
pick out איּל, a stag), Jerome a lamb (et quasi agnus כבשׂ), Rashi a
venomous serpent (perhaps after ἔχις?), Lwenstein and Malbim a
rattlesnake (נחשׁ מצלצל after עכּס); but all this is mere conjecture.
Symmachus' σκιρτῶν (ἐπὶ δεσμῶν ἄφρων) is without support, and, like the
favourite rendering of Schelling, et sicut saliens in vinculum cervus
(איל), is unsuitable on account of the unsemitic position of the words.
The noun עכס, plur. עכסים, signifies, [Isa
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#018), an anklet as a female ornament
(whence [Isa 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016) the denom. עכּס, to
make a tinkling of the anklets). In itself the word only means the
fetter, compes, from עכס, Arab. 'akas, 'akash, contrahere, constringere
(vid., Fleischer under [Isa 59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005)); and
that it can also be used of any kind of means of checking free movement,
the Arab. 'ikâs, as the name of a cord with which the camel is made fast
by the head and forefeet, shows. With this signification the
interpretation is: et velut pedic (= וכבעכס) implicatus ad castigationem
stulti, he follows her as if (bound) with a fetter to the punishment of
the fool, i.e., of himself (Michaelis, Fleischer, and others). Otherwise
Luther, who first translated "in a fetter," but afterwards (supplying ל,
not ב): "and as if to fetters, where one corrects fools." But the
ellipsis is harsh, and the parallelism leads us to expect a living being
in the place of עכס. Now since, according to Gesenius, עכס, fetter, can
be equivalent to a fettered one neither at [Isa
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#005); [Isa
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017), nor [Pro
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#028) (according to which עכס must at
least have an active personal signification), we transpose the nouns of
the clause and write וכאויל אל־מוּסר עכס, he follows her as a fool
(Psychol. p. 292) to correction (restraint) with fetters; or if אויל is
to be understood not so much physically as morally, and refers to
self-destroying conduct ([Psa 107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007)):
as a madman, i.e., a criminal, to chains. The one figure denotes the
fate into which he rushes, like a beast devoid of reason, as the loss of
life; and the other denotes the fate to which he permits himself to be
led by that woman, like a criminal by the officer, as the loss of
freedom and of honour.

[Pro 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#023)

The confusion into which the text has fallen is continued in this verse.
For the figure of the deadly arrow connects itself neither with that of
the ox which goes to the slaughter-house, nor with that of the madman
who is put in chains: the former is not killed by being shot; and with
the latter, the object is to render him harmless, not to put him to
death. The lxx therefore converts אויל into איל, a stag, and connects
the shooting with an arrow with this: ἢ ὡς ἔλαφος τοξεύματι πεπληγὼς εἰς
τὸ ἧπαρ. But we need no encroachment on the text itself, only a correct
placing of its members. The three thoughts, [Pro
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#023), reach a right conclusion and
issue, if with כּמהר צפּור אל־פּח (here Mercha-mahpach) a new departure
is begun with a comparison: he follows her with eager desires, like as a
bird hastens to the snare (vid., regarding פח, a snare, and מוקשׁ, a
noose, under [Isa 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#015)). What then
follows is a continuation of 22a. The subject is again the youth, whose
way is compared to that of an ox going to the slaughter, of a culprit in
chains, and of a fool; and he knows not (non novit, as [Pro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019); [Pro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018), and according to the sense, non
curat, [Pro 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006); [Pro
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#006)) that it is done at the risk of
his life (בנפשׁו as [Kg1 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#023); [Num
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#003)), that his life is the price with
which this kind of love is bought (הוּא, neut., as not merely [Ecc
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#001) and the like, but also e.g., [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003); [Est
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001)) - that does not concern him till
(עד = עד אשׁר or עד כי) the arrow breaks or pierces through (פּלּח as
[Job 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#013)) his liver, i.e., till he
receives the death-wound, from which, if not immediately, yet at length
he certainly dies. Elsewhere the part of the body struck with a deadly
wound is called the reins or loins (Job, etc.), or the gall-bladder
([Job 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#025)); here the liver, which is
called כּבד, Arab. kebid, perhaps as the organ in which sorrowful and
painful affections make themselves felt (cf. Aeschylus, Agam. 801: δῆγμα
λύπης ἐφ ̓ ἧπαρ προσικνεῖται), especially the latter, because the
passion of sensual love, according to the idea of the ancients,
reflected itself in the liver. He who is love-sick has jecur ulcerosum
(Horace, Od. i. 25. 15); he is diseased in his liver (Psychol. p. 268).
But the arrow is not here the arrow of love which makes love-sick, but
the arrow of death, which slays him who is ensnared in sinful love. The
befooled youth continues the disreputable relation into which he has
entered till it terminates in adultery and in lingering disease upon his
body, remorse in his soul, and dishonour to his name, speedily ending in
inevitable ruin both spiritually and temporally.

[Proverbs 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 7:24</span></span>

With ועתּה, as at [Pro 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#007), the author
now brings his narrative to a close, adding the exhortation deduced from
it:

24 And now, ye children, give ear unto me,

And observe the words of my mouth!

25 Let not thine heart incline to her ways,

And stray not in her paths.

The verb שׂטה (whence jēst, like jēt, [Pro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#015), with long ē from i) the author
uses also of departure from a wicked way ([Pro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#015)); but here, where the portraiture
of a faithless wife (a סוטה) is presented, the word used in the law of
jealousy, Num 5, for the trespass of an אשׁת אישׁ is specially
appropriate. שׂטה is interchanged with תּעה (cf. [Gen
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#014)): wander not on her paths, which
would be the consequence of straying on them. Theodotion: καὶ μὴ
πλανηθῇς ἐν ἀτραποῖς αὐτῆς, with καί, as also Syr., Targ., and Jerome.
The Masora reckons this verse to the 25 which have אל at the beginning
and ואל at the middle of each clause (vid., Baer in the Luth.
Zeitschrift, 1865, p. 587); the text of Norzi has therefore correctly
ואל, which is found also in good MSS (e.g., the Erfurt, 2 and 3).

[Proverbs 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 7:26</span></span>

The admonition, having its motive in that which goes before, is now
founded on the emphatic finale:

26 For many are the slain whom she hath caused to fall,

And many are her slain.

27 A multiplicity of ways to help is her house,

Going down to the chambers of death.

The translation "for many slain has she laid low" (Syr., Targ., Jerome,
Luther) is also syntactically possible; for רבּים can be placed before
its substantive after the manner of the demonstratives and numerals
(e.g., [Neh 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#028), cf. אחד, [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009)), and the accentuation which
requires two servants (the usual two Munachs) to the Athnach appears
indeed thus to construe it. It is otherwise if רבים here meant magni
(thus e.g., Ralbag, and recently Bertheau), and not multi; but רבים and
עצמים stand elsewhere in connection with each other in the signification
many and numerous, [Psa 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#018); [Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002); [Mic
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003). "Her slain" are those slain by
her; the part. pass. is connected with the genitive of the actor, e.g.,
[Pro 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018); cf. (Arab.) ḳatyl âlmḥabbt,
of one whom love kills (Fl.). With [Pro
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#027) cf. [Pro
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#018); [Pro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018). In 27a, בּיתהּ is not equivalent
to בביתה after [Pro 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#002), also not
elliptical and equivalent to דרכי ביתה; the former is unnecessary, the
latter is in no case established by [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007); [Ezr
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#013), nor by [Deu
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015); [Kg2
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#017) (see, on the other hand,
Philippi's Status Constructus, pp. 87-93). Rightly Hitzig has: her house
forms a multiplicity of ways to hell, in so far as adultery leads by a
diversity of ways to hell. Similarly the subject and the predicate vary
in number, [Pro 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#025); [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003); [Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013); [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023), and frequently. If one is once
in her house, he may go in this or in that way, but surely his path is
to destruction: it consists of many steps to hell, such as lead down
(דרך, fem. [Isa 37:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#034), masc. [Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)) to the extreme depths of death
(cf. [Job 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009), "chambers of the south"
= its remotest regions veiling themselves in the invisible); for חדר
(Arab. khiddr) is the part of the tent or the house removed farthest
back, and the most private (Fl.). These חדרי־מות, cf. עמקי שׁאול, [Pro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018), approach to the conception of
גּיהנּם, which is afterwards distinguished from שאול.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 8](pro008)

</div>
