<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro003)  [Next](pro005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001)

[Proverbs 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 4:1</span></span>

He now confirms and explains the command to duty which he has placed at
the beginning of the whole ([Pro 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008)).
This he does by his own example, for he relates from the history of his
own youth, to the circle of disciples by whom he sees himself
surrounded, what good doctrine his parents had taught him regarding the
way of life:

1 Hear, ye sons, the instruction of a father,

And attend that ye may gain understanding;

2 For I give to you good doctrine,

Forsake not my direction!

3 For I was a son to my father,

A tender and only (son) in the sight of my mother.

4 And he instructed me, and said to me:

"Let thine heart hold fast my words:

Observe my commandments and live!"

That בּנים in the address comes here into the place of בּני, hitherto
used, externally denotes that בני in the progress of these discourses
finds another application: the poet himself is so addressed by his
father. Intentionally he does not say אביכם (cf. [Pro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008)): he does not mean the father of
each individual among those addressed, but himself, who is a father in
his relation to them as his disciples; and as he manifests towards them
fatherly love, so also he can lay claim to paternal authority over them.
לדעת is rightly vocalized, not לדעת. The words do not give the object of
attention, but the design, the aim. The combination of ideas in דּעת
בּינה (cf. [Pro 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#002)), which appears to
us singular, loses its strangeness when we remember that דעת means,
according to its etymon, deposition or reception into the conscience and
life. Regarding לקח, apprehension, reception, lesson = doctrine, vid.,
[Pro 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005). נתתּי is the perf., which
denotes as fixed and finished what is just now being done, Gesenius,
126, 4. עזב is here synonym of נטשׁ, [Pro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008), and the contrary of שׁמר, [Pro
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#004). The relative factum in the
perfect, designating the circumstances under which the event happened,
regularly precedes the chief factum ויּרני; see under [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002). Superficially understood, the
expression 3a would be a platitude; the author means that the natural
legal relation was also confirming itself as a moral one. It was a
relation of many-sided love, according to 3a: he was esteemed of his
mother - לפני, used of the reflex in the judgment, [Gen
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#009), and of loving care, [Gen
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018), means this - as a tender child,
and therefore tenderly to be protected (רך as [Gen
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#013)), and as an only child, whether
he were so in reality, or was only loved as if he were so. יחיד (Aq.,
Sym., Theod., μονογενής) may with reference to number also mean unice
dilectus (lxx ἀγαπώμενος); cf. [Gen
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002), יחידך (where the lxx translate
τὸν ἀγαπητόν, without therefore having ידידך before them). לפני is
maintained by all the versions; לבני is not a variant.

(Note: In some editions לבני is noted as Kerı̂ to לפני, but erroneously
and contrary to the express evidence of the Masora, which affirms that
there are two passages in which we ought to read not לפני, but לבני,
viz., [Psa 80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003) and [Pro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#003).)

The instruction of the father begins with the jussive, which is pointed
יתמך־

(Note: The writing of -יתמך with the grave Metheg (Gaja) and
Kametz-Chatuph (ǒ) is that of Ben Asher; on the other hand, יתמך־ with
Cholem (ō) and the permanent Metheg is that of Ben Naphtali; vid.,
Michlol 21a \[under the verbal form 25\], 30.)

to distinguish it from יתמך־ on account of the ǒ. The lxx has
incorrectly ἐρειδέτω, as if the word were יסמך; Symmachus has correctly
κατεχέτω. The imper. וחיה is, as [Pro
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#002); [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007), more than ותחיה; the teacher
seeks, along with the means, at the same time their object: Observe my
commandments, and so become a partaker of life! The Syriac, however,
adds תּורתיו כּאישׁון עיניך and my instruction as the apple of thine
eye, a clause borrowed from [Pro 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#002).

[Proverbs 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 4:5</span></span>

The exhortation of the father now specializes itself:

5 Get wisdom, get understanding;

Forget not and turn not from the words of my mouth.

6 Forsake her not, so shall she preserve thee;

Love her, so shall she keep thee.

Wisdom and understanding are (5a) thought of as objects of merchandise
(cf. [Pro 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#023); [Pro
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014)), like the one pearl of great
price, [Mat 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046), and the words of
fatherly instruction (5b), accordingly, as offering this precious
possession, or helping to the acquisition of it. One cannot indeed say
correctly אל־תשׁכח מאמרי־פי, but אל־תשׁכח משּׁמר אמרי־פי ([Psa
102:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#005)); and in this sense אל־תּשׁכּח
goes before, or also the accus. object, which in אל־תשכח the author has
in his mind, may, since he continues with אל־תּט, now not any longer
find expression as such. That the אמרי־פי are the means of acquiring
wisdom is shown in [Pro 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006), where
this continues to be the primary idea. The verse, consisting of only
four words, ought to be divided by Mugrash;

(Note: According to correct readings in codd. and older editions,
ותשמרךּ has also indeed Rebia Mugrash, and אהבה, Mercha (with
Zinnorith); vid., Torath Emeth, p. 47, 6; Accentuationssystem, xviii. 1,
2; and regarding the Zinnorith, see Liber Psalmorum Hebraicus by S.
Baer, p. xii.)

the Vav (ו) in both halves of the verse introduces the apodosis
imperativi (cf. e.g., [Pro 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009)., and
the apodosis prohibitivi, [Pro 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#021).).
The actual representation of wisdom, [Pro
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005), becomes in [Pro
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006) personal.

[Proverbs 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 4:7</span></span>

Referring to [Pro 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005), the father
further explains that wisdom begins with the striving after it, and that
this striving is itself its fundamental beginning:

7 The beginning of wisdom is "Get wisdom,"

And with \[um, at the price of\] all thou hast gotten get understanding,

8 Esteem her, so shall she lift thee up;

She will bring thee honour if thou dost embrace her.

9 She will put on thine head a graceful garland,

She will bestow upon thee a glorious diadem.

In the motto of the book, [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007),
the author would say that the fear of Jahve is that from which all
wisdom takes its origin. יראת יהוה ([Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)) is the subject, and as such it
stands foremost. Here he means to say what the beginning of wisdom
consists in. ראשׁית חכמה is the subject, and stands forth as such. The
predicate may also be read קנה־חכמה (= קנות), after [Pro
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#016). The beginning of wisdom is
(consists in) the getting of wisdom; but the imperative קנה, which also
Aq., Sym., Theod. (κτῆσαι), Jerome, Syr., Targ. express (the lxx leaves
[Pro 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007) untranslated), is supported
by 7b. Hitzig, after Mercier, De Dieu, and Dderlein, translates the
verse thus: "the highest thing is wisdom; get wisdom," which Zckler
approves of; but the reasons which determine him to this rendering are
subtleties: if the author had wished himself to be so understood, he
ought at least to have written the words ראשׁית החכמה. But ראשׁית חכמה
is a genitive of relation, as is to be expected from the relativity of
the idea ראשׁית, and his intention is to say that the beginning of
wisdom consists in the proposition קנה חכמה (cf. the similar formula,
[Ecc 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013)); this proposition is truly
the lapis philosophorum, it contains all that is necessary in order to
becoming wise. Therefore the Greek σοφία called itself modestly
φιλοσοφία; for ἀρχὴ σὐτῆς the Book of Wisdom has, [Pro
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#018), ἡ ἀληθεστάτη παιδείας ἐπιθυμία.
In 7b the proposition is expressed which contains the specificum helping
to wisdom. The בּ denotes price: give all for wisdom ([Mat
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046), [Mat
13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)); no price is too high, no
sacrifice too great for it.

[Proverbs 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 4:8</span></span>

The meaning of the ἁπ. γεγρ. סלסל is determined by רומם in the parallel
clause; סלל signifies to raise, exalt, as a way or dam by heaping up;
the Pilpel, here tropical: to value or estimate highly. Bttcher
interprets well: hold it high in price, raise it (as a purchaser) always
higher, make offer for it upon offer. The lxx (approved by Bertheau),
περιχαράκωσον αὐτήν, circumvallate it, i.e., surround it with a wall
(סללה) - a strange and here unsuitable figure. Hold it high, says the
author, and so it will reward

(Note: Lwenstein has rightly ותרוממך, vid., my preface to Baer's
Genesis, p. vii.)

thee with a high place, and (with chiastic transposition of the
performance and the consequence) she will honour

(Note: We read תכבּדך, not תכבּרך (Hahn) or תכבּדך (Lwenstein); the tone
lies on the penult., and the tone-syllable has the point Tsere, as in
ויגּדך, [Deu 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007); vid., Michlol 66b.)

thee if (ἐάν) thou lovingly embracest her. חבּק is used of embracing in
the pressure of tender love, as in [Sol
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#006); [Sol
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#003); the Piel is related to the Kal as
amplexari to amplecti. Wisdom exalts her admirers, honours her lovers,
and makes a man's appearance pleasant, causing him to be reverenced when
he approaches. Regarding לוית־חן, vid., [Pro
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#009). מגּן, to deliver up ([Gen
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020)), to give up ([Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008)), is connected in the free poetic
manner with two accusatives, instead of with an accus. and dat. lxx has
ὑπερασπίσῃ, but one does not defend himself (as with a shield) by a
wreath or crown.

[Proverbs 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 4:10</span></span>

There is no reason for the supposition that the warning which his father
gave to the poet now passes over into warnings given by the poet himself
(Hitzig); the admonition of the father thus far refers only in general
to the endeavour after wisdom, and we are led to expect that the good
doctrines which the father communicates to the son as a viaticum will be
further expanded, and become more and more specific when they take a new
departure.

10 Hearken, my son, and receive my sayings,

So shall the years of life be increased to thee.

11 In the way of wisdom have I taught thee,

Guided thee in the paths of rectitude.

12 When thou goest, thy step shall not be straitened;

And if thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

Regarding קח (of לקח) of appropriating reception and taking up in succum
et sanguinem, vid., [Pro 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003);
regarding שׁנות חיּים, years not merely of the duration of life, but of
the enjoyment of life, [Pro 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#002);
regarding מעגּל (מעגּלה), path (track), [Pro
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#009); regarding the בּ of הורה, of the
department and subject of instruction, [Psa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008). The perfects, [Pro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#011), are different from נתתּי, 2a:
they refer to rules of life given at an earlier period, which are
summarily repeated in this address. The way of wisdom is that which
leads to wisdom ([Job 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#023)); the
paths of rectitude, such as trace out the way which is in accordance
with the rule of the good and the right. If the youth holds to this
direction, he will not go on in darkness or uncertainty with anxious
footsteps; and if in youthful fervour he flies along his course, he will
not stumble on any unforeseen obstacle and fall. יצר is as a metaplastic
fut. to צרר or צוּר, to be narrow, to straiten, formed as if from יצר.
The Targ. after Aruch,

(Note: R. Nathan ben Jechiel, a.d. 1106, who is usually styled by the
Jewish writers בּעל ערוּך, Auctor Aruch, author of a Talmudical
Lexicon.)

לא תשנק ארחך, thou shalt not need to bind together (constringere) or to
hedge up thy way.

[Proverbs 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 4:13</span></span>

The exhortations attracting by means of promises, now become warnings
fitted to alarm:

13 Hold fast to instruction, let her not go;

Keep her, for she is thy life.

14 Into the path of the wicked enter not,

And walk not in the way of the evil

15 Avoid it, enter not into it;

Turn from it and pass away.

16 For they cannot sleep unless they do evil,

And they are deprived of sleep unless they bring others to ruin.

17 For they eat the bread of wickedness,

And they drink the wine of violence.

Elsewhere מוּסר means also self-discipline, or moral religious
education, [Pro 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003); here discipline,
i.e., parental educative counsel. תּרף is the segolated fut. apoc. Hiph.
(indic. תּרפּה) from tarp, cf. the imper. Hiph. הרף from harp. נצּרה is
the imper. Kal (not Piel, as Aben Ezra thinks) with Dagesh dirimens; cf.
the verbal substantive נצּרה [Psa
141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003), with similar Dagesh, after the
form יקּהה, [Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010). מוּסר
(elsewhere always masc.) is here used in the fem. as the synonym of the
name of wisdom: keep her (instruction), for she is thy life,

(Note: Punctuate כּי היא; the Zinnorith represents the place of the
Makkeph, vid., Torath Emeth, p. 9.)

i.e., the life of thy life. In [Pro
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014) the godless (vid., on the
root-idea of רשׁע under [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)) and
the habitually wicked, i.e., the vicious, stand in parallelism; בּוא and
אשּׁר are related as entering and going on, ingressus and progressus.
The verb אשׁר signifies, like ישׁר, to be straight, even, fortunate,
whence אשׁר = Arab. yusâr, happiness, and to step straight out, [Pro
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#006), of which meanings אשּׁר is partly
the intensive, as here, partly the causative, [Pro
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#019) (elsewhere causative of the
meaning, to be happy, [Gen 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#013)). The
meaning progredi is not mediated by a supplementary צעדיו; the
derivative אשׁוּר (אשּׁוּר), a step, shows that it is derived
immediately from the root-idea of a movement in a straight line. Still
less justifiable is the rendering by Schultens, ne vestigia imprimas in
via malorum; for the Arab. âththr is denom. of ithr, אתר, the primitive
verb roots of which, athr, אתר = אשׁר, are lost.

[Pro 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#015)

On פּרעהוּ, avoid it (the way), (opp. אחז, [Job
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009); תּמך, [Psa
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#005)), see under [Pro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#025). שׂטה, elsewhere (as the Arab.
shatt, to be without measure, insolent) used in malam partem, has here
its fundamental meaning, to go aside. מעליו (expressed in French by de
dessus, in Ital. by di sopra) denotes: so that thou comest not to stand
on it. עבר means in both cases transire, but the second instance, "to go
beyond (farther)" (cf. [Sa2 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#022), and
under [Hab 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011)), coincides with "to
escape, evadere."

[Pro 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016)

In the reason here given the perf. may stand in the conditional clauses
as well as in Virgil's Et si non aliqua nocuisses, mortuus esses; but
the fut., as in [Ecc 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011), denotes
that they (the רעים and the רשׁעים) cannot sleep, and are deprived of
their sleep, unless they are continually doing evil and bringing others
into misery; the interruption of this course of conduct, which has
become to them like a second nature, would be as the interruption of
their diet, which makes them ill. For the Kal יכשׁולוּ, which here must
have the meaning of the person sinning (cf. [Pro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019)), and would be feeble if used of
the confirmed transgressors, the Kerı̂ rightly substitutes the Hiphil
יכשׁילוּ, which occurs also [Ch2 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#008),
there without an object, in the meaning to cause to fall, as the
contrast of עזר (to help).

[Pro 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017)

The second כּי introduces the reason of their bodily welfare being
conditioned by evil-doing. If the poet meant: they live on bread which
consists in wickedness, i.e., on wickedness as their bread, then in the
parallel sentence he should have used the word חמס; the genitives are
meant of the means of acquisition: they live on unrighteous gain, on
bread and wine which they procure by wickedness and by all manner of
violence or injustice. On the etymon of חמס (Arab. ḥamas, durum,
asperum, vehementem esse), vid., Schultens; the plur. חמסים belongs to a
more recent epoch (vid., under [Sa2
22:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#049) and [Psa
18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049)). The change in the tense
represents the idea that they having eaten such bread, set forth such
wine, and therewith wash it down.

[Proverbs 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 4:18</span></span>

The two ways that lie for his choice before the youth, are distinguished
from one another as light is from darkness:

18 And the path of the just is like the brightness of the morning light,

Which shines more and more till the perfect day.

19 The way of the wicked is deep darkness,

They know not at what they stumble.

The Hebr. style is wont to conceal in its Vav (ו) diverse kinds of
logical relations, but the Vav of 18a may suitably stand before 19a,
where the discontinuance of this contrast of the two ways is unsuitable.
The displacing of a Vav from its right position is not indeed without
example (see under [Psa 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003)); but
since [Pro 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019) joins itself more
easily than [Pro 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018) to [Pro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017) without missing a particle, thus
it is more probable that the two verses are to be transposed, than that
the ו of וארח ([Pro 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017)) is to be
prefixed to דּרך ([Pro 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018)). Sinning,
says [Pro 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016), has become to the
godless as a second nature, so that they cannot sleep without it; they
must continually be sinning, adds [Pro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017), for thus and not otherwise do
they gain for themselves their daily bread. With reference to this
fearful self-perversion to which wickedness has become a necessity and a
condition of life, the poet further says that the way of the godless is
כּאפלה,

(Note: In good MSS and printed copies the כ has the Pathach, as Kimchi
states the rule in Michlol 45a: כל כּאפלה פתח, כל כּאבנים פתח.)

as deep darkness, as the entire absence of light: it cannot be otherwise
than that they fall, but they do not at all know whereat they fall, for
they do not at all know wickedness as such, and have no apprehension of
the punishment which from an inward necessity it brings along with it;
on the contrary, the path of the just is in constantly increasing light
- the light of knowledge, and the light of true happiness which is given

(Note: Hitzig inverts the order of [Pro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018) and [Pro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019), and connects the כּי of 16a
immediately with [Pro 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019) (for the
way of the wicked...). He moreover regards [Pro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016), [Pro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017) as an interpolation, and explains
[Pro 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016) as a gloss transforming the
text of [Pro 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019). "That the wicked
commit wickedness," says Hitzig, "is indeed certain ([Sa1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014)), and the warning of [Pro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#015) ought not to derive its motive
from their energy in sinning." But the warning against the way of the
wicked is founded not on their energy in sinning, but on their bondage
to sin: their sleep, their food and drink - their life both when they
sleep and when they wake - is conditioned by sin and is penetrated by
sin. This foundation of the warning furnishes what is needed, and is in
nothing open to objection. And that in [Pro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016) and [Pro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019) לא ירעוּ and לא ידעוּ, יכשׁולוּ
and יכּשׁלוּ, נגזלה and כּאפלה seem to be alike, does not prove that
[Pro 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016) originated as a parallel
text from [Pro 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019) - in the one verse
as in the other the thoughts are original.)

in and with knowledge. On בּמּה vid., under [Isa
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022); it is מכשׁול, σκάνδαλον, that is
meant, stumbling against which (cf. [Lev
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#037)) they stumble to their fall.
נגהּ,

(Note: Bttcher, under [Sa2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004),
explains נגהּ of the brightness striking against, conquering (cf. נגח,
נגף) the clouds; but ferire or percutere lies nearer (cf. נגע, [Eze
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#010), נכה, [Psa
121:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006), and the Arab. darb, used of
strong sensible impressions), as Silius, iv. 329, says of the light:
percussit lumine campos.)

used elsewhere than in the Bible, means the morning star (Venus),
(Sirach 50:4, Syr.); when used in the Bible it means the early dawn, the
light of the rising sun, the morning light, [Sa2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004); [Isa
62:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001), which announces itself in the
morning twilight, [Dan 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020). The light
of this morning sunshine is הולך ואור, going and shining, i.e., becoming
ever brighter. In the connection of הולך ואור it might be a question
whether אור is regarded as gerundive ([Gen
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#003), [Gen
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005)), or as participle ([Sa2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005); [Jer
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#006)), or as a participial adjective
([Gen 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#013); [Jdg
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#024)); in the connection of הלוך ואור,
on the contrary, it is unquestionably the gerundive: the partic.
denoting the progress joins itself either with the partic., [Jon
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#011), or with the participial
adjective, [Sa2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001); [Ch2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#012), or with another adjective
formation, [Sa2 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012); [Est
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#004) (where וגדול after וגדל of other
places appears to be intended as an adjective, not after [Sa2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#010) as gerundive). Thus ואור, as also
וטוב, [Sa1 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#026), will be participial
after the form בּושׁ, being ashamed (Ges. 72, 1); cf. בּוס, [Zac
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005), קום, [Kg2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007). "נכון היּום quite corresponds to
the Greek τὸ σταθηρὸν τῆς ἡμέρας, ἡ σταθηρὰ μεσημβρία (as one also says
τὸ σταθηρὸν τῆς νυκτός), and to the Arabic qâ'mt ‛l-nhâr and qâ'mt
‛l-dhyrt. The figure is probably derived from the balance (cf. Lucan's
Pharsalia, lib. 9: quam cardine summo Stat librata dies): before and
after midday the tongue on the balance of the day bends to the left and
to the right, but at the point of midday it stands directly in the
midst" (Fleischer). It is the midday time that is meant, when the
clearness of the day has reached its fullest intensity - the point
between increasing and decreasing, when, as we are wont to say, the sun
stands in the zenith (= Arab. samt, the point of support, i.e., the
vertex). Besides [Mar 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#028), there is
no biblical passage which presents like these two a figure of gradual
development. The progress of blissful knowledge is compared to that of
the clearness of the day till it reaches its midday height, having
reached to which it becomes a knowing of all in God, [Pro
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#005); [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020).

[Proverbs 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 4:20</span></span>

The paternal admonition now takes a new departure:

20 My son, attend unto my words,

Incline thine ear to my sayings.

21 Let them not depart from thine eyes;

Keep them in the midst of thine heart.

22 For they are life to all who get possession of them,

And health to their whole body.

Regarding the Hiph. הלּין (for הלין), [Pro
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#021), formed after the Chaldee manner
like הלּין, הנּיח, הסּיג, vid., Gesenius, 72, 9; - Ewald, 114, c, gives
to it the meaning of "to mock," for he interchanges it with הלין,
instead of the meaning to take away, efficere ut recedat (cf. under [Pro
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#015)). This supposed causative meaning
it has also here: may they = may one (vid., under [Pro
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#022)) not remove them from thine eyes;
the object is ([Pro 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#020)) the words of
the paternal admonition. Hitzig, indeed, observes that "the accusative
is not supplied;" but with greater right it is to be remarked that
ילּיזוּ (fut. Hiph. of לוּז) and ילוּזוּ (fut. Kal of id.) are not one
and the same, and the less so as הלּיז occurs, but the masoretical and
grammatical authorities (e.g., Kimchi) demand ילּיזוּ. The plur. למצאיהם
is continued, 22b, in the sing., for that which is said refers to each
one of the many ([Pro 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018), [Pro
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#028), [Pro
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#035)). מצא is fundamentally an active
conception, like our "finden," to find; it means to attain, to produce,
to procure, etc. מרפּא means, according as the מ is understood of the
"that = ut" of the action or of the "what" of its performance, either
health or the means of health; here, like רפאוּת, [Pro
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008), not with the underlying
conception of sickness, but of the fluctuations connected with the
bodily life of man, which make needful not only a continual
strengthening of it, but also its being again and again restored.
Nothing preserves soul and body in a healthier state than when we always
keep before our eyes and carry in our hearts the good doctrines; they
give to us true guidance on the way of life: "Godliness has the promise
of this life, and of that which is to come." [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008).

[Proverbs 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 4:23</span></span>

After this general preface the exhortation now becomes special:

23 Above all other things that are to be guarded, keep thy heart,

For out from it life has its issues.

24 Put away from thee perverseness of mouth,

And waywardness of lips put far from thee.

25 Thine eyes should look straight forward,

And thine eyelids look straight to the end before thee.

26 Make even the path of thy feet,

And let all thy ways be correct.

27 Turn not aside to the right and to the left;

Remove thy foot from evil.

Although משׁמר in itself and in this connection may mean the object to
be watchfully avoided (cavendi) (vid., under [Pro
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#020)): thus the usage of the language
lying before us applies it, yet only as denoting the place of watching
or the object observandi; so that it is not to be thus explained, with
Raschi and others: before all from which one has to protect himself (ab
omni re cavenda), guard thine heart; but: before all that one has to
guard (prae omni re custodienda), guard it as the most precious of
possessions committed to thy trust. The heart, which according to its
etymon denotes that which is substantial (Kernhafte) in man (cf. Arab.
lubb, the kernel of the nut or almond), comes here into view not as the
physical, but as the intellectual, and specially the ethical centrum.

[Pro 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#024)

The תּוצאות are the point of a thing, e.g., of a boundary, from which it
goes forth, and the linear course proceeding from thence. If thus the
author says that the תּוצאות חיּים go out from the heart,

(Note: The correct form here is כּי־ממּנּוּ, with the Makkeph to כי.)

he therewith implies that the life has not only its fountain in the
heart, but also that the direction which it takes is determined by the
heart. Physically considered, the heart is the receptacle for the blood,
in which the soul lives and rules; the pitcher at the blood-fountain
which draws it and pours it forth; the chief vessel of the physically
self-subsisting blood-life from which it goes forth, and into which it
disembogues (Syst. der bib. Psychol. p. 232). What is said of the heart
in the lower sense of corporeal vitality, is true in the higher sense of
the intellectual soul-life. The Scripture names the heart also as the
intellectual soul-centre of man, in its concrete, central unity, its
dynamic activity, and its ethical determination on all sides. All the
radiations of corporeal and of soul life concentrate there, and again
unfold themselves from thence; all that is implied in the Hellenic and
Hellenistic words νοῦς, λόγος, συνείδησις, θυμός, lies in the word
καρδία; and all whereby בּשׂר (the body) and נפשׁ (the spirit, anima)
are affected comes in לב into the light of consciousness (Id. p. 251).
The heart is the instrument of the thinking, willing, perceiving life of
the spirit; it is the seat of the knowledge of self, of the knowledge of
God, of the knowledge of our relation to God, and also of the law of God
impressed on our moral nature; it is the workshop of our individual
spiritual and ethical form of life brought about by self-activity - the
life in its higher and in its lower sense goes out from it, and receives
from it the impulse of the direction which it takes; and how earnestly,
therefore, must we feel ourselves admonished, how sacredly bound to
preserve the heart in purity ([Psa
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)), so that from this spring of
life may go forth not mere seeming life and a caricature of life, but a
true life well-pleasing to God! How we have to carry into execution this
careful guarding of the heart, is shown in [Pro
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#024) and the golden rules which
follow. Mouth and lips are meant ([Pro
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#024)) as instruments of speech, and
not of its utterance, but of the speech going forth from them. עקּשׁוּת,
distorsio, refers to the mouth ([Pro
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012)), when what it speaks is
disfiguring and deforming, thus falsehood as the contrast of truth and
love ([Pro 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#012)); and to the lips
לזוּת, when that which they speak turns aside from the true and the
right to side-ways and by-ways. Since the Kametz of such abstracta, as
well of verbs 'ו'ע like לזוּת, [Eze
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#005), as of verbs 'ה'ל like גּלוּת,
[Isa 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#013), חזוּת, [Isa
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018), is elsewhere treated as
unalterable, there lies in this לזוּת either an inconsistency of
punctuation, or it is presupposed that the form לזוּת was vocalized like
שׁבוּת = שׁבית, [Num 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029).

[Pro 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025)

Another rule commends gathering together (concentration) in opposition
to dissipation. It is also even externally regarded worthy of
consideration, as Ben-Sira, [Pro 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#005),
expresses it: μὴ περιβλέπου ἐν ῥύμαις πόλεως - purposeless, curious
staring about operates upon the soul, always decentralizing and easily
defiling it. But the rule does not exhaust itself in this meaning with
reference to external self-discipline; it counsels also
straight-forward, unswerving directness toward a fixed goal (and what
else can this be in such a connection than that which wisdom places
before man?), without the turning aside of the eye toward that which is
profitless and forbidden, and in this inward sense it falls in with the
demand for a single, not squinting eye, [Mat
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022), where Bengel explains ἁπλοῦς by
simplex et bonus, intentus in caelum, in Deum, unice. נכח (R. נך) means
properly fixing, or holding fast with the look, and נגד (as the Arab.
najad, to be clear, to be in sight, shows) the rising up which makes the
object stand conspicuous before the eyes; both denote here that which
lies straight before us, and presents itself to the eye looking straight
out. The naming of the עפעפּים (from עפעף, to flutter, to move
tremblingly), which belongs not to the seeing apparatus of the eye but
to its protection, is introduced by the poetical parallelism; for the
eyelids, including in this word the twinkling, in their movement follow
the direction of the seeing eye. On the form יישׁרוּ (fut. Hiph. of
ישׁר, to be straight), defective according to the Masora, with the Jod
audible, cf. [Hos 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#012); [Ch1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002), and under [Gen
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#017); the softened form הישׁיר does
not occur, we find only הישׁיר or הושׁיר.

[Pro 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026)

The understanding of this rule is dependent on the right interpretation
of פּלּס, which means neither "weigh off" (Ewald) nor "measure off"
(Hitzig, Zckler). פּלּס has once, [Psa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003), the meaning to weigh out, as the
denom. of פּלס, a level, a steelyard;

(Note: The Arabic word teflı̂s, said to be of the same signification (a
balance), and which is given in the most recent editions of Gesenius'
Lexicon, has been already shown under [Job
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#016) to be a word devoid of all
evidence.)

everywhere else it means to make even, to make level, to open a road:
vid., under [Isa 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#007); [Isa
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012). The admonition thus refers not
to the careful consideration which measures the way leading to the goal
which one wishes to reach, but to the preparation of the way by the
removal of that which prevents unhindered progress and makes the way
insecure. The same meaning appears if פּלּס, of cognate meaning with
תּכּן, denoted first to level, and then to make straight with the level
(Fleischer). We must remove all that can become a moral hindrance or a
dangerous obstacle, in our life-course, in order that we may make right
steps with our feet, as the lxx ([Heb
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#013)) translate. 26b is only another
expression for this thought. הכין דּרכּו ([Ch2
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#006)) means to give a direction to his
way; a right way, which keeps in and facilitates the keeping in the
straight direction, is accordingly called דּרך נכון; and "let all thy
ways be right" (cf. [Psa 119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005), lxx
κατευθυνθείησαν) will thus mean: see to it that all the ways which thou
goest lead straight to the end.

[Pro 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027)

In closest connection with the preceding, 27a cautions against by-ways
and indirect courses, and 27b continues it in the briefest moral
expression, which is here הסר רגלך מרע instead of סוּר מרע, [Pro
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#007), for the figure is derived from
the way. The lxx has other four lines after this verse (27), which we
have endeavoured to retranslate into the Hebrew (Introd. p. 47). They
are by no means genuine; for while in 27a right and left are equivalent
to by-ways, here the right and left side are distinguished as that of
truth and its contrary; and while there \[in lxx\] the ὀρθὰς τροχιὰς
ποιεῖν is required of man, here it is promised as the operation of God,
which is no contradiction, but in this similarity of expression betrays
poverty of style. Hitzig disputes also the genuineness of the Hebrew
[Pro 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027). But it continues
explanatorily [Pro 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026), and is
related to it, yet not as a gloss, and in the general relation of 26 and
27a there comes a word, certainly not unwelcome, such as 27b, which
impresses the moral stamp on these thoughts. That with [Pro
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027) the admonition of his father,
which the poet, placing himself back into the period of his youth,
reproduces, is not yet concluded, the resumption of the address בּני,
[Pro 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#001), makes evident; while on the
other hand the address בּנים in [Pro
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#007) shows that at that point there is
advance made from the recollections of his father's house to conclusions
therefrom, for the circle of young men by whom the poet conceives
himself to be surrounded. That in [Pro
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#007). a subject of the warning with
which the seventh address closes is retained and further prosecuted,
does not in the connection of all these addresses contradict the opinion
that with [Pro 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#007) a new address
begins. But the opinion that the warning against adultery does not agree
(Zckler) with the designation רך, [Pro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#003), given to him to whom it is
addressed, is refuted by [Ch1 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#005);
[Ch2 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#007).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 5](pro005)

</div>
