<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro025)  [Next](pro027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#001)

[Proverbs 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 26:1</span></span>

There now follows a group of eleven proverbs of the fool; only the first
of the group has after it a proverb of different contents, but of
similar form:

As snow in summer, and rain in harvest;

So honour befitteth not a fool.

If there is snow in high summer (קיץ, to be glowing hot), it is contrary
to nature; and if there is rain in harvest, it is (according to the
alternations of the weather in Palestine) contrary to what is usually
the case, and is a hindrance to the ingathering of the fruits of the
field. Even so a fool and respect, or a place of honour, are incongruous
things; honour will only injure him (as according to [Pro
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#010), luxury); he will make unjust
use of it, and draw false conclusions from it; it will strengthen him in
his folly, and only increase it. נאוה (= נאוי) is the adj. to the Pil.
נאוה, [Psa 93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005) (plur. נאווּ); נאוה,
[Pro 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#010), and נאוה, [Pro
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#007), are also masc. and fem. of the
adj., according to which, that which is said under [Pro
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#010) is to be corrected. Symmachus
and Theodotion have translated οὐκ ἔπρεψεν, and have therefore read
נאוה. The root word is נאה (as שׁחה to שׁחוה) = נוה, to aim at something
(vid., Hupfeld under [Psa 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002)).

[Proverbs 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 26:2</span></span>

This verse is formed quite in the same way as the preceding:

As the sparrow in its fluttering, as the swallow in its flying,

So the curse that is groundless: it cometh not.

This passage is one of those fifteen (vid., under [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)) in which the לא of the text is
changed by the Kerı̂ into לו; the Talm., Midrash, and Sohar refer this
לּו partly to him who utters the curse himself, against whom also, if he
is a judge, such inconsiderate cursing becomes an accusation by God;
partly to him who is cursed, for they read from the proverb that the
curse of a private person also (הדיוט, ἰδιώτης) is not wont to fall to
the ground, and that therefore one ought to be on his guard against
giving any occasion for it (vid., Norzi). But Aben Ezra supposes that לא
and לו interchange, as much as to say that the undeserved curse falls on
him (לו) who curses, and does not fall (לא) on him who is cursed. The
figures in 2a harmonize only with לא, according to which the lxx, the
Syr., Targ., Venet., and Luther (against Jerome) translate, for the
principal matter, that the sparrow and the swallow, although flying out
([Pro 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#008)), return home again to
their nest (Ralbag), would be left out of view in the comparison by לו.
This emphasizes the fluttering and flying, and is intended to affirm
that a groundless curse is a פּרח בּאוּיר, aimless, i.e., a thing
hovering in the air, that it fails and does not take effect. Most
interpreters explain the two Lameds as declaring the destination: ut
passer (sc. natus est) ad vagandum, as the sparrow, through necessity of
nature, roves about... (Fleischer). But from [Pro
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#003) it is evident that the Lamed in
both cases declares the reference or the point of comparison: as the
sparrow in respect to its fluttering about, etc. The names of the two
birds are, according to Aben Ezra, like dreams without a meaning; but
the Romanic exposition explains rightly צפּור by passereau, and דּרור by
hirondelle, for צפור (Arab. 'uṣfuwr), twitterer, designates at least
preferably the sparrow, and דרור the swallow, from its flight shooting
straight out, as it were radiating (vid., under [Psa
84:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)); the name of the sparrow, dûrı̂
(found in courtyards), which Wetstein, after Saadia, compares to דרור,
is etymologically different.

(Note: It is true that the Gemara to Negam, [Pro
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#001), explains the Mishnic צפרים דרור,
"house-birds," for it derives דרור from דור, to dwell.)

Regarding חנּם, vid., under [Pro
24:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#028). Rightly the accentuation
separates the words rendered, "so the curse undeserved" (קללת, after
Kimchi, Michlol 79b, קללת), from those which follow; לא תבא is the
explication of כן: thus hovering in the air is a groundless curse - it
does not come (בוא, like e.g., [Jos
21:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#043)). After this proverb, which is
formed like [Pro 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#001), the series now
returns to the "fool."

[Proverbs 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 26:3</span></span>

3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass,

And a rod for the back of fools.

J. D. Michaelis supposes that the order should be reversed: a bridle for
the horse, a whip for the ass; but Arnoldi has here discovered the
figure of speech merismus (cf. [Pro
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#001)); and Hitzig, in the manner of
the division, the rhythmical reason of the combination (cf. שׁם חם ויפת
for שׁם יפת וחם): whip and bridle belong to both, for one whips a horse
([Neh 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002)) and also bridles him; one
bridles an ass ([Psa 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)) and also
whips him ([Num 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#028).). As whip and
bridle are both serviceable and necessary, so also serviceable and
necessary is a rod, לגו כּסילים, [Pro
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#013); [Pro
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#029).

[Proverbs 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 26:4</span></span>

4 Answer not the fool according to his folly,

Lest thou thyself also become like unto him.

After, or according to his folly, is here equivalent to recognising the
foolish supposition and the foolish object of his question, and
thereupon considering it, as if, e.g., he asked why the ignorant man was
happier than the man who had much knowledge, or how one may acquire the
art of making gold; for "a fool can ask more than ten wise men can
answer." He who recognises such questions as justifiable, and thus
sanctions them, places himself on an equality with the fool, and easily
himself becomes one. The proverb that follows affirms apparently the
direct contrary:

[Proverbs 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 26:5</span></span>

5 Answer the fool according to his folly,

Lest he regard himself as wise.

ענה־כסיל (with Makkeph, and Gaja, and Chatef)

(Note: Thus after Ben Asher; while, on the contrary, Ben Naphtali writes
ענה כסיל with Munach, vid., Thorath Emeth, p. 41.)

here stands opposed to אל־תען כסיל. The Gospel of John, e.g., [Joh
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031), cf. [Pro
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#031),

(Note: Vid., my dissertation on three little-observed passages in the
Gospel of John, and their practical lessons, in the Evang. luth.
Kirchenzeitung, 1869, Nos. 37, 38.)

is rich in such apparently contradictory sayings. The sic et non here
lying before us is easily explained; after, or according to his folly,
is this second time equivalent to, as is due to his folly: decidedly and
firmly rejecting it, making short work with it (returning a sharp
answer), and promptly replying in a way fitted, if possible, to make him
ashamed. Thus one helps him, perhaps, to self-knowledge; while, in the
contrary case, one gives assistance to his self-importance. The Talmud,
Schabbath 30b, solves the contradiction by referring [Pro
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#004) to worldly things, and [Pro
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#005) to religious things; and it is
true that, especially in the latter case, the answer is itself a duty
toward the fool, and towards the truth. Otherwise the Midrash: one ought
not to answer when one knows the fool as such, and to answer when he
does not so know him; for in the first instance the wise man would
dishonour himself by the answer, in the latter case he would give to him
who asks the importance appertaining to a superior.

[Proverbs 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 26:6</span></span>

6 He cutteth off the feet, he drinketh injury,

Who transacteth business by a fool.

He cutteth off, i.e., his own feet, as we say: he breaks his neck, il se
casse le cou; Lat. frangere brachium, crus, coxam; frangere navem
(Fleischer). He thinks to supplement his own two legs by those of the
messenger, but in reality he cuts them off; for not only is the
commission not carried out, but it is even badly carried out, so that
instead of being refreshed ([Pro
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#017); [Pro
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#013)) by the quick, faithful
execution of it, he has to swallow nothing but damage; cf. [Job
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#007), where, however, drinking scorn
is meant of another (lxx), not his own; on the contrary, חמס here refers
to injury suffered (as if it were חמדו, for the suff. of חמס is for the
most part objective); cf. the similar figures [Pro
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#026). So שׁלח בּיד, to accomplish
anything by the mediation of another, cf. [Exo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#013); with דבר (דברים), [Sa2
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#036). The reading מקצּה (Jerome,
Luther, claudus) is unnecessary; since, as we saw, מקצּה ,was ew
includes it in the sibi. The Syr. reads, after the lxx (the original
text of which was ἐκ τῶν ποδῶν ἑαυτοῦ), מקצה, for he errs, as also does
the Targumist, in thinking that מקצה can be used for מקצץ; but Hitzig
adopts this reading, and renders: "from the end of the legs he swallows
injury who sends messages by a fool." The end of the legs are the feet,
and the feet are those of the foolish messenger. The proverb in this
form does not want in boldness, but the wisdom which Hitzig finds in its
is certainly not mother-wit.

(Note: The Venet. translates שׁתה by ἄνους, so שׁטה (the post-bibl.
designation of a fool) - one of the many indications that this
translator is a Jew, and as such is not confined in his knowledge of
language only to the bibl. Hebrew.)

Bttcher, on his part, also with מקצה, renders: "from the end of his feet
he drinks in that which is bitter..." - that also is too artificial, and
is unintelligible without the explanation of its discoverer. But that he
who makes a fool his messenger becomes himself like unto one who cuts
off his own legs, is a figure altogether excellent.

[Proverbs 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 26:7</span></span>

7 The hanging down of the legs of a lame man;

And a proverb in a fool's mouth.

With reference to the obscure דּליוּ, the following views have been
maintained: - (1) The form as punctuated appears directly as an
imperative. Thus the lxx translate, the original text of which is here:
ἀφελοῦ πορείαν κυλλῶν (conj. Lagarde's) καὶ παροιμίαν ἐκ στόματος
ἀφρόνων, which the Syr. (with its imitator, the Targ.) has rendered
positively: "If thou canst give the power of (sound) going to the lame,
then wilt thou also receive (prudent) words from the mouth of a fool."
Since Kimchi, דּליוּ has been regarded by many as the softening of the
Imp. Piel דּדּוּ, according to which the Venet. translates: ἐπάρατε
κνήμας χωλοῦ; and Bertheau and Zckler explain: always take away his legs
from the lame, since they are in reality useless to him, just as a
proverb in the mouth of the fool is useless - something that without
loss might be never there." But why did not the poet write הרימוּ, or
הסירוּ, or קחוּ, or the like? דּלּי, to carry away, to dispense with, is
Syriac (Targ. Jer. I, under [Deu
32:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#050)), but not Hebrew. And how
meaningless is this expression! A lame man would withstand a surgeon (as
he would a murderer) who would amputate his legs; for lame legs are
certainly better than none, especially since there is a great
distinction between a lame man (פּדּח, from פּסח, luxare; cf. (Arab.)
fasaḥ, laxare, vid., Schultens) who halts or goes on crutches ([Sa2
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029)), and one who is maimed
(paralytic), who needs to be carried. It comes to this, that by this
rendering of 7a one must, as a consequence, with the lxx, regard וּמשׁל
\[and a proverb\] as object. accus. parallel to שׁקים \[legs\]; but "to
draw a proverb from one's mouth" is, after [Pro
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#005), something quite different from
to tear a proverb away from him, besides which, one cannot see how it is
to be caught. Rather one would prefer: attollite crura claudi (ut
incedat, et nihil promovebitis); but the מן of מפּסּח does not accord
with this, and 7b does not connect itself with it. But the explanation:
"take away the legs from a lame man who has none, at least none to use,
and a proverb in the mouth of fools, when there is none," is shattered
against the "leg-taking-away," which can only be used perhaps of frogs'
legs. (2) Symmachus translates: ἐξέλιπον κνῆμαι ἀπὸ χωλοῦ; and Chajg
explains דּליוּ as 3 pret. Kal, to which Kimchi adds the remark, that he
appears to have found דּליוּ, which indeed is noted by Norzi and J. H.
Michaelis as a variant. But the Masoretic reading is דּליוּ, and this,
after Gesenius and Bttcher (who in this, without any reason, sees an
Ephraimitic form of uttering the word), is a softened variation from
דּדּוּ. Only it is a pity that this softening, while it is supported by
alius = ἄλλος, folium = φύλλον, faillir = fallere, and the like, has yet
not a single Hebrew or Semitic example in its favour. (3) Therefore
Ewald finds, "all things considered," that it is best to read דּליוּ,
"the legs are too loose for the lame man to use them." But, with
Dietrich, we cannot concur in this, nor in the more appropriate
translation: "the legs of the lame hang down loose," to say nothing of
the clearly impossible: "high are the legs of the lame (one higher than
the other)," and that because this form גּליוּ for גּליוּ also occurs
without pause, [Psa 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002); [Psa
73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002); [Psa
122:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006); [Isa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012); but although thus, as at [Psa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009); [Psa
68:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032), at the beginning of a clause,
yet always only in connection, never at the beginning of an address. (4)
It has also been attempted to interpret דּליוּ as abstr., e.g., Euchel:
"he learns from a cripple to dance, who seeks to learn proverbs from the
mouth of a fool." דּליוּ שׁקים must mean the lifting up of the legs =
springing and dancing. Accordingly Luther translates:

"As dancing to a cripple,

So does it become a fool to speak of wisdom."

The thought is agreeable, and according to fact; but these words to not
mean dancing, but much rather, as the Arabic shows (vid., Schultens at
[Pro 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#005), and on the passage before
us), a limping, waddling walk, like that of ducks, after the manner of a
well-bucket dangling to and fro. And דּליוּ, after the form מלכוּ, would
be an unheard-of Aramaism. For forms such as שׂחוּ, swimming, and שׁלוּ,
security, [Psa 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007), on which C. B.
Michaelis and others rest, cannot be compared, since they are modified
from sachw, ṣalw, while in דּליוּ the ending must be, and besides the
Aramaic דּליוּ must in st. constr. be דּליוּוּת. Since none of these
explanations are grammatically satisfactory, and besides דּליוּ = דּללוּ
= דּדּוּ gives a parallel member which is heterogeneous and not
conformable to the nature of an emblematical proverb, we read דּלּוּי
after the forms צפּוּי, שׁקּוּי (cf. חבּוּק, [Pro
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#010); [Pro
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#033)), and this signifies loose,
hanging down, from דּלה, to hang at length and loosely down, or
transitively: to hang, particularly of the hanging down at length of the
bucket-rope, and of the bucket itself, to draw water from the well. The
מן is similar to that of [Job 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#004),
only that here the connecting of the hanging down, and of that from
which it hangs down, is clear. Were we to express the purely nominally
expressed emblematical proverb in the form of a comparative one, it
would thus stand as Fleischer translates it: ut laxa et flaccida
dependent (torpent) crura a claudo, sic sententia in ore stultorum (sc.
torpet h. e. inutilis est). The fool can as little make use of an
intelligent proverb, or moral maxim (dictum sententiosum), as a lame man
can of his feet; the word, which in itself is full of thought, and
excellent, becomes halting, lame, and loose in his mouth (Schultens:
deformiter claudicat); it has, as spoken and applied by him, neither
hand nor foot. Strangely, yet without missing the point, Jerome: quomodo
pulcras frustra habet claudus tibias, sic indecens est in ore stultorum
parabola. The lame man possibly has limbs that appear sound; but when he
seeks to walk, they fail to do him service - so a bon-mot comes forth
awkwardly when the fool seeks to make use of it. Hitzig's conjecture: as
leaping of the legs on the part of a lame man..., Bttcher has already
shown sufficient reasons for rejecting; leaping on the part of any one,
for the leaping of any one, were a court style familiar to no poet.

[Proverbs 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 26:8</span></span>

This proverb presents to us a new difficulty.

As one binds a stone in a sling,

So is he who giveth honour to a fool.

This translation is warranted by tradition, and is in accordance with
the actual facts. A sling is elsewhere called קלע; but that מרגּמה also
in the passage before us signifies a sling (from רגם, to throw with
stones = to stone or to throw stones = to sling, cf. Targ. [Est
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#014) רגּם, of David's slinging stones
against Goliath), is supported by the lxx, Syr., and Targ. on the one
side, and the Jewish Glossists on the other (Rashi: fronde, Ital.
frombola). Rightly the lxx renders כּצרור as a verb: ὡς ἀποδεσμεύει; on
the contrary, the Syr. and Targ. regard it as a substantive: as a piece
of stone; but צרור as a substantive does not mean a piece, as one would
put into a sling to use as a weapon, but a grain, and thus a little
piece, [Sa2 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#013); cf. [Amo
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009). Erroneously Ewald: "if one binds
to the sling the stone which he yet seeks to throw, then all this
throwing and aiming are in vain; so it is in vain to give to a fool
honour which does not reach him." If one seeks to sling a stone, he must
lay the lapis missilis so in the sling that it remains firm there, and
goes forth only by the strong force of the slinging; this fitting in (of
the stone), so that it does not of itself fall out, is expressed by צרר
בּ (cf. [Pro 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004); [Job
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#008)). The giving is compared to the
binding, the stones to the honour, and the sling to the fool: the fool
is related to the honour which one confers on him, as the stone to the
sling in which one lays it - the giving of honour is a slinging of
honour. Otherwise (after Kimchi) the Venet. ὡς συνδεσμὸς λίθου ἐν
λιθάδι, i.e., as Fleischer translates: ut qui crumenam gemmarum plenam
in acervum lapidum conjicit. Thus also Ralbag, Ahron b. Josef, and
others, and lastly Zckler. The figure is in the form of an address, and
מרגּמה (from רגם, accumulare, congerere, vid., under [Psa
67:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001) :28) might certainly mean the
heaping of stones. But אבן is not used in the sense of אבן יקרה
(precious stone); also one does not see why one precious stone is not
enough as the figure of honour, and a whole heap is named; but in the
third place, כּן נותן requires for כצרור a verbal signification.
Therefore Jerome translates: sicut qui mittit lapidem in acervum
Mercurii; in this the echo of his Jewish teacher, for the Midrash thus
explains literally: every one who gives honour to a fool is like one who
throws a stone on a heap of stones consecrated to Mercury. Around the
Hermes (ἑρμαὶ), i.e., pillars with the head of Mercury (statuae
mercuriales or viales), were heaps of stones (ἕρμακες), to which the
passer-by was wont to throw a stone; it was a mark of honour, and served
at the same time to improve the way, whose patron was Mercurious
(מרקולים). It is self-evident that this Graeco-Roman custom to which the
Talm. makes frequent reference, cannot be supposed to have existed in
the times of Solomon. Luther translates independently, and apparently
rendering into German that in acervum Mercurii: that is as if one threw
a precious stone on the "Rabenstein," i.e., the heap of stones raised at
the foot of the gallows. This heap of stones is more natural and
suitable to the times of Solomon than the heap of stones dedicated to
Mercury, if, like Gussetius, one understands מרגמה of a heap of stones,
supra corpus lapidatum. But against this and similar interpretations it
is enough to remark that כצרור cannot signify sicut qui mittit. Had such
a meaning been intended, the word would have been כּהשׁליך or כּמשׁליך.
Still different is the rendering of Joseph Kimchi, Aben Ezra, and
finally Lwenstein: as when one wraps up a stone in a piece of purple
stuff. But ארגּמן, purple, has nothing to do with the verb רגם; it is,
as the Aramaic ארגּון shows, a compound word; the supposition of a
denom. מרגּמה thus proceeds from a false etymological supposition. And
Hitzig's combination of מרגמה with (Arab.) munjam, handle and beam of a
balance (he translates: as a stone on the beam of a balance, i.e., lies
on it), is nothing but refined ingenuity, since we have no need at all
of such an Arab. word for a satisfactory clearing up of מרגמה. We abide
by the rendering of the sling. Bttcher translates: a sling that
scatters; perhaps מרגמה in reality denotes such a sling as throws many
stones at once. Let that, however, be as it may: that he who confers a
title of honour, a place of honour, and the like, on a fool, is like one
who lays a stone in a sling, is a true and intelligibly formed thought:
the fool makes the honour no honour; he is not capable of maintaining
it; that which is conferred on him is uselessly wasted.

[Proverbs 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 26:9</span></span>

9 A thorn goeth into the hand of a drunkard,

And a proverb in a fool's mouth;

i.e., if a proverb falls into a fool's mouth, it is as if a thorn
entered into the hand of a drunken man; the one is as dangerous as the
other, for fools misuse such a proverb, which, rightly used, instructs
and improves, only to the wounding and grieving of another, as a drunken
man makes use of the pointed instrument which he has possession of for
coarse raillery, and as a welcome weapon of his strife. The lxx, Syr.
(Targ.?), and Jerome interpret עלה in the sense of shooting up, i.e., of
growing; Bttcher also, after [Pro
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#031) and other passages, insists that
the thorn which has shot up may be one that has not grown to perfection,
and therefore not dangerous. But thorns grow not in the hand of any one;
and one also does not perceive why the poet should speak of it as
growing in the hand of a drunken man, which the use of the hand with it
would only make worse. We have here עלה בידי, i.e., it has come into my
hand, commonly used in the Mishna, which is used where anything,
according to intention, falls into one's hands, as well as where it
comes accidentally and unsought for, e.g., Nazir 23a, מי שׁנתכוון לעלות
בידו בשׂר חזיר ועלה בידו בשׂר טלה, he who designs to obtain swine's
flesh and (accidentally) obtains lamb's flesh. Thus rightly Heidenheim,
Lwenstein, and the Venet.: ἄκανθα ἀνέβη εἰς χεῖρα μεθύοντος. חוח
signifies a thorn bush, [Kg2 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#009),

(Note: The plur. חוחים, [Sa1 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006),
signifies not thorn bushes, but rock-splitting; in Damascus, chôcha
means a little gate in the wing of a large door; vid., Wetstein's
Nordarabien, p. 23.)

as well as a thorn, [Sol 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002), but
where not the thorns of the rose, and indeed no rose at all, is meant.
Luther thinks of the rose with the thorn when he explains: "When a
drunkard carries and brandishes in his hand a thorn bush, he scratches
more with it than allows the roses to be smelled - so a fool with the
Scriptures, or a right saying, often does more harm than good." This
paraphrase of Luther's interprets עלה ביד more correctly than his
translation does; on the other hand, the latter more correctly is
satisfied with a thorn twig (as a thorn twig which pierces into the hand
of a drunken man); the roses are, however, assumed contrary to the text.
This holds good also against Wessely's explanation: "the Mashal is like
a rose not without thorns, but in the mouth of a fool is like a thorn
without a rose, as when a drunken man seeks to pluck roses and gains by
his effort nothing but being pierced by thorns." The idea of roses is to
be rejected, because at the time when this proverb was formed there were
no roses in Palestine. The proverb certainly means that a right Mashal,
i.e., an ingenious excellent maxim, is something more and better than a
חוח (the prick as of the Jewish thorn, Zizyphus vulgaris, or the
Christus-thorn, the Ziz spina Christi); but in the mouth of a fool such
a maxim becomes only a useless and a hurtful thing; for the fool so
makes use of it, that he only embarrasses others and recklessly does
injury to them. The lxx translates משׁל by δουλεία, and the Aram. by
שׁטיוּתא; how the latter reached this "folly" is not apparent; but the
lxx vocalized משׁל, according to which Hitzig, at the same time changing
שׁכּור into שׂכוּר, translates: "thorns shoot up by the hand of the
hireling, and tyranny by the mouth of fools." Although a hired labourer,
yet, on this account, he is not devoid of conscience; thus 9a so
corrected has something in its favour: one ought, as far as possible, to
do all with his own hand; but the thought in 9b is far-fetched, and if
Hitzig explains that want of judgment in the state councils creates
despotism, so, on the other hand, [Pro
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#007) says that the fool cannot give
counsel in the gate, and therefore he holds his mouth.

[Proverbs 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 26:10</span></span>

All that we have hitherto read is surpassed in obscurity by this
proverb, which is here connected because of the resemblance of ושכר to
שכור. We translate it thus, vocalizing differently only one word:

Much bringeth forth from itself all;

But the reward and the hirer of the fool pass away.

The lxx translates πολλὰ χειμάζεται πᾶσα σὰρξ ἀφρόνων (all the flesh of
fools suffers much), συντριβήσεται γὰρ ἧ ἔκστασις αὐτῶν, which is in
Hebrew:

רב מחולל כל בּשׂר כסיל

ישּׁבר עברתם

An unfortunate attempt so to rectify the words that some meaning might
be extracted from them. The first line of this translation has been
adopted by the Syr. and Targ., omitting only the כל, in which the
self-condemnation of this deciphering lies (for כל בשׂר means elsewhere,
humanity, not the whole body of each individual); but they translate the
second line as if the words were:

ישׁכּר עבר ים

i.e., and the drunken man sails over the sea (עברים is separated into
עבר ים, as בבקרים, [Amo 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012), is to be
separated into בּבּקר ים); but what does that mean? Does it mean that to
a drunkard (but שׁכּור, the drunken man, and not סבא, the drunkard, is
used) nothing remains but to wander over the sea? or that the drunken
man lets his imagination wander away over the sea, while he neglects the
obligation that lies upon him? Symmachus and Theodotion, with the
Midrash (Rashi) and Saadia (Kimchi), take שׂכר in 10b = סגר (like [Isa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#010), שׂכר = embankment, cf. סכּרין,
Kelim, [Pro 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#005)); the former
translates by καὶ ὁ φράσσων ἄφρονα ἐμφράσσει τὰς ὀργὰς αὐτοῦ, the latter
by καὶ φιμῶν ἄφρονα φιμοῖ χόλους, yielding to the imagination that
עברים, like עברות, may be the plur. of עברה, anger. Jerome punctuates רב
as, [Pro 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#008), רב, and interprets, as
Symmachus and Theodotion, שׂכר both times = סגר, translating: Judicium
determinat causas, et qui imponit stulto silentium iras mitigat; but רב
does not mean judicium, nor מחולל determinat, nor כל causas. As
Gussetius, so also Ralbag (in the first of his three explanations),
Meri, Elia Wilna interpret the proverb as a declaration regarding
quarrelsome persons: he causeth woe to all, and hireth fools, hireth
transgressors, for his companions; but in that case we must read רב for
רב; מחולל, bringing woe, would be either the Po. of חלל, to bore
through, or Pilel of חיל (חוּל), to put into distress (as with pangs);
but עברים, transgressors = sinners, is contrary to the O.T. usus loq.,
[Pro 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#003) ([Pro
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#012)) is falsely cited in its favour;
besides, for רב there should have been at least אישׁ רב and why שׂכרו is
repeated remains inexplicable. Others take מחולל־כל as the name of God,
the creator of all men and things; and truly this is the nearest
impression of these two words, for חולל is the usual designation for
divine production, e.g., [Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002).
Accordingly Kimchi explains: The Lord is the creator of all, and He
gives to fools and to transgressors their maintenance; but עברים,
transgressors, is Mishnic, not bibl.; and שׂכר means to hire, but not to
supply with food. The proverb is thus incapable of presenting a thought
like [Mat 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045) (He maketh His sun to
rise on the evil and on the good). Others translate: "The Lord is
creator of all, and takes fools, takes idlers, into His service." Thus
rendered, the proverb is offensive; wherefore Rashi, Moses Kimchi,
Arama, and others regard the Mashal as in the mouth of fools, and thus
they take [Pro 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#009) and [Pro
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010) together as a tetrastich.
Certainly this second collection of proverbs contains also tetrastiches;
but [Pro 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#009) and [Pro
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010) cannot be regarded as together
forming a tetrastich, because רב (which is valid against Kimchi also)
cannot mean God the Lord: רב, Lord, is unheard of in bibl. Heb., and at
least the word הרב must be used for God. The Venet. on this account does
not follow Kimchi, but translates, Ἄρχων πλάττει πάντα, καὶ μισθοῦται
μωρὸν καὶ μισθοῦται ὡς παραβάτης (ought to have been παραβάτας); but who
could this cunning man be? Perhaps the Venet. is to be understood, after
Gecatilia (in Rashi): a great (rich) man performs all manner of things;
but if he hires a fool, it is as if he hired the first best who pass
along the way. But that חולל is used in the general sense of to execute,
to perform, is without example, and improbable. Also the explanation: a
ruler brings grief, i.e., severe oppression, upon all (Abulwald,
Immanuel, Aben Ezra, who, in his smaller grammar, explains רב = רב after
[Isa 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009); C. B. Michaelis: dolore
afficit omnes), does not recommend itself; for חולל, whether it be from
חלל, [Isa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009) (to bore through), or
from חיל, [Psa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009) (to bring on the
pangs of birth), is too strong a word for hurting; also the clause, thus
generally understood, is fortunately untrue. Translated as by Euchel:
"the prominent persons destroy all; they keep fools in pay, and favour
vagabonds," - it sounds as if it had been picked up in an assembly of
democrats. On the other hand, the proverb, as translated by Luther:

A good master maketh a thing right;

But he who hireth a bungler, by him it is spoiled,

is worthy of the Book of Proverbs. The second line is here freely
rendered, but it is also appropriate, if we abide closer by the words of
the text, in this connection. Fleischer: Magister (artifex peritus)
effingit omnia (i.e., bene perficit quaecunque ei committuntur); qui
autem stultum conducit, conducit transeuntes (i.e., idem facit ac si
homines ignotos et forte transeuntes ad opus gravius et difficilius
conduceret). Thus also Gesenius, Bttcher, and others, who all, as
Gecatilia above, explain עברים, τοὺς τυχόντας, the first best. But we
are reluctantly constrained to object to this thought, because רב
nowhere in bibl. Hebrew signifies a master; and the ו of the second
ושׂכר dno cannot bear that rendering, ac si. And if we leave it out, we
nevertheless encounter a difficulty in חולל, which cannot be used of
human production. Many Christian interpreters (Cocceius, Schultens,
Schelling, Ewald, Bertheau, Stier, Zckler) give to רב a meaning which is
found in no Jewish interpreter, viz., sagittarius, from רבב (רבב), [Gen
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023) (and perhaps [Psa
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015)), after the forms צר, שׂר, the
plur. of which, רבּים, is found at [Job
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#013); [Jer
50:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#029), but in a connection which
removes all doubt from the meaning of the word. Here also רב may be more
closely defined by מחולל; but how then does the proverb stand? "an
archer who wounds everything, and he who hires a fool, and hires
passers-by" (Ewald: street-runners), i.e., they are alike. But if the
archer piercing everything is a comic Hercules furens, then, in order to
discover the resemblance between the three, there is need of a portion
of ingenuity, such as is only particularly assigned to the favoured. But
it is also against the form and the usage of the word to interpret עברים
simply of rogues and vagabonds. Several interpreters have supposed that
רב and כל must stand in a certain interchangeable relation to each
other. Thus, e.g., Ahron b. Josef: "Much makes amazement to all, but
especially one who hires a fool...." But this "especially" (Before all)
is an expression smuggled in. Agreeing with Umbreit and Hitzig, we
translate line first; but in translating line second, we follow our own
method:

Much bringeth all out of it;

i.e., where there is much, then one has it in his power, if he begins
right, to undertake everything. רב has by כּל the definition of a
neuter, so as to designate not only many men, [Exo
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021), but also much ability in a
pecuniary and facultative sense (cf. the subst. רב, [Isa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007); [Psa
145:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#007)); and of the much which bringeth
forth all out of itself, effects all by itself, חולל with equal right
might be used, as [Pro 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#023), of the
north wind. The antithesis 10b takes this form:

But the reward (read וּשׂכר) and the master (who hires him for wages) of
the fool pass away,

i.e., perish; עברים, as if עבר, is used of chaff, [Isa
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#005); of stubble, [Jer
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#024); of shadow, [Psa
144:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004). That which the fool gains
passes away, for he squanders it; and he who took him into his service
for wages is ruined along with him, for his work is only pernicious, not
useful. Although he who possesses much, and has great ability, may be
able to effect everything of himself, yet that is not the case when he
makes use of the assistance therein of foolish men, who not only do not
accomplish anything, but, on the contrary, destroy everything, and are
only ruinous to him who, with good intention, associates them with
himself in his work. That the word must be more accurately ושׂכר,
instead of ושׂכרוו, one may not object, since ושׂכר is perfectly
unambiguous, and is manifestly the object.

[Proverbs 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 26:11</span></span>

The series of proverbs regarding fools is continued:

Like a dog which returneth to his vomit,

Is a fool who cometh again with his folly.

שׁב is like שׁונה, particip.; only if the punctuation were כּכּלב, ought
"which returneth to his vomit" to be taken as a relative clause (vid.,
under [Psa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014)). Regarding על as
designating the terminus quo with verbs of motions, vid., Khler under
Mal. 3:24. On קא = קיא, cf. [Pro 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#008).
Luther rightly; as a dog devours again his vomit. The lxx translate:
ὥσπερ κύων ὅταν ἐπέλθῃ ἐπὶ τὸν ἑαυτοῦ ἔμετον; the reference in [Pe2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022) : κύων ἐπιστρέψας ἐπὶ τὸ ἴδιον
ἐξέραμα, is thus not from the lxx; the Venet. is not connected with this
N.T. citation, but with the lxx, if its accordance with it is not merely
accidental. To devour again its vomit is common with the dog.

(Note: Vid., Schulze's Die bibl. Sprichwrter der deutschen Sprache, p.
71f.)

Even so, it is the manner of fools to return again in word and in deed
to their past folly (vid., regarding שׁנה with ב of the object. [Pro
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#009)); as an Aram. popular saying has
it: the fool always falls back upon his foolish conduct.

(Note: Vid., Wahl's Das Sprichwort der heb.-aram. Literatur, p. 147;
Duke's Rabbin. Blumenlese, p. 9.)

He must needs do so, for folly has become to him a second nature; but
this "must" ceases when once a divine light shines forth upon him. The
lxx has after [Pro 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011) a distich
which is literally the same as Sir. 4:21.

[Proverbs 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 26:12</span></span>

12 Seest thou a man who is wise in his own eyes?

The fool hath more hope than he.

Regarding the perf. hypotheticum ראית, vid., at [Pro
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#029). Line second is repeated, [Pro
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#020), unchanged. ממּנּוּ, prae eo, is
equivalent to the Mishnic יותר ממּנּוּ, plus quam ei. As the conversion
of a sinner, who does not regard himself as righteous, is more to be
expected than that of a self-righteous man ([Mat
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012).), so the putting right of a
fool, who is conscious that he is not wise (cf. [Pro
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#007)), is more likely to be effected
than that of one deeming himself wise; for the greatest hindrance to any
turning toward that which is better lies in the delusion that he does
not need it.

(Note: The Targum has 12b after Codd. פּקח סכלא טב מגּיהּ (= Syr.
pekach, expedit, convenit, melius est), it is far better circumstanced
regarding the fool than regarding him. Vid., Geiger's Zeitschr. vi.
(1868), p. 154.)

Thus far the group of proverbs regarding fools.

[Proverbs 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 26:13</span></span>

There follows now a group of proverbs regarding the slothful:

13 The slothful saith there is a lion without,

A lion in the midst of the streets;

cf. the original of this proverb, [Pro
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#013). שׁוּעל, to say nothing of שׁחל,
is not the jackal; שׁחל is the bibl. name for the lion. בּין is the more
general expression for בּקרב, [Isa
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#025); by the streets he thinks of the
rows of houses that form them.

[Proverbs 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 26:14</span></span>

14 The door turneth on its hinges,

And the sluggard on his bed.

The comparison is clear. The door turns itself on its hinges, on which
it hangs, in and out, without passing beyond the narrow space of its
motion; so is the fool on his bed, where he turns himself from the one
side to the other. He is called עצל, because he is fast glued to the
place where he is (Arab. 'azila), and cannot be free (contrast of the
active, cf. Arab. ḥafyf, moving nimbly, agilis). But the door offers
itself as a comparison, because the diligent goes out by it to begin his
work without ([Pro 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#027); [Psa
104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)), while the sluggard rolls
himself about on his bed. The hook, the hinge, on which the door is
moved, called ציר, from צוּר, to turn,

(Note: The Arab. verb signifies radically: to turn, like the Persian
verbs kashatn and kardydan, and like our "werden" to grow, turn, accords
with vertere (Fleischer).)

has thus the name of הסּוב.

[Proverbs 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 26:15</span></span>

15 The slothful has thrust his hand into the dish,

It is hard for him to bring it back to his mouth again.

A variation of [Pro 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#024); the fut.
ישׁיבנּה there, is here explained by נלאה להשׁיבהּ.

[Proverbs 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 26:16</span></span>

16 The sluggard is wise in his own eyes,

More than seven men who give an excellent answer.

Between slothfulness and conceit there exists no inward necessary mutual
relation. The proverb means that the sluggard as such regards himself as
wiser than seven, who all together answer well at any examination: much
labour - he thinks with himself - only injures the health, blunts men
for life and its joys, leads only to over-exertion; for the most prudent
is, as a general rule, crack-brained. Bttcher's "maulfaule" \[slow to
speak\] belongs to the German style of thinking; עטל לשׁנא in Syr. is
not he who is slow to speak, but he who has a faltering tongue.

(Note: The Aram. עטל is the Hebr. עצל, as עטא = עצה; but in Arab.
corresponds not to 'atal, but to 'azal.)

Seven is the number of manifoldness in completed unfolding ([Pro
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)). Meri thinks, after [Ezr
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014), on the council of seven of the
Asiatic ruler. But seven is a round number of plurality, [Pro
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#025), [Pro
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#016); [Pro
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#031). Regarding טעם, vid., at [Pro
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022).

[Proverbs 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 26:17</span></span>

A series of proverbs which recommend the love of peace, for they present
caricatures of the opposite:

17 He seizeth by the ears of a dog passing by,

Who is excited by a strife which concerns him not.

According to the accentuation in the text, the proverb is to be
translated with Fleischer: Qualis est qui prehendit aures canis, talis
est qui forte transiens ira abripitur propter rixam alienam (eique
temere se immiscent). Since he is cautioned against unwarranted
interference, the expression מתערב בּדין might have been used ([Pro
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#010)), according to which the Syr.
translates; but על־ריב substantiates the originality of מתעבּר (vid.,
[Pro 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#016); [Pro
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002)). On the other hand, the placing
together, without any connection of the two participles, is perplexing;
why not עבר וּמתעבּר? For it is certainly not meant, that falling into a
passion he passes by; but that passing by, he falls into a passion; for
he stands to this object. The Targumist, feeling this also, renders עבר
in the sense of being angry, but contrary to the usus loq. Wherefore the
conjecture of Euchel and Abramsohn commends itself, that עבר belongs to
כלב - the figure thereby becomes more distinct. To seize one's own dog
by the ear is not dangerous, but it is not advisable to do this with a
strange dog. Therefore עבר belongs as a necessary attribute to the dog.
The dog accidentally passing by corresponds to the strife to which one
stands in no relation (ריב לא־ול, vid., regarding the Makkeph, Baer's
Genesis, p. 85, not. 9). Whoever is excited to passion about a strife
that does not belong to him, is like one who lays hold by the ears (the
lxx arbitrarily: by the tail) of a dog that is passing by - to the one
or to the other it happens right when he brings evil upon himself
thereby.

[Proverbs 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 26:18</span></span>

These verses form a tetrastich:

18 As a man who casteth brands,

And arrows, and death;

19 So is the man who deceiveth his neighbour,

And saith: I only make sport.

The old translations of מתלהלה are very diverse. Aquila has rendered it
by κακοηθιζόμενος; Symmachus: πειρώμενοι; the Syr.: the vainglorious;
the Targ.: מתּחת (from נחת), a successor (spiritually); Jerome: noxius
(injurious; for which Luther: secret). There is thus no traditional
translation. Kimchi explains the word by השׁתגע (Venet. ἐξεστώς); Aben
Ezra by השׁתטה (from שׂטה), to behave thoughtlessly, foolishly; but both
erroneously, confounding with it ותּלהּ, [Gen
47:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#013), which is formed from להה and
not from לההּ, and is related to לאה, according to which מתלהלה would
designate him who exerts himself (Rashi, המתיגע), or who is worn out
(Saadia: who does not know what to do, and in weariness passes his
time). The root לההּ (להּ), whence the reflex form התלהלהּ, like
התמהמהּ, from מההּ, מהּ) leads to another primary idea. The root להּ
presents in (Arab.) âliha (vid., Fleischer in the Comm. zur Genesis, p.
57), waliha, and taliha, formed from the 8th form of this verb
(aittalah), the fundamental meaning of internal and external unrest;
these verbs are used of the effect of fear (shrinking back from fear),
and, generally, the want of self-command; the Syr. otlahlah, to be
terrified, obstupescere, confirms this primary conception, connecting
itself with the R. להּ. Accordingly, he who shoots every possible
death-bringing arrow, is thought of as one who is beside himself, one
who is of confused mind, in which sense the passive forms of (Arab.)
âlah and talah are actually used. Schultens' reference to (Arab.) lâh
micare, according to which כמתלהלה must mean sicut ludicram micationem
exercens (Bttcher: one who exerts himself; Malbim: one who scoffs, from
התל), is to be rejected, because מתלהלה must be the direct opposite of
משׂחק; and Ewald's comparison of (Arab.) wâh and akhkh, to be entangled,
distorted, lâh, to be veiled, confounds together heterogeneous words.
Regarding זקּים (from זנק), burning arrows, vid., under [Isa
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011). Death stands third, not as
comprehensive (that which is deadly of every kind), but as a climax
(yea, even death itself). The כּן of the principal sentence, correlate
to כּ of the contiguous clause, has the Makkeph in our editions; but the
laws of the metrical Makkeph require כּן אישׁ (with Munach), as it
occurs e.g., in Cod. 1294. A man who gives vent to his malice against
his neighbour, and then says: seest thou not that... (הלא, like Arab.
âlâ), i.e., I am only jesting, I have only a joke with thee: he exhibits
himself as being mad, who in blind rage scatters about him deadly
arrows.

[Proverbs 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 26:20</span></span>

There now follow proverbs regarding the nirgân, the slanderer (vid.,
regarding the formation and import of this word at [Pro
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#028)):

20 Where the wood faileth, the fire goeth out;

And where no tale-bearer, discord cometh to silence.

Wood, as material for building or for burning, is called, with the plur.
of its product, עצים. Since אפס is the absolute end of a thing, and thus
expresses its no longer existing, so it was more appropriate to wood
(Fleischer: consumtis lignis) than to the tale-bearer, of whom the
proverb says the same thing as [Pro
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#010) says of the mocker.

[Proverbs 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 26:21</span></span>

21 Black coal to burning coal, and wood to fire;

And a contentious man to stir up strife.

The Venet. translates פּחם by καρβών, and גּחלת by ἄνθραξ; the former
(from פּחם, Arab. faḥuma, to be deep black) is coal in itself; the
latter (from גּחל, jaham, to set on fire, and intrans. to burn), coal in
a glowing state (e.g., [Pro 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#022);
[Eze 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013)). Black coal is suited to
glowing coal, to nourish it; and wood to the fire, to sustain it; and a
contentious man is suited for and serves this purpose, to kindle up
strife. חרר signifies to be hot, and the Pilpel חרחר, to heat, i.e., to
make hot or hotter. The three - coal, wood, and the contentious man -
are alike, in that they are a means to an end.

[Proverbs 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 26:22</span></span>

22 The words of the tale-bearer are like dainty morsels;

And they glide down into the innermost parts.

A repetition of [Pro 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#008).

[Proverbs 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 26:23</span></span>

The proverbs next following treat of a cognate theme, hypocrisy (the art
of dissembling), which, under a shining \[gleissen\] exterior,

(Note: Vid., regarding gleisen (to give a deceitful appearance) and
gleissen (to throw a dazzling appearance), Schmitthenner-Weigand's
Deutsches Wrterbuch.)

conceals hatred and destruction:

23 Dross of silver spread over an earthen vessel -

Lips glowing with love and a base heart.

Dross of silver is the so-called gltte (French, litharge), a combination
of lead and oxygen, which, in the old process of producing silver, was
separated (Luther: silberschaum, i.e., the silver litharge; Lat. spuma
argenti, having the appearance of foam). It is still used to glaze over
potter's ware, which here (Greek, κέραμος) is briefly called חרשׂ for
כּלי חרשׂ; for the vessel is better in appearance than the mere
potsherd. The glossing of the earthenware is called צפּה על־חרשׂ, which
is applicable to any kind of covering (צפּה, R. צף, to spread or lay out
broad) of a less costly material with that which is more precious. 23a
contains the figure, and 23b its subscription: שׂפתים דּלקים ולב רע.
Thus, with the taking away of the Makkeph after Codd., to be punctuated:
burning lips, and therewith a base heart; burning, that is, with the
fire of love (Meri, אשׁ החשׁק), while yet the assurances of friendship,
sealed by ardent kisses, serve only to mask a far different heart. The
lxx translate דלקים \[burning\] by λεῖα, and thus have read חלקים
\[smooth\], which Hitzig without reason prefers; burning lips (Jerome,
incorrectly: tumentia; Luther, after [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033), חמת: Gifftiger mund = a
poisonous mouth) are just flattering, and at the same time hypocritical

(Note: Schultens explains the labia flagrantia by volubiliter prompta et
diserta. But one sees from the Arab. dhaluḳa, to be loose, lightly and
easily moved (vid., in Fleischer's Beitrgen zur arab. Sprachkunde the
explanation of the designation of the liquid expressed with the point of
the tongue by dhalḳiytt, at [Pro
1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026); cf. de Sacy's Grammar), and
dalḳ, to draw out (of the sword from its scabbard), to rinse (of water),
that the meaning of the Heb. דלק, to burn, from R. דל, refers to the
idea of the flickering, tongue-like movement of the flame.)

lips. Regarding שׂפתים as masc., vid., p. 85; לב רע means, at [Pro
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#020), animus maestus; here, inimicus.
The figure is excellent: one may regard a vessel with the silver gloss
as silver, and it is still earthen; and that also which gives forth the
silver glance is not silver, but only the refuse of silver. Both are
suitable to the comparison: the lips only glitter, the heart is false
(Heidenheim).

[Proverbs 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 26:24</span></span>

[Pro 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#024) and [Pro
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#025) form a tetrastich.

24 With his lips the hater dissembleth,

And in his heart he museth deceit.

25 If he maketh his voice agreeable, believe him not,

For seven abominations are in his heart.

All the old translators (also the Venet. and Luther) give to יגּכר the
meaning, to become known; but the Niph. as well as the Hithpa. (vid., at
[Pro 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#011); [Gen
47:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#017)) unites with this meaning also
the meaning to make oneself known: to make oneself unknown,
unrecognisable = (Arab.) tanakkr, e.g., by means of clothing, or by a
changed expression of countenance.

(Note: Vid., de Goeje's Fragmenta Hist. Arab. ii. (1871), p. 94. The
verb נכר, primarily to fix one's attention, sharply to contemplate
anything, whence is derived the meanings of knowing and of not knowing,
disowning. The account of the origin of these contrasted meanings, in
Gesenius-Dietrich's Lexicon, is essentially correct; but the Arab. nakar
there referred to means, not sharpness of mind, from nakar = הכּיר, but
from the negative signification prevailing in the Arab. alone, a
property by which one makes himself worthy of being disowned:
craftiness, cunning, and then also in bonam partem: sagacity.)

The contrast demands here this latter signification: labiis suis alium
se simulat osor, intus in pectore autem reconditum habet dolum
(Fleischer). This rendering of ישׁית מרמה is more correct than Hitzig's
("in his breast) he prepares treachery;" for שׁית מרמה is to be rendered
after שׁית עצות, [Psa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003) (vid.,
Hupfeld's and also our comm. on this passage), not after [Jer
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#007); for one says שׁית מוקשׁים, to
place snares, שׁית ארב, to lay an ambush, and the like, but not to place
or to lay deceit. If such a dissembler makes his voice agreeable (Piel
of חנן only here, for the form [Psa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014) is, as it is punctuated, Kal),
trust not thyself to him (האמין, with ב: to put firm trust in anything,
vid., Genesis, p. 312)

(Note: The fundamental idea of firmness in האמין is always in the
subject, not the object. The Arabic interpreters remark that âman with ב
expresses recognition, and with ל submission (vid., Lane's Lexicon under
âman); but in Hebr. האמין with ב fiducia fidei, with ל assensus fidei;
the relation is thus not altogether the same.)

for seven abominations, i.e., a whole host of abominable thoughts and
designs, are in his heart; he is, if one may express it, after [Mat
12:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045), possessed inwardly of seven
devils. The lxx makes a history of 24a: an enemy who, under complaints,
makes all possible allowances, but in his heart τεκταίνεται δόλους. The
history is only too true, but it has no place in the text.

[Proverbs 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 26:26</span></span>

26 Hatred may conceal itself behind deceit:

Its wickedness shall be exposed in the assembly.

Proverbs which begin with the fut. are rarely to be found, it is true;
yet, as we have seen, [Pro 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#026), they
are sometimes to be met with in the collection. This is one of the few
that are of such a character; for that the lxx and others translate ὁ
κρύπτων, which gives for רעתו a more appropriate reference, does not
require us to agree with Hitzig in reading הכּסה ([Pro
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#016), [Pro
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#023)) - the two clauses rendered fut.
stand in the same syntactical relation, as e.g., [Job
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024). Still less can the rendering of
במשׁאון by συνίστησι δόλον, by the lxx, induce us to read with Hitzig
חרשׁ און, especially since it is doubtful whether the Heb. words which
floated before those translators (the lxx) have been fallen upon.
משּׁאון (beginning and ending with a formative syllable) is certainly a
word of rare formation, to be compared only to מסדּרון, [Jdg
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#023); but since the nearest-lying
formation משּׁא signifies usury (from נשׁא, to credit) (according to
which Symmachus, διὰ λήμματα, to desire gain), it is obvious that the
language preferred this double formation for the meaning deceiving,
illusion, or, exactly: fraud. It may also be possible to refer it, like
משּׁוּאות (vid., under [Psa 23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)
:18), to שׁוא = שׁאה, to be confused, waste, as this is done by Parchon,
Kimchi (Venet. ἐν ἐρημίᾳ), Ralbag, and others; משׁאון, in this sense of
deepest concealment, certainly says not a little as the contrast of קהל
\[an assembly\], but ישׁימום \[a desert\] stood ready for the poet to be
used in this sense; he might also have expressed himself as [Job
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003); [Job
38:27](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#027). The selection of this rare word
is better explained if it denotes the superlative of deceit - a course
of conduct maliciously directed toward the deception of a neighbour.
That is also the impression which the word has made on Jerome
(fraudulenter), the Targ. (בּמוּרסתא, in grinding), Luther (to do
injury), and according to which it has already been explained, e.g., by
C. B. Michaelis and Oetinger ("with dissembled, deceitful nature"). The
punctuation of תכסה, Codd. and editions present in three different
forms. Buxtorf in his Concordance (also Frst), and the Basel Biblia
Rabbinica, have the form תּכסּה; but this is a mistake. Either תּכּסה
(Niph.) תּכּסּה (Hithpa., with the same assimilation of the preformative
ת as in הכּבּס, [Lev 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#055); נכּפּר,
[Deu 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#008)) is to be read; Kimchi, in
his Wrterbuch, gives תּכּסּה, which is certainly better supported. A
surer contrast of במשׁאון and בקהל remains in our interpretation; only
we translate not as Ewald: "hatred seeks to conceal itself by
hypocrisy," but: in deceitful work. Also we refer רעתו, not to במשׁאון,
but to שׂנאה, for hatred is thought of in connection with its personal
representative. We see from 26b that hatred is meant which not only
broods over evil, but also carries it into execution. Such hatred may
conceal itself in cunningly-contrived deception, yet the wickedness of
the hater in the end comes out from behind the mask with the light of
publicity.

[Proverbs 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 26:27</span></span>

27 He who diggeth a pit falleth therein;

And he that rolleth up a stone, upon himself it rolleth back.

The thought that destruction prepared for others recoils upon its
contriver, has found its expression everywhere among men in divers forms
of proverbial sayings; in the form which it here receives, 27a has its
oldest original in [Psa 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016), whence
it is repeated here and in [Ecc 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008),
and Sir. 27:26. Regarding כּרה, vid., at [Pro
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#027). בּהּ here has the sense of in
eam ipsam; expressed in French, the proverb is: celui qui creuse la
fosse, y tombera; in Italian: chi cava la fossa, cader in essa. The
second line of this proverb accords with [Psa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#017) (vid., Hupfeld and Riehm on this
passage). It is natural to think of the rolling as a rolling upwards;
cf. Sir. 27:25, ὁ βάλλων λίθον εἰς ὕψος ἐπὶ κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ βάλλει, i.e.,
throws it on his own head. וגלל אבן is to be syntactically judged of
like [Pro 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#013).

[Proverbs 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 26:28</span></span>

28 The lying tongue hateth those whom it bruiseth;

And a flattering mouth causeth ruin.

The lxx, Jerome, the Targ., and Syr. render ישׂנא דכיו in the sense of
non amat veritatem; they appear by דכיו to have thought of the Aram.
דכיא, that which is pure; and thus they gain nothing else but an
undeniable plain thought. Many Jewish interpreters gloss: מוכיחיו, also
after the Aram.: דּכּיו = מדכּיו; but the Aram. דּכּי does not mean pure
in the sense of being right, therefore Elia Wilna understands him who
desires to justify himself, and this violent derivation from the Aram.
thus does not lead to the end. Luther, translating: "a false tongue
hates those who punish it," explains, as also Gesenius, conterentes =
castigantes ipsam; but דּך signifies, according to the usage of the
language before us, "bruised" (vid., [Psa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)), not: bruising; and the thought
that the liar hates him who listens to him, leads ad absurdum; but that
he does not love him who bruises (punishes) him, is self-evident. Kimchi
sees in דּכּיו another form of דּכּא; and Meri, Jona Gerundi in his
ethical work (שׁערי תשׁובה = The gates of Repentance), and others,
accordingly render דכיו in the sense of ענו (עניו): the lying tongue
hates - as Lwenstein translates - the humble \[pious\]; also that for
דכּיו, by the omission of ו, דכּי = זכּי may be read, is supposable; but
this does not harmonize with the second half of the proverb, according
to which לשׁון שׁקר must be the subject, and ישׂנא דכיו must express
some kind of evil which proceeds from such a tongue. Ewald: "the lying
tongue hates its master (אדניו)," but that is not in accordance with the
Heb. style; the word in that case should have been בּעליו. Hitzig
countenances this אדניו, with the remark that the tongue is here
personified; but personified, the tongue certainly means him who has it
([Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003)). Bttcher's conjecture
ישׁנּא דכיו, "confounds their talk," is certainly a curiosity. Spoken of
the sea, those words would mean, "it changes its surge." But is it then
at all necessary to uncover first the meaning of 28a? Rashi, Arama, and
others refer דכּיו to דּכּים = נדכּאים (מדכּים). Thus also perhaps the
Venet., which translates τοὺς ἐπιτριμμοὺς (not: ἐπιτετριμμένους) αὐτῆς.
C. B. Michaelis: Lingua falsitatis odio habet contritos suos, h. e. eos
quos falsitate ac mendacio laedit contritosque facit. Hitzig objects
that it is more correct to say: conterit perosos sibi. And certainly
this lay nearer, on which account Fleischer remarks: in 28a there is to
be supposed a poetic transposition of the ideas (Hypallage): homo qui
lingua ad calumnias abutitur conterit eos quos odit. The poet makes
ישׂנא the main conception, because it does not come to him so readily to
say that the lying tongue bruises those against whom it is directed, as
that it is hatred, which is active in this. To say this was by no means
superfluous. There are men who find pleasure in repeating and magnifying
scandalously that which is depreciatory and disadvantageous to their
neighbour unsubstantiated, without being at all conscious of any
particular ill-will or personal enmity against him; but this proverb
says that such untruthful tongue-thrashing proceeds always from a
transgression of the commandment, "Thou shalt not hate thy brother,"
[Lev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017), and not merely from the
want of love, but from a state of mind which is the direct opposite of
love (vid., [Pro 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#018)). Ewald finds
it incongruous that 28a speaks of that which others have to suffer from
the lying tongue, whereas the whole connection of this proverb requires
that the tongue should here be regarded as bringing ruin upon its owner
himself. But of the destruction which the wicked tongue prepares for
others many proverbs also speak, e.g., [Pro
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#013), cf. [Pro
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#004), לשׁון הוּת; and 28b does not
mention that the smooth tongue (written וּפה־חלק with Makkeph) brings
injury upon itself (an idea which must be otherwise expressed; cf. [Pro
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#032)), but that it brings injury and
ruin on those who have pleasure in its flatteries (חלקות, [Psa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003); [Isa
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#010)), and are befooled thereby: os
blandiloquum (blanditiis dolum tegens) ad casum impellit, sc. alios
(Fleischer).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 27](pro027)

</div>
