<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa017)  [Next](psa019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 18:0</span></span>

David's Hymnic Retrospect of a Life Crowned with Many Mercies

Next to a תּפּלּה of David comes a שׁירה (nom. unitatis from שׁיר),
which is in many ways both in words and thoughts (Symbolae p. 49)
interwoven with the former. It is the longest of all the hymnic Psalms,
and bears the inscription: To the Precentor, by the servant of Jahve, by
David, who spake unto Jahve the words of this song in the day that Jahve
had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies and out of the hand
of Saûl: then he said. The original inscription of the Psalm in the
primary collection was probably only לדוד למנצח לעבד ה, like the
inscription of [Psa 36:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001). The rest
of the inscription resembles the language with which songs of this class
are wont to be introduced in their connection in the historical
narrative, [Exo 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001); [Num
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#017), and more especially [Deu
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#030). And the Psalm before us is
found again in 2 Sam 22, introduced by words, the manifestly
unaccidental agreement of which with the inscription in the Psalter, is
explained by its having been incorporated in one of the histories from
which the Books of Samuel are extracted, - probably the Annals (Dibre
ha-Jamim) of David. From this source the writer of the Books of Samuel
has taken the Psalm, together with that introduction; and from this
source also springs the historical portion of the inscription in the
Psalter, which is connected with the preceding by אשׁר.

David may have styled himself in the inscription עבד ה, just as the
apostles call themselves δοῦλοι Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ. He also in other
instances, in prayer, calls himself "the servant of Jahve," [Psa
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012), [Psa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014); [Psa
144:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#010); [Sa2
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#020), as every Israelite might do; but
David, who is the first after Moses and Joshua to bear this designation
or by-name, could to so in an especial sense. For he, with whom the
kingship of promise began, marks an epoch in his service of the work of
God no less than did Moses, through whose mediation Israel received the
Law, and Joshua, through whose instrumentality they obtained the Land of
promise.

The terminology of psalm-poesy does not include the word שׁירה, but only
שׁיר. This at once shows that the historical portion of the inscription
comes from some other source. בּיום is followed, not by the infin.
הצּיל: on the day of deliverance, but by the more exactly plusquamperf.
הצּיל: on the day (בּיום = at the time, as in [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004), and frequently) when he had
delivered - a genitival (Ges. 116, 3) relative clause, like [Psa
138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003); [Exo
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#028); [Num
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#001), cf. [Psa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#010). מיּד alternates with מכּף in
this text without any other design than that of varying the expression.
The deliverance out of the hand of Saul is made specially prominent,
because the most prominent portion of the Psalm, [Psa
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005), treats of it. The danger in
which David the was placed, was of the most personal, the most perilous,
and the most protracted kind. This prominence was of great service to
the collector, because the preceding Psalm bears the features of this
time, the lamentations over which are heard there and further back, and
now all find expression in this more extended song of praise.

Only a fondness for doubt can lead any one to doubt the Davidic origin
of this Psalm, attested as it is in two works, which are independent of
one another. The twofold testimony of tradition is supported by the fact
that the Psalm contains nothing that militates against David being the
author; even the mention of his own name at the close, is not against it
(cf. [Kg1 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#045)). We have before us an
Israelitish counterpart to the cuneiform monumental inscriptions, in
which the kings of worldly monarchies recapitulate the deeds they have
done by the help of their gods. The speaker is a king; the author of the
Books of Samuel found the song already in existence as a Davidic song;
the difference of his text from that which lies before us in the
Psalter, shows that at that time it had been transmitted from some
earlier period; writers of the later time of the kings here and there
use language which is borrowed from it or are echoes of it (comp. [Pro
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005) with [Psa
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031); [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019) with [Psa
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034)); it bears throughout the mark
of the classic age of the language and poetry, and "if it be not
David's, it must have been written in his name and by some one imbued
with his spirit, and who could have been this contemporary poet and
twin-genius?" (Hitzig). All this irresistibly points us to David
himself, to whom really belong also all the other songs in the Second
Book of Samuel, which are introduced as Davidic (over Saul and Jonathan,
over Abner, etc.). This, the greatest of all, springs entirely from the
new self-consciousness to which he was raised by the promises recorded
in 2 Sam 7; and towards the end, it closes with express retrospective
reference to these promises; for David's certainty of the everlasting
duration of his house, and God's covenant of mercy with his house, rests
upon the announcement made by Nathan.

The Psalm divides into two halves; for the strain of praise begins anew
with [Psa 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#032), after having run its
first course and come to a beautiful close in [Psa
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031). The two halves are also
distinct in respect of their artificial form. The strophe schema of the
first is: 6. 8. 8. 6. 8 (not 9). 8. 8. 8. 7. The mixture of six and
eight line strophes is symmetrical, and the seven of the last strophe is
nothing strange. The mixture in the second half on the contrary is
varied. The art of the strophe system appears here, as is also seen in
other instances in the Psalms, to be relaxed; and the striving after
form at the commencement has given way to the pressure and crowding of
the thoughts.

The traditional mode of writing out this Psalm, as also the Cantica, 2
Sam 22 and Judg 5, is "a half-brick upon a brick, and a brick upon a
half-brick" (אירח על גבי לבנה ולבנה על גבי אריח): i.e., one line
consisting of two, and one of three parts of a verse, and the line
consisting of the three parts has only one word on the right and on the
left; the whole consequently forms three columns. On the other hand, the
song in Deut 32 (as also [Jos 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#009).,
[Est 9:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#007)) is to be written "a
half-brick upon a half-brick and a brick upon a brick," i.e., in only
two columns, cf. infra p. 168.

Psalm 18 according to the Text of 2 Samuel 22

[Sa2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001)

On the differences of the introductory superscription, see on [Psa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001). The relation of the prose
accentuation of the Psalm in 2 Sam 22 to the poetical accentuation in
the Psalter is instructive. Thus, for example, instead of Mercha
mahpach. (Olewejored) in the Psalter we here find Athnach; instead of
the Athnach following upon Mercha mahpach., here is Zakeph (cf. [Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007), [Psa
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016), [Psa
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031) with [Sa2
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#007), [Sa2
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#016), [Sa2
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#031)); instead of Rebia mugrash, here
Tiphcha (cf. [Psa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004) with [Sa2
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#004)); instead of Pazer at the
beginning of a verse, here Athnach (cf. [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002) with [Sa2
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002)).

(Note: Vid., Baer's Accentsystem xv., and Thorath Emeth iii. 2 together
with S. 44, Anm.)

The peculiar mode of writing the stichs, in which we find this song in
our editions, is the old traditional mode. If a half-line is placed
above a half-line, so that they form two columns, it is called לבנה
על־גבי לבנה אריח על־גבי אריח, brick upon brick, a half-brick upon a
half-brick, as the song Haazinu in Deut 32 is set out in our editions.
On the other hand if the half-lines appear as they do here divided and
placed in layers one over another, it is called אריח על־גבי לבנה ולבנה
על־גבי אריח. According to Megilla 16b all the cantica in the Scriptures
are to be written thus; and according to Sofrim xiii., Ps 18 has this
form in common with 2 Sam 22.

[Sa2 22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002)

This strophe is stunted by the falling away of its monostichic introit,
[Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002). In consequence of this, the
vocatives in [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002). are deprived
of their support and lowered to substantival clauses: Jahve is my Rock,
etc., which form no proper beginning for a hymn. Instead of וּמפלּטי we
have, as in [Psa 144:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#002), ומפלטי־לי; and
instead of אלי צוּרי we find אלהי צוּרי, which is contrary to the usual
manner of arranging these emblematical names. The loss the strophe
sustains is compensated by the addition: and my Refuge, my Saviour, who
savest me from violence. In [Sa2 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#004)
as in [Sa2 22:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#049) the non-assimilated
מן (cf. [Sa2 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#014), [Psa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004); [Psa
73:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#019)) is shortened into an
assimilated one. May לּי perhaps be the remains of the obliterated אלי,
and אלהי, as it were, the clothing of the צוּרי which was then left too
bare?

[Sa2 22:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005)

The connection of this strophe with the preceding by כּי accords with
the sense, but is tame. On the other hand, the reading משׁבּרי instead
of חבלי (even though the author of [Psa
116:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#003) may have thus read it) is
commended by the parallelism, and by the fact, that now the latter
figure is not repeated in [Sa2 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005),
[Sa2 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#006). משׁברי are not necessarily
waves that break upon the shore, but may also be such as break one upon
another, and consequently אפפוּני is not inadmissible. The ו of ונחלי,
which is not wanted, is omitted. Instead of the fuller toned from
סבבוּני, which is also more commensurate with the closing cadence of the
verse, we have here the usual syncopated סבּוּני (cf. [Psa
118:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#011)). The repetition of the אקרא
(instead of אשׁוּע) is even more unpoetical than the repetition of חבלי
would be. On the other hand, it might originally have been ויּשׁמע
instead of ישׁמע; without ו it is an expression (intended
retrospectively) of what takes place simultaneously, with ו it expresses
the principal fact. The concluding line ושׁועתי בּאזניו is stunted: the
brief substantival clause is not meaningless (cf. [Job
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#021); [Isa
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#009)), but is only a fragment of the
more copious, fuller toned conclusion of the strophe which we find in
the Psalter.

[Sa2 22:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#008)

The Kerמ here obliterates the significant alternation of the Kal and
Hithpa. of גּעשׁ. Instead of וּמוסדי we have the feminine form of the
plural מוסדות (as in both texts in [Sa2
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#016)) without ו. Instead of the
genitive הרים, by an extension of the figure, we have השׁמים (cf. the
pillars, [Job 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#011)), which is not
intended of the mountains as of Atlasses, as it were, supporting the
heavens, but of the points of support and central points of the heavens
themselves: the whole universe trembles.

[Sa2 22:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#011)

Instead of the pictorial ויּדא ([Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049), and hence in Jeremiah), which
is generally used of the flight of the eagle, we have the plain,
uncoloured ויּרא He appeared. Instead of ישׁת, which is intended as an
aorist, we meet the more strictly regular, but here, where so many
aorists with ו come together, less poetical ויּשׁת. In [Sa2
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#012) the rise and fall of the
parallel members has grown over till it forms one heavy clumsy line: And
made darkness round about Him a pavilion (סכּות). But the ἁπ. λεγ.
חשׁרת, to which the signification of a "massive gathering together" is
secured by the Arabic, is perhaps original. The word Arab. ḥšr,
frequently used in the Koran of assembling to judgment, with the radical
signification stipare, cogere (to crowd together, compress) which is
also present in Arab. ḥšâ, ḥâš, ḥšd, is here used like ἀγείρειν in the
Homeric νεφεληγρέτα (the cloud-gatherer).

(Note: Midrash and Talmud explain it according to the Aramaic "a
straining of the clouds," inasmuch as the clouds, like a sieve, let the
drops trickle down to the earth, falling close upon each other and yet
separately (B. Taanth 9b: מחשרות מים על־גבי קרקע). Kimchi combines חשׁר
with קשׁר. But the ancient Arabic ḥšr is the right key to the word. The
root of חשׁך and חשׁכּה is perhaps the same (cf. [Exo
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021)).)

[Sa2 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#013) is terribly mutilated. Of
עביו עררו ברד ו of the other text there are only the four letters בּערוּ
(as in [Sa2 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#009)) left.

[Sa2 22:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#014)

Instead of ויּרעם we find ירעם, which is less admissible here, where a
principal fact is related and the description is drawing nearer and
nearer to its goal. Instead of מן־שׁמים the other text has בּשּׁמים; in
[Psa 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004) also, מן is retained without
being assimilated before שׁ. But the fact, however, that the line בּרד
וגחלי־אשׁ is wanting, is a proof, which we welcome, that it is
accidentally repeated from the preceding strophe, in the other text. On
the other hand, חצּים is inferior to חצּיו; וּברקים רב is corrupted into
a tame בּרק; and the Ker ויּהם erroneously assumes that the suffix of
ויפיצם refers to the arrows, i.e., lightnings. Again on the other hand,
אפיקי ים, channels of the sea, is perhaps original; מים in this
connection expresses too little, and, as being the customary word in
combination with אפיקי ([Psa 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002);
[Joe 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020)), may easily have been
substituted after it. At any rate ים and תּבל form a more exact
antithesis. יגּלוּ instead of ויּגּלוּ is the same in meaning. The close
of the strophe is here also weakened by the obliteration of the address
to God: by (בּ instead of the מ of the other text) the threatening of
Jahve, at the snorting of His breath of anger. The change of the
preposition in this surge (so-to-speak) of the members of the verse is
rather interruptive than pleasing.

[Sa2 22:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#017)

The variant משּׂנאי instead of ומשׂאני is unimportant; but משׁען instead
of למשׁען, for a support, is less pleasing both as it regards language
and rhythm. The resolution of ויוציאני into אתי...ויּצא is a clumsy and
needless emphasising of the me.

[Sa2 22:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021)

Instead of כּצדקי, we find כּצדקתי here and in [Sa2
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#025), contrary to usage of the
language of the Psalms (cf. [Psa 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)
with [Kg1 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#032)). Instead of the
poetical אסיר מנּי ([Job 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#005); [Job
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#012)) we have אסוּר ממּנּה (with the
fem. used as a neuter), according to the common phrase in [Kg2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#003), and frequently (cf. [Deu
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#032)). Instead of ואהי, the not less
(e.g., [Psa 102:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#008)) usual ואהיה; and
instead of ואשׁתּמּר, the form with ah of direction which occurs very
frequently with the first person of the fut. convers. in the later
Hebrew, although it does also occur even in the older Hebrew ([Psa
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006); [Psa
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005), [Gen
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#006); [Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)). And instead of עמּו we find
לו, which does not commend itself, either as a point of language or of
rhythm; and by comparison with [Sa2
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#026), [Sa2
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#027), it certainly is not original.

[Sa2 22:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#025)

On כּצדקתי see [Sa2 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021). כּברי is
without example, since elsewhere (כּפּים) בּר ידים is the only
expression for innocence. In the equally remarkable expression גּבּור
תּמים (the upright "man of valour"), גבור is used just as in the
expression גּבּור חיל. The form תּתּבר, has only the sound of an
assimilated Hithpa. like תּתּמּם (= תתתמם), and is rather a reflexive of
the Hiph. הבר after the manner of the Aramaic Ittaphal (therefore =
תּתּכרר); and the form תּתּפּל sounds altogether like a Hithpa. from
תּפל (thou showest thyself insipid, absurd, foolish), but - since תּפלה
cannot be ascribed to God ([Job 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#022)),
and is even unseemly as an expression - appears to be treated likewise
as an Ittaphal with a kind of inverted assimilation = תּתהפתּל
(Bttcher). They are contractions such as are sometimes allowed by the
dialect of the common people, though contrary to all rules. ואת instead
of כּי at the beginning of [Sa2 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#028)
changes what is confirmatory into a mere continuation of the foregoing.
One of the most sensible variations is the change of ועינים רמות to
ועיניך על־רמים. The rendering: And Thine eyes (are directed down) upon
the haughty that Thou mayst bring (them) low (Stier, Hengst., and
others), violates the accentuation and is harsh so far as the language
is concerned (תּשׁפּיל for להשׁפּלם). Hitzig renders it, according to
the accents: And Thou lowerest Thine eyes against the proud, השׁפיל
עימים = הפיל פנים ([Jer 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)). But one
would expect בּ instead of על, if this were the meaning. It is better to
render it according to [Psa 113:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006) :
And Thou dost cast down Thine eyes upon the haughty, in which rendering
the haughty are represented as being far beneath Jahve notwithstanding
their haughtiness, and the "casting down or depressing of the eyes" is
an expression of the utmost contempt (despectus).

[Sa2 22:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#029)

Here in [Sa2 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#029) תּאיר has been
lost, for Jahve is called, and really is, אור in [Psa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001), but not נר. The form of writing
גיר is an incorrect wavering between נר and ניר. The repetition יהוה
ויהוה, by which the loss of תאיר, and of אלהי in [Sa2
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#029), is covered, is inelegant. We
have בּכה here instead of בּך, as twice besides in the Old Testament.
The form of writing ארוּץ, as [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004) shows, does not absolutely
require that we should derive it from רוּץ; nevertheless רוּץ can be
joined with the accusative just as well as דּלּג, in the sense of
running against, rushing upon; therefore, since the parallelism is
favourable, it is to be rendered: by Thee I rush upon a troop. The
omission of the ו before בּאלהי is no improvement to the rhythm.

[Sa2 22:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#032)

The variety of expression in [Sa2
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#032) which has been preserved in the
other text is lost here. Instead of המאזרני חיל we find, as if from a
faded MS, חיל מעוּזי (according to Norzi מעוּזי) my refuge (lit.,
hiding) of strength, i.e., my strong refuge, according to a
syntactically more elegant style of expression (= מעוזי מעוז חיל), like
[Psa 71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007); [Lev
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003); [Lev
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042); vid., Nהgelsbach ֗63, g, where
it is correctly shown, that this mode of expression is a matter of
necessity in certain instances.

(Note: In the present instance מעוז חילי, like מחסה עזּי in [Psa
71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007) (cf. [Eze
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027); [Eze
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#007), and perhaps [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008)) would not be inadmissible,
although in the other mode of expression greater prominence is given to
the fact of its being provided and granted by God. But in cases like the
following it would be absolutely inadmissible to append the suffix to
the nom. rectum, viz., שׂואי שׁקר, [Psa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020); בּריתי יעקב my covenant with
Jacob, [Lev 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042); מדּו בד his garment
of linen, [Lev 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003); כּתבם המּתיחשׂים
their ancestral register, [Ezr 2:62](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#062);
and it is probable that this transference of the pronominal suffix to
the nom. regens originated in instances like these, where it was a
logical necessary and then became transferred to the syntax ornata. At
the same time it is clear from this, that in cases like שׂנאי שׁקר, and
consequently also שׂנאי חנּם, the second notion is not conceived as an
accusative of more precise definition, but as a governed genitive.)

The form of writing, מעוּזי, seems here to recognise a מעוז, a
hiding-place, refuge, = Arab. m‛âd, which is different from מעז a
fortress (from עזז); but just as in every other case the punctuation
confuses the two substantives (vid., on [Psa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003)), so it does even here, since
מעוז, from עוּז, ought to be inflected מעוּזי, like מנוּסי, and not
מעוּזי. Nevertheless the plena scriptio may avail to indicate to us,
that here מעוז is intended to by a synonym of מחסה. Instead of (תמים
דרכי) ויּתּן we have ויּתּר here; perhaps it is He let, or caused, my
way to be spotless, i.e., made it such. Thus Ewald renders it by
referring to the modern Arabic hllâ, to let, cause Germ. lassen, French
faire = to make, effect; even the classic ancient Arabic language uses
trk (Lassen) in the sense of j'l (to make), e.g., "I have made (Arab.
taraktu) the sword my camp-companion," i.e., my inseparable attendant
(lit., I have caused it to be such), as it is to be translated in
Nldeck'e Beitrge zur Kenntniss der Poesie der alten Araber, S. 131.

(Note: Ibid. S. 133, Z. 13 is, with Fleischer, to be rendered: ye have
made (Arab. trktm) my milk camels restless, i.e., caused them to be
such, by having stolen them and driven them away so that they now yearn
after home and their young ones.)

Or does התּיר retain its full and proper meaning "to unfetter?" This is
more probable, since the usage of Hebrew shows no example of התּיר in
the post-biblical signification "to allow, permit," which ought to form
the transition to "to cause to be = to effect." Therefore we may compare
on the contrary Koran ix. 15, challu sebı̂-lahum loose their way, i.e.,
let them go forth free, and render it: He unfettered, unbound, left to
itself, let my way go on as faultless (unobstructed). Hitzig, following
the Chethb דרכו, renders it differently: "and made the upright skip on
his way." But תמים beside דרכו is to be regarded at the outset as its
predicate, and התּיר means "to cause to jump up," [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006), not "to skip along."
Nevertheless, the Chethb דרכו, which, from the following Chethb רגליו,
bears the appearance of being designed, at any rate seems to have
understood תמים personally: He unfettered (expedit) the upright his way,
making his feet like etc. The reading ונחת instead of ונחתה, although
admissible so far as the syntax is concerned (Ges. 147, a), injures the
flow of the rhythm.

[Sa2 22:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#036)

The pentastich is stunted here by the falling away of the middle line of
[Sa2 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#036) : and Thy right hand
supported me. Instead of the expressive וענותך (and Thy condescension)
we find here וענתך which, in accordance with the usage of the language,
does not mean Thy being low (Hengst.), but rather: Thy labour (Bttch.),
or more securely: Thine answering, lxx ὑπακοή (i.e., the actual help,
wherewith Thou didst answer my prayer). Instead of תּחתּי we find, as
also in [Sa2 22:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#040), [Sa2
22:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#048), תּחתּני with a verbal suffix,
like בּעד in [Psa 139:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#011); it is
perhaps an inaccuracy of the common dialect, which confused the genitive
and accusative suffix. But instances of this are not wanting even in the
written language, Ges. 103, rem. 3.

[Sa2 22:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#038)

The cohortative תּרדּפת, as frequently, has the sense of a hypothetical
antecedent, whether it refers to the present, as in [Psa
139:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#008), or to the past as in [Psa
73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016) and here: in case I pursued. In
the text in the Psalter it is ואשּׂיגם, here it is ואשׁמידם, by which
the echo of Ex 15 is obliterated. And after עד־כלותם how tautological is
the ואכלּם which is designed to compensate for the shortening of the
verse! The verse, to wit, is shortened at the end, ולא־יכלו קום being
transformed into ולא יקוּמוּן. Instead of יפּלוּ, ויפּלוּ is not
inappropriate. Instead of ותּאזּרני we find ותּזרני, by a syncope that
belongs to the dialect of the people, cf. תּזלי for תּאזלי [Jer
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036), מלּף for מאלּף [Job
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#011). Of the same kind is תּתּה =
נתתּה, an apocope taken from the mouths of the people, with which only
רד, [Jdg 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#011), if equivalent to ירד,
can be compared. The conjunctive ו of ומשׂנאי stands here in connection
with אצמיתם as a consec.: my haters, whom I destroyed. The other text is
altogether more natural, better conceived, and more elegant in this
instance.

[Sa2 22:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#042)

Instead of ישׁוּעוּ we have ישׁעוּ, a substitution which is just
tolerable: they look forth for help, or even: they look up expectantly
to their gods, [Isa 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008); [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001). The two figurative expressions
in [Sa2 22:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#043), however, appear here,
in contrast with the other text, in a distorted form: And I pulverised
them as the dust of the earth, as the mire of the street did I crush
them, I trampled them down. The lively and expressive figure כעפר על־פני
רוח is weakened into כעפר־ארץ. Instead of אריקם, we have the overloaded
glossarial אדקּם ארקעם. The former (root דק, דך, to break in pieces) is
a word that is interchanged with the אריקם of the other text in the
misapprehended sense of ארקּם. The latter (root רק, to stretch, to make
broad, thin, and compact) looks like a gloss of this אדקם. Since one
does not intentionally either crush or trample upon the dirt of the
street nor tread it out thin or broad, we must in this instance take not
merely כעפר־ארץ but also כטיט־חוצות as expressing the issue or result.

[Sa2 22:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044)

The various reading ריבי עמּי proceeds from the correct understanding,
that ריבי refers to David's contentions within his kingdom. The
supposition that עמּי is a plur. apoc. and equivalent to עמּים, as it is
to all appearance in [Psa 144:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#002), and
like מנּי = מנּים [Psa 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009), has no
ground here. The reasonable variation תּשׁמרני harmonises with עמּי:
Thou hast kept me (preserved me) for a head of the nations, viz., by not
allowing David to become deprived of the throne by civil foes. The two
lines of [Sa2 22:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#045) are reversed, and
not without advantage. The Hithpa. יתכּחשׁוּ instead of the Piel יכחשׁוּ
(cf. [Psa 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#003); [Psa
81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016)) is the reflexive of the latter:
they made themselves flatterers (cf. the Niph. [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029) : to show themselves flattering,
like the ישּׁמעוּ which follows here, audientes se praestabant =
obediebant). Instead of (אזן) לשׁמע we have here, in a similar
signification, but less elegant, (אזן) לשׁמוע according to the hearing
of the ear, i.e., hearsay. Instead of ויחרגוּ we find ויחגּרוּ, which is
either a transposition of the letters as a solecism (cf. פּרץ [Sa2
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#027) for פּצר), or used in a peculiar
signification. "They gird (accincti prodeunt)" does not give any
suitable meaning to this picture of voluntary submission. But חגר
(whence Talmudic חגּר lame) may have signified "to limp" in the dialect
of the people, which may be understood of those who drag themselves
along with difficulty and reluctance (Hitz.). "Out of their closed
placed (castles)," here with the suff. ām instead of êhém.

[Sa2 22:47-49](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047)

The צוּר thrust into [Sa2 22:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047) is
troublesome. וירם (without any necessity for correcting it to וירם) is
optative, cf. [Gen 27:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#031); [Pro
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#004), [Pro
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#016). Instead of ויּדבּר we have
וּמריד and who subdueth, which is less significant and so far as the
syntax is concerned less elegant. Also here consequently תּחתּני for
תּחתּי. Instead of מפלּטי we find וּמוציאי and who bringeth me forth out
of my enemies, who surround me - a peculiar form of expression and
without support elsewhere (for it is different in [Sa2
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#020)). The poetical אף is exchanged
for the prose וּ, מן־קמי for מקּמי, and חמס (אישׁ) for חמסים; the last
being a plur. ([Psa 140:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#002), [Psa
140:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#005); [Pro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017)), which is foreign to the genuine
Davidic Psalms.

[Sa2 22:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#050)

The change of position of יהוה in [Sa2
22:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#050), as well as אזמּר for אזמּרה, is
against the rhythm; the latter, moreover, is contrary to custom, [Psa
57:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#010); [Psa
108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004). While מדגל of the other text is
not pointed מגדּל, but מגדּל, it is corrected in this text from מגדיל
into מגדּול tower of salvation - a figure that recalls [Psa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004), [Pro
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010), but is obscure and somewhat
strange in this connection; moreover, migdol for migdal, a tower, only
occurs elsewhere in the Old Testament as a proper name.

If we now take one more glance over the mutual relationship of the two
texts, we cannot say that both texts equally partake of the original.
With the exception of the correct omission of [Sa2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#014) and the readings משׁבּרי, חשׁרת,
and אפיקי ים there is scarcely anything in the text of 2 Sam 22 that
specially commends itself to us. That this text is a designed, and
perhaps a Davidic, revision of the other text (Hengst.), is an
assumption that is devoid of reason and appearance; for in 2 Sam 22 we
have only a text that varies in some instances, but not a substantially
new form of the text. The text in 2 Sam 22, as it has shown us, is
founded upon careless written and oral transmission. The rather decided
tendency towards a defective form of writing leads one to conjecture the
greater antiquity of the copy from which it is taken. It is easy to
understand how poetical passages inserted in historical works were less
carefully dealt with. It is characteristic of the form of the text of
the Psalm in 2 Sam 22, that in not a few instances the licences of
popular expression have crept into it. There is some truth in what
Bttcher says, when he calls the text in the Psalter the recension of the
priests and that in the Second Book of Samuel the recension of the
laity.

[Psalms 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 18:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:2-4) The poet opens with a number of endearing names for God,
in which he gratefully comprehends the results of long and varied
experience. So far as regards the parallelism of the members, a
monostich forms the beginning of this Psalm, as in [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001); [Psa
23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001); Ps 25 and many others.
Nevertheless the matter assumes a somewhat different aspect, if [Psa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003) is not, with Maurer, Hengstenberg
and Hupfeld, taken as two predicate clauses (Jahve is..., my God is...),
but as a simple vocative-a rendering which alone corresponds to the
intensity with which this greatest of the Davidic hymns opens-God being
invoked by ה, ה, אלי, and each of these names being followed by a
predicative expansion of itself, which increases in fulness of tone and
emphasis. The ארחמך (with ā, according to Ew. ֗251, b), which carries
the three series of the names of God, makes up in depth of meaning what
is wanting in compass. Elsewhere we find only the Piel רחם of tender
sympathising love, but here the Kal is used as an Aramaism. Hence the
Jalkut on this passages explains it by רחמאי יתך "I love thee," or
ardent, heartfelt love and attachment. The primary signification of
softness (root רח, Arab. rḥ, rch, to be soft, lax, loose), whence רחם,
uterus, is transferred in both cases to tenderness of feeling or
sentiment. The most general predicate חזפי (from חזק according to a
similar inflexion to אמר, בּסר, עמק, plur. עמקי [Pro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018)) is followed by those which
describe Jahve as a protector and deliverer in persecution on the one
hand, and on the other as a defender and the giver of victory in battle.
They are all typical names symbolising what Jahve is in Himself; hence
instead of וּמפלּטי it would perhaps have been more correct to point
וּמפלטי (and my refuge). God had already called Himself a shield to
Abram, [Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001); and He is called
צוּר (cf. אבן [Gen 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024)) in the great
Mosaic song, [Deu 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037) (the latter verse is distinctly
echoed here).

סלע from סלע, Arab. sl‛, findere, means properly a cleft in a rock
(Arabic סלע,

(Note: Neshwn defines thus: Arab. 'l-sal‛ is a cutting in a mountain
after the manner of a gorge; and Jkt, who cites a number of places that
are so called: a wide plain (Arab. fḍ') enclosed by steep rocks, which
is reached through a narrow pass (Arab. ša‛b), but can only be descended
on foot. Accordingly, in סלעי the idea of a safe (and comfortable)
hiding-place preponderates; in צוּרי that of firm ground and
inaccessibility. The one figure calls to mind the (well-watered)
Edomitish סלע surrounded with precipitous rocks, [Isa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001); [Isa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#011), the Πέτρα described by Strabo,
xvi. 4, 21; the other calls to mind the Phoenician rocky island צור, Ṣûr
(Tyre), the refuge in the sea.))

then a cleft rock, and צוּר, like the Arabic sachr, a great and hard
mass of rock (Aramaic טוּר, a mountain). The figures of the מצוּדה
(מצודה, מצד) and the משׂגּב are related; the former signifies properly
specula, a watch-tower,

(Note: In Arabic maṣâdun signifies (1) a high hill (a signification that
is wanting in Freytag), (2) the summit of a mountain, and according to
the original lexicons it belongs to the root Arab. maṣada, which in
outward appearance is supported by the synonymous forms Arab. maṣadun
and maṣdun, as also by their plurals Arab. amṣidatun and muṣdânun, wince
these can only be properly formed from those singulars on the assumption
of the m being part of the root. Nevertheless, since the meanings of
Arab. maṣada all distinctly point to its being formed from the root
Arab. mṣ contained in the reduplicated stem Arab. maṣṣa, to suck, but
the meanings of Arab. maṣâdun, maṣsadun, and maṣdun do not admit of
their being referred to it, and moreover there are instances in which
original nn. loci from vv. med. Arab. w and y admit of the prefixed m
being treated as the first radical through forgetfulness or disregard of
their derivation, and with the retention of its from secondary roots (as
Arab. makana, madana, maṣṣara), it is highly probable that in maṣâd,
maṣad and maṣd we have an original מצד, מצודה, מצוּדה. These Hebrew
words, however, are to be referred to a צוּד in the signification to
look out, therefore properly specula. - Fleischer.)

and the latter, a steep height. The horn, which is an ancient figure of
victorious and defiant power in [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Sa1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001), is found here applied to Jahve
Himself: "horn of my salvation" is that which interposes on the side of
my feebleness, conquers, and saves me. All these epithets applied to God
are the fruits of the affliction out of which David's song has sprung,
viz., his persecution by Saul, when, in a country abounding in rugged
rocks and deficient in forest, he betook himself to the rocks for
safety, and the mountains served him as his fortresses. In the shelter
which the mountains, by their natural conformations, afforded him at
that time, and in the fortunate accidents, which sometimes brought him
deliverance when in extreme peril, David recognises only marvellous
phenomena of which Jahve Himself was to him the final cause. The
confession of the God tried and known in many ways is continued in [Psa
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005) by a general expression of his
experience. מהלּל is a predicate accusative to יהוה: As one praised
(worthy to be praised) do I call upon Jahve, - a rendering that is
better suited to the following clause, which expresses confidence in the
answer coinciding with the invocation, which is to be thought of as a
cry for help, than Olshausen's, "Worthy of praise, do I cry, is Jahve,"
though this latter certainly is possible so far as the style is
concerned (vid., on [Isa 45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024), cf.
also [Gen 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#003); [Mic
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006)). The proof of this fact, viz.,
that calling upon Him who is worthy to be praised, who, as the history
of Israel shows, is able and willing to help, is immediately followed by
actual help, as events that are coincident, forms the further matter of
the Psalm.

[Psalms 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 18:4</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:5-7) In these verses David gathers into one collective figure
all the fearful dangers to which he had been exposed during his
persecution by Saul, together with the marvellous answers and
deliverances he experienced, that which is unseen, which stands in the
relation to that which is visible of cause and effect, rendering itself
visible to him. David here appears as passive throughout; the hand from
out of the clouds seizes him and draws him out of mighty waters: while
in the second part of the Psalm, in fellowship with God and under His
blessing, he comes forward as a free actor.

The description begins in [Psa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005)
with the danger and the cry for help which is not in vain. The verb אפף
according to a tradition not to be doubted (cf. אופן a wheel) signifies
to go round, surround, as a poetical synonym of סבב, הקּיף, כּתּר, and
not, as one might after the Arabic have thought: to drive, urge. Instead
of "the bands of death," the lxx (cf. [Act
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)) renders it ὠδῖνες (constrictive
pains) θανάτου; but [Psa 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006) favours
the meaning bands, cords, cf. [Psa
119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061) (where it is likewise חבלי
instead of the הבלי, which one might have expected, [Jos
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#005); [Job
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008)), death is therefore represented
as a hunter with a cord and net, [Psa
91:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003). בליּעל, compounded of בּלי and
יעל (from יעל, ועל, root על), signifies unprofitableness, worthlessness,
and in fact both deep-rooted moral corruption and also abysmal
destruction (cf. [Co2 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015), Βελίαρ =
Βελίαλ as a name of Satan and his kingdom). Rivers of destruction are
those, whose engulfing floods lead down to the abyss of destruction
([Jon 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007)). Death, Belı̂jáal, and Sheôl
are the names of the weird powers, which make use of David's persecutors
as their instruments. Futt. in the sense of imperfects alternate with
praett. בּעת (= Arab. bgt) signifies to come suddenly upon any one (but
compare also Arab. b‛ṯ, to startle, excitare, to alarm), and קדּם, to
rush upon; the two words are distinguished from one another like
׬berfallen and anfallen. The היכל out of which Jahve hears is His
heavenly dwelling-place, which is both palace and temple, inasmuch as He
sits enthroned there, being worshipped by blessed spirits. לפניו belongs
to ושׁועתי: my cry which is poured forth before Him (as e.g., in [Psa
102:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001)), for it is tautological if
joined with תּבא beside ושׁועתי. Before Jahve's face he made
supplication and his prayer urged its way into His ears.

[Psalms 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 18:7</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:8-10) As these verses go on to describe, the being heard
became manifest in the form of deliverance. All nature stands to man in
a sympathetic relationship, sharing his curse and blessing, his
destruction and glory, and to God is a (so to speak) synergetic
relationship, furnishing the harbingers and instruments of His mighty
deeds. Accordingly in this instance Jahve's interposition on behalf of
David is accompanied by terrible manifestations in nature. Like the
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, Ps 68; Ps 77, and the giving of the
Law on Sinai, Ex 19, and like the final appearing of Jahve and of Jesus
Christ according to the words of prophet and apostle (Hab 3; [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007).), the appearing of Jahve for the
help of David has also extraordinary natural phenomena in its train. It
is true we find no express record of any incident in David's life of the
kind recorded in [Sa1 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010), but it
must be come real experience which David here idealises (i.e., seizes at
its very roots, and generalises and works up into a grand majestic
picture of his miraculous deliverance). Amidst earthquake, a black
thunderstorm gathers, the charging of which is heralded by the
lightning's flash, and its thick clouds descend nearer and nearer to the
earth. The aorists in [Psa 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008)
introduce the event, for the introduction of which, from [Psa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004) onwards, the way has been
prepared and towards which all is directed. The inward excitement of the
Judge, who appears to His servant for his deliverance, sets the earth in
violent oscillation. The foundations of the mountains ([Isa
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018)) are that upon which they are
supported beneath and within, as it were, the pillars which support the
vast mass. געשׁ (rhyming with רעשׁ) is followed by the Hithpa. of the
same verb: the first impulse having been given they, viz., the earth and
the pillars of the mountains, continue to shake of themselves. These
convulsions occur, because "it is kindled with respect to God;" it is
unnecessary to supply אפּו, חרה לו is a synonym of חם לו. When God is
wrath, according to Old Testament conception, the power of wrath which
is present in Him is kindled and blazes up and breaks forth. The panting
of rage may accordingly also be called the smoke of the fire of wrath
([Psa 74:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001); [Psa
80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005)). The smoking is as the breathing
out of the fire, and the vehement hot breath which is inhaled and
exhaled through the nose of one who is angry (cf. [Job
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#012)), is like smoke rising from the
internal fire of anger. The fire of anger itself "devours out of the
mouth," i.e., flames forth out of the mouth, consuming whatever it lays
hold of-in men in the form of angry words, with God in the fiery forces
of nature, which are of a like kind with, and subservient to, His anger,
and more especially in the lightning's flash. It is the lightning
chiefly, that is compared here to the blazing up of burning coals. The
power of wrath in God, becoming manifest in action, breaks forth into a
glow, and before it entirely discharges its fire, it gives warning of
action like the lightning's flash heralding the outburst of the storm.
Thus enraged and breathing forth His wrath, Jahve bowed the heavens,
i.e., caused them to bend towards the earth, and came down, and darkness
of clouds (ערפל similar in meaning to ὄρφνη, cf. ἔρεβος) was under His
feet: black, low-hanging clouds announced the coming of Him who in His
wrath was already on His way downwards towards the earth.

[Psalms 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 18:10</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:11-13) The storm, announcing the approaching outburst of the
thunderstorm, was also the forerunner of the Avenger and Deliverer. If
we compare [Psa 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011) with [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003), it is natural to regard כּרוּב
as a transposition of רכוּב (a chariot, Ew. 153, a). But assuming a
relationship between the biblical Cherub and (according to Ctesias) the
Indo-Persian griffin, the word (from the Zend grab, garew, garefsh, to
seize) signifies a creature seizing and holding irrecoverably fast
whatever it seizes upon; perhaps in Semitic language the strong
creature, from כּרב = Arab. krb, torquere, constringere, whence mukrab,
tight, strong). It is a passive form like גּבוּל, יסד, לבוּשׁ. The
cherubim are mentioned in [Gen 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024) as
the guards of Paradise (this alone is enough to refute the
interpretation recently revived in the Evang. Kirchen-Zeit., 1866, No.
46, that they are a symbol of the unity of the living One, כרוב = כּרוב
"like a multitude!"), and elsewhere, as it were, as the living mighty
rampart and vehicle of the approach of the inaccessible majesty of God;
and they are not merely in general the medium of God's personal presence
in the world, but more especially of the present of God as turning the
fiery side of His doxa towards the world. As in the Prometheus of
Aeschylus, Oceanus comes flying τὸν πτερυγωκῆ τόνδ ̓ οἰωνόν γνώμῃ
στομίων ἄτερ εὐθύνων, so in the present passage Jahve rides upon the
cherub, of which the heathenish griffin is a distortion; or, if by a
comparison of passages like [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003); [Isa
66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015), we understand David according
to Ezekiel, He rides upon the cherub as upon His living throne-chariot
(מרכּבה). The throne floats upon the cherubim, and this cherub-throne
flies upon the wings of the wind; or, as we can also say: the cherub is
the celestial spirit working in this vehicle formed of the spirit-like
elements. The Manager of the chariot is Himself hidden behind the thick
thunder-clouds. ישׁת is an aorist without the consecutive ו (cf. יך [Hos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)). חשׁך is the accusative of the
object to it; and the accusative of the predicate is doubled: His
covering, His pavilion round about Him. In [Job
36:29](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#029) also the thunder-clouds are
called God's סכּה, and also in [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002) they are סביביו, concealing Him
on all sides and announcing only His presence when He is wroth. In [Psa
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012) the accusative of the object,
חשׁך, is expanded into "darkness of waters," i.e., swelling with waters

(Note: Rab Dimi, B. Taanth 10a, for the elucidation of the passage
quotes a Palestine proverb: נהור ענני זעירין מוהי חשׁוך ענני סגיין מוהי
i.e., if the clouds are transparent they will yield but little water, if
they are dark they will yield a quantity.)

and billows of thick vapour, thick, and therefore dark, masses (עב in
its primary meaning of denseness, or a thicket, [Exo
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009), cf. [Jer
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#029)) of שׁחקים, which is here a
poetical name for fleecy clouds. The dispersion and discharge, according
to [Psa 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013), proceeded from נגהּ
גגדּו. Such is the expression for the doxa of God as being a mirroring
forth of His nature, as it were, over against Him, as being therefore
His brightness, or the reflection of His glory. The doxa is fire and
light. On this occasion the forces of wrath issue from it, and therefore
it is the fiery forces: heavy and destructive hail (cf. [Exo
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023)., [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030)) and fiery glowing coals, i.e.,
flashing and kindling lightning. The object עביו stands first, because
the idea of clouds, behind which, according to [Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011), the doxa in concealed, is
prominently connected with the doxa. It might be rendered: before His
brightness His clouds turn into hail..., a rendering which would be more
in accordance with the structure of the stichs, and is possible
according to Ges. 138, rem. 2. Nevertheless, in connection with the
combination of עבר with clouds, the idea of breaking through ([Lam
3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044)) is very natural. If עביו is
removed, then עברו signifies "thence came forth hail..." But the mention
of the clouds as the medium, is both natural and appropriate.

[Psalms 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 18:13</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:14-16) Amidst thunder, Jahve hurled lightnings as arrows upon
David's enemies, and the breath of His anger laid bare the beds of the
flood to the very centre of the earth, in order to rescue the sunken
one. Thunder is the rumble of God, and as it were the hollow murmur of
His mouth, [Job 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#002). עליון, the Most
High, is the name of God as the inapproachable Judge, who governs all
things. The third line of [Psa 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#014)
is erroneously repeated from the preceding strophe. It cannot be
supported on grammatical grounds by [Exo
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023), since קול נתן, edere vocem, has
a different meaning from the נתן קלת, dare tonitrua, of that passage.
The symmetry of the strophe structure is also against it; and it is
wanting both in 2 Sam. and in the lxx. רב, which, as the opposite of מעט
[Neh 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#012); [Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007), means adverbially "in
abundance," is the parallel to ויּשׁלח. It is generally taken, after the
analogy of [Gen 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023), in the sense of
בּרק, [Psa 144:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#006) : רב in pause = רב
(the ō passing over into the broader like עז instead of עז in [Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)) = רבב, cognate with רבה, רמה;
but the forms סב, סבּוּ, here, and in every other instance, have but a
very questionable existence, as e.g., רב, [Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013), is more probably an adjective
than the third person praet. (cf. Bttcher, Neue Aehrenlese No. 635,
1066). The suffixes ēm do not refer to the arrows, i.e., lightnings, but
to David's foes. המם means both to put in commotion and to destroy by
confounding, [Exo 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024); [Exo
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027). In addition to the thunder, the
voice of Jahve, comes the stormwind, which is the snorting of the breath
of His nostrils. This makes the channels of the waters visible and lays
bare the foundations of the earth. אפיק (collateral form to אפק) is the
bed of the river and then the river or brook itself, a continendo aquas
(Ges.), and exactly like the Arabic mesı̂k, mesâk, mesek (from Arab. msk,
the VI form of which, tamâsaka, corresponds to התאפּק), means a place
that does not admit of the water soaking in, but on account of the
firmness of the soil preserves it standing or flowing. What are here
meant are the water-courses or river beds that hold the water. It is
only needful for Jahve to threaten (epitiman [Mat
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)) and the floods, in which he,
whose rescue is undertaken here, is sunk, flee ([Psa
104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)) and dry up ([Psa
106:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009), [Nah
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#004)). But he is already half engulfed
in the abyss of Hades, hence not merely the bed of the flood is opened
up, but the earth is rent to its very centre. From the language being
here so thoroughly allegorical, it is clear that we were quite correct
in interpreting the description as ideal. He, who is nearly overpowered
by his foes, is represented as one engulfed in deep waters and almost
drowning.

[Psalms 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 18:16</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:17-20) Then Jahve stretches out His hand from above into the
deep chasm and draws up the sinking one. The verb שׁלח occurs also in
prose ([Sa2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)) without יד ([Psa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004), cf. on the other hand the
borrowed passage, [Psa 144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007)) in the
signification to reach (after anything). The verb משׁה, however, is only
found in one other instance, viz., [Exo
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010), as the root (transferred from
the Egyptian into the Hebrew) of the name of Moses, and even Luther saw
in it an historical allusion, "He hath made a Moses of me," He hath
drawn me out of great (many) waters, which had well nigh swallowed me
up, as He did Moses out of the waters of the Nile, in which he would
have perished. This figurative language is followed, in [Psa
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#018), by its interpretation, just as
in [Psa 144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007) the "great waters" are
explained by מיּד בּני נכר, which, however, is not suitable here, or at
least is too limited.

With [Psa 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#017) the hymn has reached
the climax of epic description, from which it now descends in a tone
that becomes more and more lyrical. In the combination איבי עז, עז is
not an adverbial accusative, but an adjective, like רוּחך טובה [Psa
143:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010), and ὁ ἀνὴρ ἀγαθός (Hebrerbrief
S. 353). כּי introduces the reason for the interposition of the divine
omnipotence, viz., the superior strength of the foe and the weakness of
the oppressed one. On the day of his איד, i.e., (vid., on [Psa
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012)) his load or calamity, when he
was altogether a homeless and almost defenceless fugitive, they came
upon him (קדּם [Psa 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013)), cutting
off all possible means of delivering himself, but Jahve became the
fugitive's staff ([Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)) upon
which he leaned and kept himself erect. By the hand of God, out of
straits and difficulties he reached a broad place, out of the dungeon of
oppression to freedom, for Jahve had delighted in him, he was His chosen
and beloved one. חפץ has the accent on the penult here, and Metheg as a
sign of the lengthening (העמדה) beside the ē, that it may not be read ĕ.

(Note: In like manner Metheg is placed beside the ee of the final closed
syllable that has lost the tone in חפץ [Psa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009), ותּחולל [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002), vid., Isaiah S. 594 note.)

The following strophe tells the reason of his pleasing God and of His
not allowing him to perish. This כּי חפץ בּי (for He delighted in me)
now becomes the primary thought of the song.

[Psalms 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 18:20</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:21-24) On גּמל (like שׁלּם with the accusative not merely of
the thing, but also of the person, e.g., [Sa1
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#018)), εὐ or κακῶς πράττειν τινά,
vid., on [Psa 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005). שׁמר, to observe =
to keep, is used in the same way in [Job
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015). רשׁע מן is a pregnant
expression of the malitiosa desertio. "From God's side," i.e., in His
judgment, would be contrary to the general usage of the language (for
the מן in [Job 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017) has a different
meaning) and would be but a chilling addition. On the poetical form
מנּי, in pause מנּי, vid., Ew. 263, b. The fut. in [Psa
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#023), close after the substantival
clause [Psa 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#023), is not intended of
the habit in the past, but at the present time: he has not wickedly
forsaken God, but (כּי = imo, sed) always has God's commandments present
before him as his rule of conduct, and has not put them far away out of
his sight, in order to be able to sin with less compunction; and thus
then (fut. consec.) in relation (עם, as in [Deu
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#013), cf. [Sa2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005)) to God he was תמים, with his
whole soul undividedly devoted to Him, and he guarded himself against
his iniquity (עון, from עוה, Arab. 'wâ, to twist, pervert, cf. Arab.
gwâ, of error, delusion, self-enlightenment), i.e., not: against
acquiescence in his in-dwelling sin, but: against iniquity becoming in
any way his own; מעוני equivalent to מעותי ([Dan
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005)), cf. מחיּי = than that I should
live, [Jon 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#008). In this strophe, this
Psalm strikes a cord that harmonises with [Psa
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001), after which it is therefore
placed. We may compare David's own testimony concerning himself in [Sa1
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#023)., the testimony of God in [Kg1
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#008), and the testimony of history in
[Kg1 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#005); [Kg1
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004).

[Psalms 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 18:24</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:25-28) What was said in [Psa
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021) is again expressed here as a
result of the foregoing, and substantiated in [Psa
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026), [Psa
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027). חסיד is a friend of God and
man, just as pius is used of behaviour to men as well as towards God.
גּבר תמים the man (construct of גּבר) of moral and religious
completeness (integri = integritatis, cf. [Psa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002)), i.e., of undivided devotion to
God. נבר (instead of which we find בּר לבב elsewhere, [Psa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004); [Psa
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)) not one who is purified, but, in
accordance with the reflexive primary meaning of Niph., one who is
purifying himself, ἁγνίζων ἑαυτόν, [Jo1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003). עקּשׁ (the opposite of ישׂר) one
who is morally distorted, perverse. Freely formed Hithpaels are used
with these attributive words to give expression to the corresponding
self-manifestation: התחסּד, התּמּם (Ges. 54, 2, b), התבּרר, and התפּתּל
(to show one's self נפתּל or פּתלתּל). The fervent love of the godly man
God requites with confiding love, the entire submission of the upright
with a full measure of grace, the endeavour after purity by an
unbeclouded charity (cf. [Psa 73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)),
moral perverseness by paradoxical judgments, giving the perverse over to
his perverseness ([Rom 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)) and
leading him by strange ways to final condemnation ([Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014), cf. [Lev
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#023).). The truth, which is here
enunciated, is not that the conception which man forms of God is the
reflected image of his own mind and heart, but that God's conduct to man
is the reflection of the relation in which man has placed himself to
God; cf. [Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030); [Sa1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023). This universal truth is
illustrated and substantiated in [Psa
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028). The people who are bowed down
by affliction experience God's condescension, to their salvation; and
their haughty oppressors, god's exaltation, to their humiliation. Lofty,
proud eyes are among the seven things that Jahve hateth, according to
[Pro 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#017). The judgment of God compels
them to humble themselves with shame, [Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011).

[Psalms 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 18:28</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:29-31) The confirmation of what has been asserted is continued
by David's application of it to himself. Hitzig translates the futures
in [Psa 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#029). as imperfects; but the
sequence of the tenses, which would bring this rendering with it, is in
this instance interrupted, as it has been even in [Psa
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028), by כּי. The lamp, נר
(contracted from nawer), is an image of life, which as it were burns on
and on, including the idea of prosperity and high rank; in the form ניר
(from niwr, nijr) it is the usual figurative word for the continuance of
the house of David, [Kg1 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#036), and
frequently. David's life and dominion, as the covenant king, is the lamp
which God's favour has lighted for the well-being of Israel, and His
power will not allow this lamp ([Sa2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017)) to be quenched. The darkness
which breaks in upon David and his house is always lighted up again by
Jahve. For His strength is mighty in the weak; in, with, and by Him he
can do all things. The fut. ארץ may be all the more surely derived from
רצץ (= ארץ), inasmuch as this verb has the changeable u in the future
also in [Isa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004); [Ecc
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#006). The text of 2 Sam 22, however,
certainly seems to put "rushing upon" in the stead of "breaking down."
With [Psa 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031) the first half of the
hymn closes epiphonematically. האל is a nom. absol., like hatsuwr, [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004). This old Mosaic utterance is
re-echoed here, as in [Sa2 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#022), in
the mouth of David. The article of האל points to God as being manifest
in past history. His way is faultless and blameless. His word is צרוּפה,
not slaggy ore, but purified solid gold, [Psa
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007). Whoever retreats into Him, the
God of the promise, is shielded from every danger. [Pro
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005) is borrowed from this passage.

[Psalms 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 18:31</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:32-35) The grateful description of the tokens of favour he has
experienced takes a new flight, and is continued in the second half of
the Psalm in a more varied and less artificial mixture of the strophes.
What is said in [Psa 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031) of the way
and word of Jahve and of Jahve Himself, is confirmed in [Psa
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#032) by the fact that He alone is
אלוהּ, a divine being to be reverenced, and He alone is צוּר, a rock,
i.e., a ground of confidence that cannot be shaken. What is said in [Psa
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031) consequently can be said only of
Him. מבּלעדי and זוּלתי alternate; the former (with a negative intensive
מן) signifies "without reference to" and then absolutely "without" or
besides, and the latter (with ı̂ as a connecting vowel, which elsewhere
has also the function of a suffix), from זוּלת (זוּלה), "exception." The
verses immediately following are attached descriptively to אלהינוּ, our
God (i.e., the God of Israel), the God, who girded me with strength; and
accordingly (fut. consec.) made my way תמים, "perfect," i.e., absolutely
smooth, free from stumblings and errors, leading straight forward to a
divine goal. The idea is no other than that in [Psa
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031), cf. [Job
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#003), except that the freedom from
error here is intended to be understood in accordance with its reference
to the way of a man, of a king, and of a warrior; cf. moreover, the
other text. The verb שׁוּה signifies, like Arab. swwâ, to make equal
(aequare), to arrange, to set right; the dependent passage [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019) has, instead of this verb, the
more uncoloured שׁים. The hind, איּלה or איּלת, is the perfection of
swiftness (cf. ἔλαφος and ἐλαφρός) and also of gracefulness among
animals. "Like the hinds" is equivalent to like hinds' feet; the Hebrew
style leaves it to the reader to infer the appropriate point of
comparison from the figure. It is not swiftness in flight (De Wette),
but in attack and pursuit that is meant, - the latter being a prominent
characteristic of warriors, according to [Sa2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#023); [Sa2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#018); [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008). David does not call the high
places of the enemy, which he has made his own by conquest "my high
places," but those heights of the Holy Land which belong to him as king
of Israel: upon these Jahve preserves him a firm position, so that from
them he may rule the land far and wide, and hold them victoriously (cf.
passages like [Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013); [Isa
58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)). The verb למּד, which has a
double accusative in other instances, is here combined with ל of the
subject taught, as the aim of the teaching. The verb נחת (to press down
= to bend a bow) precedes the subject "my arms" in the singular; this
inequality is admissible even when the subject stands first (e.g., [Gen
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022); [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020); [Zac
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014)). קשׁת נחוּשׁה a bow of brazen =
of brass, as in [Job 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024). It is also
the manner of heroes in Homer and in the Ram-jana to press down and bend
with their hand a brazen bow, one end of which rests on the ground.

[Psalms 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 18:35</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:36-37) Yet it is not the brazen bow in itself that makes him
victorious, but the helpful strength of his God. "Shield of Thy
salvation" is that consisting of Thy salvation. מגן has an unchangeable
, as it has always. The salvation of Jahve covered him as a shield, from
which every stroke of the foe rebounded; the right hand of Jahve
supported him that his hands might not become feeble in the conflict. In
its ultimate cause it is the divine ענוה, to which he must trace back
his greatness, i.e., God's lowliness, by virtue of which His eyes look
down upon that which is on the earth ([Psa
113:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006)), and the poor and contrite ones
are His favourite dwelling-place ([Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015); [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001).); cf. B. Megilla 31a, "wherever
Scripture testifies of the גבורה of the Holy One, blessed be He, it
gives prominence also, in connection with it, to His condescension,
ענותנוּתו, as in [Deu 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017) and in
connection with it [Deu 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#018), [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015) and [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015), [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005) and [Psa
68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)." The rendering of Luther, who
follows the lxx and Vulgate, "When Thou humblest me, Thou makest me
great" is opposed by the fact that ענוה means the bending of one's self,
and not of another. What is intended is, that condescension of God to
mankind, and especially to the house of David, which was in operation,
with an ultimate view to the incarnation, in the life of the son of
Jesse from the time of his anointing to his death, viz., the divine
χρηστότης καὶ φιλανθρωπία ([Tit 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004)),
which elected the shepherd boy to be king, and did not cast him off even
when he fell into sin and his infirmities became manifest. To enlarge
his steps under any one is equivalent to securing him room for freedom
of motion (cf. the opposite form of expression in [Pro
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#012)). Jahve removed the obstacles of
his course out of the way, and steeled his ankles so that he stood firm
in fight and endured till he came off victorious. The praet. מעדו
substantiates what, without any other indication of it, is required by
the consecutio temporum, viz., that everything here has a retrospective
meaning.

[Psalms 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">psa 18:37</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:38-41) Thus in God's strength, with the armour of God, and by
God's assistance in fight, he smote, cast down, and utterly destroyed
all his foes in foreign and in civil wars. According to the Hebrew
syntax the whole of this passage is a retrospect. The imperfect
signification of the futures in [Psa
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#038), [Psa
18:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#039) is made clear from the aorist
which appears in [Psa 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040), and from
the perfects and futures in what follows it. The strophe begins with an
echo of [Exo 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009) (cf. supra [Psa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006)). The poet calls his opponents
קמי, as in [Psa 18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049), [Psa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006); [Psa
74:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#023), cf. קימנוּ [Job
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#020), inasmuch as קוּם by itself has
the sense of rising up in hostility and consequently one can say קמי
instead of עלי קמים (קומים [Kg2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007)).

(Note: In the language of the Beduins kôm is war, feud, and kômānı̂
(denominative from kōm) my enemy (hostis); kōm also has the
signification of a collective of kōmānı̂, and one can equally well say:
entum waijânâ kôm, you and we are enemies, and: bênâtnâ kôm, there is
war between us.)

The frequent use of this phrase (e.g., Ps 36:13, [Lam
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#014)) shows that קום in [Psa
18:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#039) does not mean "to stand
(resist)," but "to rise (again)." The phrase נתן ערף, however, which in
other passages has those fleeing as its subject ([Ch2
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#006)), is here differently applied:
Thou gavest, or madest me mine enemies a back, i.e., those who turn
back, as in [Exo 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027). From [Psa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#013) (תּשׁיתמו שׁכם, Symm. τάξεις
αὐτοὺς ἀποστρόφους) it becomes clear that ערף is not an accusative of
the member beside the accusative of the person (as e.g., in [Deu
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#011)), but an accusative of the
factitive object according to Ges. 139, 2.

[Psalms 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 18:41</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:42-43) Their prayer to their gods, wrung from them by their
distress, and even to Jahve, was in vain, because it was for their
cause, and too late put up to Him. על = על; in [Psa
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002) the two prepositions are
interchanged. Since we do not pulverize dust but to dust, כּעפר is to be
taken as describing the result: so that they became as dust (cf. [Job
38:30](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#030), כּאכן, so that it is become
like stone, and the extreme of such pregnant brevity of expression in
[Isa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002)) before the wind (על־פּני as
in [Ch2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#017), before the front). The
second figure is to be explained differently: I emptied them out (אריקם
from הריק) like the dirt of the streets, i.e., not merely: so that they
became such, but as one empties it out, - thus contemptuously,
ignominiously and completely (cf. [Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006); [Zac
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005)). The lxx renders it λεανῶ from
הרק (root רק to stretch, make thin, cf. tendo tenius, dehnen dnn); and
the text of 2 Sam 22 present the same idea in אדיקם.

[Psalms 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">psa 18:43</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:44-46) Thus victorious in God, David became what he now is,
viz., the ruler of a great kingdom firmly established both in home and
foreign relations. With respect to the גּוים and the verb תּפלּטני which
follows, ריבי עם can only be understood of the conflicts among his own
people, in which David was involved by the persecution of Saul and the
rebellions of Absolom and Sheba the son of Bichri; and from which Jahve
delivered him, in order to preserve him for his calling of world-wide
dominion in accordance with the promise. We therefore interpret the
passage according to בּרית עם in [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008), and קנאת־עם in [Isa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011); whereas the following עם comes
to have a foreign application by reason of the attributive clause
לא־ידעתּי (Ges. 123, 3). The Niph. נשׁמע in [Psa
18:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045) is the reflexive of שׁמע, to
obey (e.g., [Exo 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007)), and is
therefore to be rendered: show themselves obedient (= Ithpa. in [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)). לשׁמע אזן implies more than
that they obeyed at the word; שׁמע means information, rumour, and שׁמע
אזן is the opposite of personal observation ([Job
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005)), it is therefore to be rendered:
they submitted even at the tidings of my victories; and [Sa2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#009). is an example of this. כּחשׁ to
lie, disown, feign, and flatter, is sued here, as it is frequently, of
the extorted humility which the vanquished show towards the conqueror.
[Psa 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046) completes the picture of
the reason of the sons of a foreign country "putting a good face on a
bad game." They faded away, i.e., they became weak and faint-hearted
([Exo 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#018)), incapable of holding out
against or breaking through any siege by David, and trembled,
surrendering at discretion, out of their close places, i.e., out of
their strongholds behind which they had shut themselves in (cf. Ps
142:8). The signification of being alarmed, which in this instance,
being found in combination with a local מן, is confined to the sense of
terrified flight, is secured to the verb חרג by the Arabic ḥarija (root
ḥr, of audible pressure, crowding, and the like) to be pressed, crowded,
tight, or narrow, to get in a strait, and the Targumic חרנּא דמותא =
אימתא דמותא (vid., the Targums on [Deu
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025)). Arab. ḥjl, to limp, halt,
which is compared by Hitzig, is far removed as to the sound; and the
most natural, but colourless Arab. chrj, to go out of (according to its
radical meaning - cf. Arab. chrq, chr‛, etc. - : to break forth,
erumpere), cannot be supported in Hebrew or Aramaic. The ירגּזוּ found
in the borrowed passage in Micah, [Mic
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#017), favours our rendering.

[Psalms 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">psa 18:46</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:47-49) The hymn now draws towards the end with praise and
thanksgiving for the multitude of God's mighty deeds, which have just
been displayed. Like the (צוּרי) בּרוּך which is always doxological, חי
ה (vivus Jahve) is meant as a predicate clause, but is read with the
accent of an exclamation just as in the formula of an oath, which is the
same expression; and in the present instance it has a doxological
meaning. Accordingly וירוּם also signifies "exalted be," in which sense
it is written וירם (וירם = וירם) in the other text. There are three
doxological utterances drawn from the events which have just been
celebrated in song. That which follows, from האל onwards, describes
Jahve once more as the living, blessed (εὐλογητόν), and exalted One,
which He has shown Himself to be. From ויּדבּר we see that הנּותן is to
be resolved as an imperfect. The proofs of vengeance, נקמות, are called
God's gift, insofar as He has rendered it possible to him to punish the
attacks upon his own dignity and the dignity of his people, or to
witness the punishment of such insults (e.g., in the case of Nabal); for
divine vengeance is a securing by punishment (vindicatio) of the
inviolability of the right. It is questionable whether הדבּיר (synonym
רדד, [Psa 144:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#002)) here and in [Psa
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004) means "to bring to reason" as an
intensive of דּבר, to drive (Ges.); the more natural meaning is "to turn
the back" according to the Arabic adbara (Hitzig), cf. dabar, dabre,
flight, retreat; debira to be wounded behind; medbûr, wounded in the
back. The idea from which הדביר gains the meaning "to subdue" is that of
flight, in which hostile nations, overtaken from behind, sank down under
him ([Psa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)); but the idea that is
fully worked out in [Psa 129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003), [Isa
51:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023), is by no means remote. With
מפלטי the assertion takes the form of an address. מן רומם does not
differ from [Psa 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014) : Thou liftest
me up away from mine enemies, so that I hover above them and triumph
over them. The climactic אף, of which poetry is fond, here unites two
thoughts of a like import to give intensity of expression to the one
idea. The participle is followed by futures: his manifold experience is
concentrated in one general ideal expression.

[Psalms 18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 18:49</span></span>

(Heb.: 18:50-51) The praise of so blessed a God, who acts towards David
as He has promised him, shall not be confined within the narrow limits
of Israel. When God's anointed makes war with the sword upon the
heathen, it is, in the end, the blessing of the knowledge of Jahve for
which he opens up the way, and the salvation of Jahve, which he thus
mediatorially helps on. Paul has a perfect right to quote [Psa
18:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#050) of this Psalm ([Rom
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)), together with [Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043) and [Psa
117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001), as proof that salvation belongs
to the Gentiles also, according to the divine purpose of mercy. What is
said in [Psa 18:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#050) as the reason and
matter of the praise that shall go forth beyond Israel, is an echo of
the Messianic promises in [Sa2 7:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)
which is perfectly reconcileable with the Davidic authorship of the
Psalm, as Hitzig acknowledges. And Theodoret does not wrongly appeal to
the closing words עד־עולם against the Jews. In whom, but in Christ, the
son of David, has the fallen throne of David any lasting continuance,
and in whom, but in Christ, has all that has been promised to the seed
of David eternal truth and reality? The praise of Jahve, the God of
David, His anointed, is, according to its ultimate import, a praising of
the Father of Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 19](psa019)

</div>
