<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa011)  [Next](psa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 12:0</span></span>

Lament and Consolation in the Midst of Prevailing Falsehood

[Psa 11:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001) is appropriately followed
by [Psa 12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001), which is of a kindred
character: a prayer for the deliverance of the poor and miserable in a
time of universal moral corruption, and more particularly of prevailing
faithlessness and boasting. The inscription: To the Precentor, on the
Octave, a Psalm of David points us to the time when the Temple music was
being established, i.e., the time of David - incomparably the best age
in the history of Israel, and yet, viewed in the light of the spirit of
holiness, an age so radically corrupt. The true people of Jahve were
even then, as ever, a church of confessors and martyrs, and the sighing
for the coming of Jahve was then not less deep than the cry "Come, Lord
Jesus!" at the present time.

This [Psa 12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001) together with [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) is a second example of the way
in which the psalmist, when under great excitement of spirit, passes
over into the tone of one who directly hears God's words, and therefore
into the tone of an inspired prophet. Just as lyric poetry in general,
as being a direct and solemn expression of strong inward feeling, is the
earliest form of poetry: so psalm-poetry contains in itself not only the
mashal, the epos, and the drama in their preformative stages, but
prophecy also, as we have it in the prophetic writings of its most
flourishing period, has, as it were, sprung from the bosom of
psalm-poetry. It is throughout a blending of prophetical epic and
subjective lyric elements, and is in many respects the echo of earlier
psalms, and even in some instances (as e.g., [Isa
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001); [Hab
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)) transforms itself into the strain
of a psalm. Hence Asaph is called החזה in [Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030), not from the special character
of his Psalms, but from his being a psalmist in general; for Jeduthun
has the same name given to him in [Ch2
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#015), and נבּא in [Ch1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#002). (cf. προφητεύειν, [Luk
1:67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067)) is used directly as an epithet
for psalm-singing with accompaniment-a clear proof that in prophecy the
co-operation of a human element is no less to be acknowledged, that the
influence of a divine element in psalm-poesy.

The direct words of Jahve, and the psalmist's Amen to them, form the
middle portion of this Psalm-a six line strophe, which is surrounded by
four line strophes.

[Psalms 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 12:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 12:2-3) The sigh of supplication, הושׁיעה, has its object within
itself: work deliverance, give help; and the motive is expressed by the
complaint which follows. The verb גּמר to complete, means here, as in
[Psa 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010), to have an end; and the ἁπ.
λεγ. פּסס is equivalent to אפס in [Psa
77:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009), to come to the extremity, to
cease. It is at once clear from the predicate being placed first in the
plur., that אמוּנים in this passage is not an abstractum, as e.g., in
[Pro 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#017); moreover the parallelism
is against it, just as in [Pro 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#024).
חסיד is the pious man, as one who practises חסד towards God and man.
אמוּן, primary form אמוּן (plur. אמונים; whereas from אמוּן we should
expect אמוּנים), - used as an adjective (cf. on the contrary [Deu
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020)) here just as in [Pro
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#024), [Sa2
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#019), - is the reliable, faithful,
conscientious man, literally one who is firm, i.e., whose word and
meaning is firm, so that one can rely upon it and be certain in relation
to it.

(Note: The Aryan root man to remain, abide (Neo-Persic mânden), also
takes a similar course, signifying usually "to continue in any course,
wait, hope." So the old Persic man, Zend upaman, cf. μένειν with its
derivatives which are applied in several ways in the New Testament to
characterise πίστις.)

We find similar complaints of the universal prevalence of wickedness in
[Mic 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002); [Isa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001); [Jer
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028), and elsewhere. They contain
their own limitation. For although those who complain thus without
pharisaic self-righteousness would convict themselves of being affected
by the prevailing corruption, they are still, in their penitence, in
their sufferings for righteousness' sake, and in their cry for help, a
standing proof that humanity has not yet, without exception, become a
massa perdita. That which the writer especially laments, is the
prevailing untruthfulness. Men speak שׁוא (= שׁוא from שׁוא), desolation
and emptiness under a disguise that conceals its true nature, falsehood
([Psa 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007)), and hypocrisy ([Job
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#013)), ἕκαστος πρὸς τὸν πλησίον αὐτοῦ
(lxx, cf. [Eph 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025), where the
greatness of the sin finds its confirmation according to the teaching of
the New Testament: ὅτι ἐσμὲν ἀλλήλων μέλη). They speak lips of
smoothnesses (חלקות, plural from חלקה, laevitates, or from חלק, laevia),
i.e., the smoothest, most deceitful language (accusative of the object
as in [Isa 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)) with a double heart,
inasmuch, namely, as the meaning they deceitfully express to others, and
even to themselves, differs from the purpose they actually cherish, or
even (cf. [Ch1 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#033) בלא לב ולב, and
[Jam 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008) δίψυχος, wavering) inasmuch
as the purpose they now so flatteringly put forth quickly changes to the
very opposite.

[Psalms 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 12:3</span></span>

(Heb.: 12:4-5) In this instance the voluntative has its own proper
signification: may He root out (cf. [Psa
109:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015), and the oppositive [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006)). Flattering lips and a vaunting
tongue are one, insofar as the braggart becomes a flatterer when it
serves his own selfish interest. אשׁר refers to lips and tongue, which
are put for their possessors. The Hiph. הגבּיר may mean either to impart
strength, or to give proof of strength. The combination with ל, not בּ,
favours the former: we will give emphasis to our tongue (this is their
self-confident declaration). Hupfeld renders it, contrary to the meaning
of the Hiph.: over our tongue we have power, and Ewald and Olshausen, on
the ground of an erroneous interpretation of [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027), render: we make or have a firm
covenant with our tongue. They describe their lips as being their
confederates (את as in [Kg2 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#032)), and
by the expression "who is lord over us" they declare themselves to be
absolutely free, and exalted above all authority. If any authority were
to assert itself over them, their mouth would put it down and their
tongue would thrash it into submission. But Jahve, whom this making of
themselves into gods challenges, will not always suffer His own people
to be thus enslaved.

[Psalms 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 12:5</span></span>

(Heb.: 12:6-7) In [Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006) the
psalmist hears Jahve Himself speak; and in [Psa
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007) he adds his Amen. The two מן in
[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006) denote the motive, עתּה the
decisive turning-point from forebearance to the execution of judgment,
and ימר the divine determination, which has just now made itself
audible; cf. Isaiah's echo of it, [Isa
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#010). Jahve has hitherto looked on
with seeming inactivity and indifference, now He will arise and place in
ישׁע, i.e., a condition of safety (cf. שׂים בּחיּים [Psa
66:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#009)), him who languishes for
deliverance. It is not to be explained: him whom he, i.e., the boaster,
blows upon, which would be expressed by יפיח בּו, cf. [Psa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005); but, with Ewald, Hengstenberg,
Olshausen, and Bttcher, according to [Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003), where הפיח ל occurs in the sense
of panting after an object: him who longs for it. יפיח is, however, not
a participial adjective = יפח, but the fut., and יפיח לו is therefore a
relative clause occupying the place of the object, just as we find the
same thing occurring in [Job 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019);
[Isa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002), [Isa
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025), and frequently. Hupfeld's
rendering: "in order that he may gain breath (respiret)" leaves אשׁית
without an object, and accords more with Aramaic and Arabic than with
Hebrew usage, which would express this idea by ינוּח לו or ירוח לו.

In [Psa 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007) the announcement of Jahve
is followed by its echo in the heart of the seer: the words (אמרות
instead of אמרות by changing the Sheb which closes the syllable into an
audible one, as e.g., in אשׁרי) of Jahve are pure words, i.e., intended,
and to be fulfilled, absolutely as they run without any admixture
whatever of untruthfulness. The poetical אמרה (after the form זמרה)
serves pre-eminently as the designation of the divine power-words of
promise. The figure, which is indicated in other instances, when God's
word is said to be צרוּפה ([Psa 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031);
[Psa 119:140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#140); [Pro
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005)), is here worked out: silver
melted and thus purified בּעליל לארץ. עליל signifies either a
smelting-pot from עלל, Arab. gll, immittere, whence also על (Hitz.); or,
what is more probable since the language has the epithets כוּר and מצרף
for this: a workshop, from עלל, Arab. ‛ll, operari (prop. to set about a
thing), first that which is wrought at (after the form מעיל, פּסיל,
שׁביל), then the place where the work is carried on. From this also
comes the Talm. בּעליל = בּעליל manifeste, occurring in the Mishna Rosh
ha-Shana 1. 5 and elsewhere, and which in its first meaning corresponds
to the French en effet.

(Note: On this word with reference to this passage of the Psalm vid.,
Steinschneider's Hebr. Bibliographie 1861, S. 83.)

According to this, the ל in לארץ is not the ל of property: in a
fining-pot built into the earth, for which לארץ without anything further
would be an inadequate and colourless expression. But in accordance with
the usual meaning of לארץ as a collateral definition it is: smelted
(purified) down to the earth. As Olshausen observes on this subject,
"Silver that is purified in the furnace and flows down to the ground can
be seen in every smelting hut; the pure liquid silver flows down out of
the smelting furnace, in which the ore is piled up." For it cannot be ל
of reference: "purified with respect to the earth," since ארץ does not
denote the earth as a material and cannot therefore mean an earthy
element. We ought then to read לאבץ, which would not mean "to a white
brilliancy," i.e., to a pure bright mass (Bttch.), but "with respect to
the stannum, lead" (vid., on [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)). The verb זקק to strain, filter,
cause to ooze through, corresponds to the German seihen, seigen, old
High German sihan, Greek σακκεῖν (σακκίζειν), to clean by passing
through a cloth as a strainer, שׂק. God's word is solid silver smelted
and leaving all impurity behind, and, as it were, having passed seven
times through the smelting furnace, i.e., the purest silver, entirely
purged from dross. Silver is the emblem of everything precious and pure
(vid., Bhr, Symbol. i. 284); and seven is the number indicating the
completion of any process (Bibl. Psychol. S. 57, transl. p. 71).

[Psalms 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 12:7</span></span>

(Heb.: 12:8-9) The supplicatory complaint contained in the first strophe
has passed into an ardent wish in the second; and now in the fourth
there arises a consolatory hope based upon the divine utterance which
was heard in the third strophe. The suffix eem in [Psa
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008) refers to the miserable and poor;
the suffix ennu in [Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008) (him,
not: us, which would be pointed תצרנוּ, and more especially since it is
not preceded by תשׁמרנוּ) refers back to the man who yearns for
deliverance mentioned in the divine utterance, [Psa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006). The "preserving for ever" is so
constant, that neither now nor at any future time will they succumb to
this generation. The oppression shall not become a thorough depression,
the trial shall not exceed their power of endurance. What follows in
[Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008) is a more minute description
of this depraved generation. דּור is the generation whole and entire
bearing one general character and doing homage to the one spirit of the
age (cf. e.g., [Pro 30:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#011), where
the characteristics of a corrupt age are portrayed). זוּ (always without
the article, Ew. 293, a) points to the present and the character is has
assumed, which is again described here finally in a few outlines of a
more general kind than in [Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003).
The wicked march about on every side (התחלּך used of going about
unopposed with an arrogant and vaunting mien), when (while) vileness
among ()ל the children of men rises to eminence (רוּם as in [Pro
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#011), cf. משׁל [Pro
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002)), so that they come to be under
its dominion. Vileness is called זלּוּת from זלל (cogn. דּלל) to be
supple and lax, narrow, low, weak and worthless. The form is passive
just as is the Talm. זילוּת (from זיל = זליל), and it is the epithet
applied to that which is depreciated, despised, and to be despised; here
it is the opposite of the disposition and conduct of the noble man,
נדיב, [Isa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008), - a baseness which is
utterly devoid not only of all nobler principles and motives, but also
of all nobler feelings and impulses. The כּ of כּרם is not the
expression of simultaneousness (as e.g., in [Pro
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#025)): immediately it is exalted -
for then [Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008) would give
expression to a general observation, instead of being descriptive - but
כּרם is equivalent to בּרם, only it is intentionally used instead of the
latter, to express a coincidence that is based upon an intimate relation
of cause and effect, and is not merely accidental. The wicked are puffed
up on all sides, and encompass the better disposed on every side as
their enemies. Such is the state of things, and it cannot be otherwise
at a time when men allow meanness to gain the ascendency among and over
them, as is the case at the present moment. Thus even at last the
depressing view of the present prevails in the midst of the confession
of a more consolatory hope. The present is gloomy. But in the central
hexastich the future is lighted up as a consolation against this
gloominess. The Psalm is a ring and this central oracle is its jewel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 13](psa013)

</div>
