<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa063)  [Next](psa065) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 64](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 64:0</span></span>

invocation of Divine Protection against the Falseness of Men

Even Hilary begins the exposition of this Psalm with the words Psalmi
superscriptio historiam non continet, in order at the outset to give up
all attempt at setting forth its historical connection. The Midrash
observes that it is very applicable to Daniel, who was cast into the
lions' den by the satraps by means of a delicately woven plot. This is
indeed true; but only because it is wanting in any specially defined
features and cannot with any certainty be identified with one or other
of the two great periods of suffering in the life of David.

[Psalms 64:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 64:1</span></span>

The Psalm opens with an octostich, and closes in the same way. The
infinitive noun שׂיח signifies a complaint, expressed not by the tones
of pain, but in words. The rendering of the lxx (here and in [Psa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#003)) is too general, ἐν τῷ θέεσθαί
με. The "terror" of the enemy is that proceeding from him (gen. obj. as
in [Deu 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#015), and frequently). The
generic singular אויב is at once particularized in a more detailed
description with the use of the plural. סוד is a club or clique; רגשׁה
(Targumic = המון, e.g., [Eze 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#010)) a
noisy crowd. The perfects after אשׁר affirm that which they now do as
they have before done; cf. [Psa 140:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#004)
and [Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008), where, as in this
passage, the treading or bending of the bow is transferred to the arrow.
דּבר מר is the interpretation added to the figure, as in [Psa
144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007). That which is bitter is called
מר, root מר, stringere, from the harsh astringent taste; here it is used
tropically of speech that wounds and inflicts pain (after the manner of
an arrow or a stiletto), πικροὶ λόγοι. With the Kal לירות ([Psa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002)) alternates the Hiph. ירהוּ. With
פּתאם the description takes a new start. ולא ייראוּ, forming an
assonance with the preceding word, means that they do it without any
fear whatever, and therefore also without fear of God ([Psa
55:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020); [Psa
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)).

[Psalms 64:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 64:5</span></span>

The evil speech is one with the bitter speech in [Psa
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#004), the arrow which they are anxious
to let fly. This evil speech, here agreement or convention, they make
firm to themselves (sibi), by securing, in every possible way, its
effective execution. ספּר (frequently used of the cutting language of
the ungodly, [Psa 59:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#013); [Psa
69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027); cf. Talmudic ספּר לשׁון
שׁלישׁי, to speak as with three tongues, i.e., slanderously) is here
construed with ל of that at which their haughty and insolent utterances
aim. In connection therewith they take no heed of God, the all-seeing
One: they say (ask), quis conspiciat ipsis. There is no need to take למו
as being for לו (Hitzig); nor is it the dative of the object instead of
the accusative, but it is an ethical dative: who will see or look to
them, i.e., exerting any sort of influence upon them? The form of the
question is not the direct ([Psa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008)), but the indirect, in which מי,
seq. fut., is used in a simply future ([Jer
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028)) or potential sense ([Job
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#017); [Kg1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#020)). Concerning עולת, vid., [Psa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003). It is doubtful whether תּמּנוּ

(Note: תּמּנוּ in Baer's Psalterium is an error that has been carried
over from Heidenheim's.)

is the first person (= תּמּונוּ) as in [Num
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#013), [Jer
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#018), or the third person as in [Lam
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022) (= תּמּוּ, which first of all
resolved is תּנמוּ, and then transposed תּמּנוּ, like מעזניה = מענזיה =
מעזּיה, [Isa 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#011)). The reading
טמנוּ, from which Rashi proceeds, and which Luther follows in his
translation, is opposed by the lxx and Targum; it does not suit the
governing subject, and is nothing but an involuntary lightening of the
difficulty. If we take into consideration, that תּמם signifies not to
make ready, but to be ready, and that consequently חפשׂ מחפּשׂ is to be
taken by itself, then it must be rendered either: they excogitate
knavish tricks or villainies, "we are ready, a clever stroke is
concocted, and the inward part of man and the heart is deep!" or, which
we prefer, since there is nothing to indicate the introduction of any
soliloquy: they excogitate knavish tricks, they are ready - a delicately
devised, clever stroke (nominative of the result), and (as the poet
ironically adds) the inward part of man and the heart is (verily) deep.
There is nothing very surprising in the form תּמּנוּ for תּמּוּ, since
the Psalms, whenever they depict the sinful designs and doings of the
ungodly, delight in singularities of language. On ולב (not ולב) = (אישׁ)
ולב = ולבּו, cf. [Psa 118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014).

[Psalms 64:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 64:7</span></span>

Deep is man's heart and inward part, but not too deep for God, who
knoweth the heart ([Jer 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009).). And He
will just as suddenly surprise the enemies of His anointed with their
death-blow, as they had plotted it for him. The futt. consec. that
follow represent that which is future, with all the certainty of an
historical fact as a retribution springing from the malicious craftiness
of the enemies. According to the accentuation, [Psa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#008) is to be rendered: "then will
Elohim shoot them, a sudden arrow become their wounds." Thus at length
Hupfeld renders it; but how extremely puzzling is the meaning hidden
behind this sentence! The Targum and the Jewish expositors have
construed it differently: "Then will Elohim shoot them with arrows
suddenly;" in this case, however, because [Psa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#008) then becomes too blunt and bald,
פּתאם has to be repeated in thought with this member of the verse, and
this is in itself an objection to it. We interpunctuate with Ewald and
Hitzig thus: then does Elohim shoot them with an arrow, suddenly arise
(become a reality) their wounds (cf. [Mic
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#004)), namely, of those who had on
their part aimed the murderous weapon against the upright for a sudden
and sure shot. [Psa 64:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#009) is still more
difficult. Kimchi's interpretation, which accords with the accents: et
corruere facient eam super se, linguam suam, is intolerable; the
proleptic suffix, having reference to לשׁונם ([Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006); [Job
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#020)), ought to have been feminine
(vid., on [Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)), and "to make
their own tongue fall upon themselves" is an odd fancy. The objective
suffix will therefore refer per enallagen to the enemy. But not thus (as
Hitzig, who now seeks to get out of the difficulty by an alteration of
the text, formerly rendered it): "and they cause those to fall whom they
have slandered \[lit. upon whom their tongue came\]." This form of
retribution does not accord with the context; and moreover the gravely
earnest עלימו, like the הוּ-, refers more probably to the enemies than
to the objects of their hostility. The interpretation of Ewald and
Hengstenberg is better: "and one overthrows him, inasmuch as their
tongue, i.e., the sin of their tongue with which they sought to destroy
others, comes upon themselves." The subject to ויּכשׁילהוּ, as in [Psa
63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011); [Job
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019); [Job
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#003); [Luk
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020), is the powers which are at the
service of God, and which are not mentioned at all; and the thought
עלימו לשׁונם (a circumstantial clause) is like [Psa
140:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#010), where in a similar connection
the very same singularly rugged lapidary, or terse, style is found. In
[Psa 64:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#009) we must proceed on the
assumption that ראה ב in such a connection signifies the gratification
of looking upon those who are justly punished and rendered harmless. But
he who tarries to look upon such a scene is certainly not the person to
flee from it; התנודד does not here mean "to betake one's self to flight"
(Ewald, Hitzig), but to shake one's self, as in [Jer
48:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#027), viz., to shake the head ([Psa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015); [Jer
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016)) - the recognised (vid., [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008)) gesture of malignant, mocking
astonishment. The approbation is awarded, according to [Psa
64:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#010), to God, the just One. And with
the joy at His righteous interposition, - viz. of Him who has been
called upon to interpose, - is combined a fear of the like punishment.
The divine act of judicial retribution now set forth becomes a blessing
to mankind. From mouth to mouth it is passed on, and becomes an
admonitory nota bene. To the righteous in particular it becomes a
consolatory and joyous strengthening of his faith. The judgment of Jahve
is the redemption of the righteous. Thus, then, does he rejoice in his
God, who by thus judging and redeeming makes history into the history of
redemption, and hide himself the more confidingly in Him; and all the
upright boast themselves, viz., in God, who looks into the heart and
practically acknowledges them whose heart is directed unswervingly
towards Him, and conformed entirely to Him. In place of the futt.
consec., which have a prophetic reference, simple futt. come in here,
and between these a perf. consec. as expressive of that which will then
happen when that which is prophetically certain has taken place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 65](psa065)

</div>
