<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa008)  [Next](psa010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 9:0</span></span>

Hymn to the Righteous Judge after a Defeat of Hostile Peoples

Just as Ps 7 is placed after [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001) as exemplifying it, so Ps 9
follows [Psa 8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001) as an illustration
of the glorifying of the divine name on earth. And what a beautiful idea
it is that [Psa 8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001), the Psalm which
celebrates Jahve's name as being glorious in the earth, is introduced
between a Psalm that closes with the words "I will sing of the name of
Jahve, the Most High" (Ps 7:18) and one which begins: "I will sing of
Thy name, O Most High!" ([Psa 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#003)).

The lxx translates the inscription על־מות לכן by ὑπὲρ τῶν κρυφίων τοῦ
υἱοῦ (Vulg. pro occultis filii) as though it were על־עלמות. Luther's
rendering is still bolder: of beautiful (perhaps properly: lily-white)
youth. Both renderings are opposed to the text, in which על occurs only
once. The Targum understands בן of the duellist Goliath (= אישׁ הבּנים);
and some of the Rabbis regard לבן even as a transposition of נבל: on the
death of Nabal. Hengstenberg has revived this view, regarding נבל as a
collective designation of all Nabal-like fools. All these and other
curious conceits arise from the erroneous idea that these words are an
inscription referring to the contents of the Psalm. But, on the
contrary, they indicate the tune or melody, and that by means of the
familiar words of the song, - perhaps some popular song, - with which
this air had become most intimately associated. At the end of [Psa
48:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001) this indication of the air is
simply expressed by על־מוּת. The view of the Jewish expositors, who
refer לבּן to the musician בּן mentioned in [Ch1
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#018), has, therefore, some
probability in its favour. But this name excites critical suspicion. Why
may not a well-known song have begun מוּת לבּן "dying (is) to the
son...," or (if one is inclined to depart from the pointing, although
there is nothing to render this suspicious) מות לבּן "Death makes
white?"

Even Hitzig does not allow himself to be misled as to the ancient
Davidic origin of Ps 9 and 10 by the fact of their having an
alphabetical arrangement. These two Psalms have the honour of being
ranked among the thirteen Psalms which are acknowledge by him to be
genuine Davidic Psalms. Thus, therefore, the alphabetical arrangement
found in other Psalms cannot, in itself, bring us down to "the times of
poetic trifling and degenerated taste." Nor can the freedom, with which
the alphabetical arrangement is handled in Ps 9 and 10 be regarded as an
indication of an earlier antiquity than these times. For the Old
Testament poets, even in other instances, do not allow themselves to be
fettered by forms of this character (vid., on Ps 145, cf. on [Psa
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002)); and the fact, that in [Psa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001) the alphabetical arrangement is
not fully carried out, is accounted for otherwise than by the license in
which David, in distinction from later poets, indulged. In reality this
pair of Psalms shows, that even David was given to acrostic composition.
And why should he not be? Even among the Romans, Ennius (Cicero, De
Divin. ii. 54 ֗111), who belongs not to the leaden, but to the iron age,
out of which the golden age first developed itself, composed in
acrostics. And our oldest Germanic epics are clothed in the garb of
alliteration, which Vilmar calls the most characteristic and most
elevated style that the poetic spirit of our nation has created.
Moreover, the alphabetical form is adapted to the common people, as is
evident from Augustine's Retract. i. 20. It is not a paltry substitute
for the departed poetic spirit, not merely an accessory to please the
eye, an outward embellishment - it is in itself indicative of mental
power. The didactic poet regards the array of the linguistic elements as
the steps by which he leads his pupils up into the sanctuary of wisdom,
or as the many-celled casket in which he stores the pearls of the
teachings of his wisdom. The lyric writer regards it as the keys on
which he strikes every note, in order to give the fullest expression to
his feelings. Even the prophet does not disdain to allow the order of
the letters to exert an influence over the course of his thoughts, as we
see from [Nah 1:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003).

(Note: This observation is due to Pastor Frohnmeyer of Wrtemberg.)

Therefore, when among the nine

(Note: The Psalterium Brunonis (ed. by Cochleus, 1533) overlooks Ps
9-10, reckoning only seven alphabetical Psalms.)

alphabetical Psalms ([Psa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001), [Psa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001), [Psa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001), [Psa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001), [Psa
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001), [Psa
111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001), [Psa
112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001), [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001), [Psa
145:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001)) four bear the inscription לדוד
([Psa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001), [Psa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001), [Psa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001), [Psa
145:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001)), we shall not at once regard
them as non-Davidic just because they indicate an alphabetical plan
which is more or less fully carried out.

This is not the place to speak of the relation of the anonymous Ps 10 to
Ps 9, since Ps 9 is not in any way wanting in internal roundness and
finish. It is thoroughly hymnic. The idea that [Psa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014) passes from thanksgiving into
supplication rests on a misinterpretation, as we shall presently see.
This Psalm is a thoroughly national song of thanksgiving for victory by
David, belonging to the time when Jahve was already enthroned on Zion,
and therefore, to the time after the ark was brought home. Was it
composed after the triumphant termination of the Syro-Ammonitish war? -
The judgment of extermination already executed, [Psa
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)., harmonises with what is recorded
in [Sa2 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031); and the גוים, who are
actually living within the borders of Israel, appear to be Philistines
according to the annalistic passage about the Philistine feuds, [Sa2
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015)., cf. [Psa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001) in connection with [Sa1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006).

[Psalms 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 9:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:2-3) In this first strophe of the Psalm, which is laid out in
tetrastichs-the normative strophe-the alphabetical form is carried out
in the fullest possible way: we have four lines, each of which begins
with א. It is the prelude of the song. The poet rouses himself up to a
joyful utterance of Jahve's praise. With his whole heart ([Psa
138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)), i.e., all his powers of mind
and soul as centred in his heart taking part in the act, will he
thankfully and intelligently confess God, and declare His wondrous acts
which exceed human desire and comprehension ([Psa
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007)); he will rejoice and be glad in
Jahve, as the ground of his rejoicing and as the sphere of his joy; and
with voice and with harp he will sing of the name of the Most High.
עליון is not an attributive of the name of God (Hitz.: Thine exalted
name), but, as it is everywhere from [Gen
14:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018) onward (e.g., [Psa
97:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#009)), an attributive name of God. As
an attributive to שׁמך one would expect to find העליון.

[Psalms 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 9:3</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:4-5) The call upon himself to thanksgiving sounds forth, and
the ב-strophe continues it by expressing the ground of it. The
preposition בּ in this instance expresses both the time and the reason
together (as in [Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010); [Ch2
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#006)); in Latin it is recedentibus
hostibus meis retro. אחור serves to strengthen the notion of being
driven back, as in [Psa 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#010), cf.
[Psa 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011); and just as, in Latin,
verbs compounded of re are strengthened by retro. In [Psa
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004) finite verbs take the place of the
infinitive construct; here we have futt. with a present signification,
just as in [Ch2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007) we find a praet.
intended as perfect. For the rendering which Hitzig adopts: When mine
enemies retreat backwards, they stumble... is opposed both by the
absence of any syntactic indication in [Psa
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004) of an apodosis (cf. [Psa
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002)); and also by the fact that
יכּשׁלוּ is well adapted to be a continuation of the description of
שׁוּב אחור (cf. [Joh 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006)), but is
tame as a principal clause to the definitive clause בשוב אויבי אחור.
Moreover, אחור does not signify backwards (which would rather be אחרנּית
[Gen 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#023); [Sa1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018)), but back, or into the rear. The
מן of מפּניך is the מן of the cause, whence the action proceeds. What is
intended is God's angry countenance, the look of which sets his enemies
on fire as if they were fuel ([Psa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#010)), in antithesis to God's
countenance as beaming with the light of His love. Now, while this is
taking place, and because of its taking place, will be sing praise to
God. From [Psa 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#002) we see that the
Psalm is composed directly after the victory and while the destructive
consequences of it to the vanquished are still in operation. David sees
in it all an act of Jahve's judicial power. To execute any one's right,
משׁפּט ([Mic 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#009)), to bring to an
issue any one's suit or lawful demand, דּין ([Psa
140:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#013)), is equivalent to: to assist
him and his good cause in securing their right. The phrases are also
used in a judicial sense without the suffix. The genitive object after
these principal words never denotes the person against whom, but the
person on whose behalf, the third party steps forward with his judicial
authority. Jahve has seated Himself upon His judgment-seat as a judge of
righteousness (as in [Jer 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020)),
i.e., as a judge whose judicial mode of procedure is righteousness,
justice,

(Note: Also [Pro 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#016) is probably to
be read צדק כּל־שׁכּטי, with Norzi, according to the Targum, Syriac
version, and old Codices; at any rate this is an old various reading,
and one in accordance with the sense, side by side with כל־שׁפטי ארץ.)

and has decided in his favour. In ישׁב ל (as in [Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011)), which is distinguished in
this respect from ישׁב על ([Psa 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#009)),
the idea of motion, considere, comes prominently forward.

[Psalms 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 9:5</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:6-7) The strophe with ג, which is perhaps intended to represent
ד and ה as well, continues the confirmation of the cause for
thanksgiving laid down in [Psa 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004). He
does not celebrate the judicial act of God on his behalf, which he has
just experienced, alone, but in connection with, and, as it were, as the
sum of many others which have preceded it. If this is the case, then in
[Psa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006) beside the Ammonites one may
at the same time (with Hengstenb.) think of the Amalekites ([Sa1
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#012)), who had been threatened since
the time of Moses with a "blotting out of their remembrance" ([Exo
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014); [Deu
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#019), cf. [Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020)). The divine threatening is the
word of omnipotence which destroys in distinction from the word of
omnipotence that creates. רשׁע in close connection with גּוים is
individualising, cf. [Psa 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018) with
[Psa 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016), [Psa
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017). ועד is a sharpened pausal form
for ועד, the Pathach going into a Segol (קטן פתח); perhaps it is in
order to avoid the threefold a-sound in לעולם ועד (Ngelsbach 8 extr.).
In [Psa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007) האויב (with Azla legarme)
appears to be a vocative. In that case נתשׁתּ ought also to be addressed
to the enemy. But if it be interpreted: "Thou hast destroyed thine own
cities, their memorial is perished," destroyed, viz., at the challenge
of Israel, then the thought is forced; and if we render it: "the cities,
which thou hast destroyed, perished is the remembrance of them," i.e.,
one no longer thinks of thine acts of conquest, then we have a thought
that is in itself awkward and one that finds no support in any of the
numerous parallels which speak of a blotting out and leaving no trace
behind. But, moreover, in both these interpretations the fact that זכרם
is strengthened by המּה is lost sight of, and the twofold masculine זכרם
המּה is referred to ערים (which is carelessly done by most expositors),
whereas עיר, with but few exceptions, is feminine; consequently זכרם
המה, so far as this is not absolutely impossible, must be referred to
the enemies themselves (cf. [Psa
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#017); [Psa
109:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015)). האויב might more readily be
nom. absol.: "the enemy - it is at end for ever with his destructions,"
but חרבּה never has an active but always only a neuter signification;
or: "the enemy - ruins are finished for ever," but the signification to
be destroyed is more natural for תּמם than to be completed, when it is
used of ruinae. Moreover, in connection with both these renderings the
retrospective pronoun (חרבותיו) is wanting, and this is also the case
with the reading חרבות (lxx, Vulg., Syr.), which leaves it uncertain
whose swords are meant. But why may we not rather connect האויב at once
with תּמּוּ as subject? In other instances תּמּוּ is also joined to a
singular collective subject, e.g., [Isa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004); here it precedes, like הארב in
[Jdg 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#037). חרבות לנצח is a nominative
of the product, corresponding to the factitive object with verbs of
making: the enemies are destroyed as ruins for ever, i.e., so that they
are become ruins; or, more in accordance with the accentuation: the
enemy, destroyed as ruins are they for ever. With respect to what
follows the accentuation also contains hints worthy of our attention. It
does not take נתשׁתּ (with the regular Pathach by Athnach after
Olewejored, vid., on [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)) as a
relative clause, and consequently does not require זכרם המה to be
referred back to ערים.

We interpret the passage thus: and cities (viz., such as were hostile)
thou hast destroyed (נתשׁ evellere, exstirpare), perished is their (the
enemies') memorial. Thus it also now becomes intelligible, why זכרם,
according to the rule Ges. 121, 3, is so remarkably strengthened by the
addition of המּה (cf. [Num 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#032); [Sa1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#042); [Pro
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#019); [Pro
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#015); [Eze
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#011)). Hupfeld, whose interpretation
is exactly the same as ours, thinks it might perhaps be the enemies
themselves and the cities set over against one another. But the contrast
follows in [Psa 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008) : their, even
their memorial is perished, while on the contrary Jahve endures for ever
and is enthroned as judge. This contrast also retrospectively gives
support to the explanation, that זכרם refers not to the cities, but to
האויב as a collective. With this interpretation of [Psa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007) we have no occasion to read זכרם
מהמּה (Targ.), nor זכר מהמּה (Paul., Hitz.). The latter is strongly
commended by [Job 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020), cf. [Jer
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002); but still it is not quite
admissible, since זכר here is not subjective (their own remembrance) but
objective (remembrance of them). But may not ערים perhaps here, as in
[Psa 139:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#020), mean zealots =
adversaries (from עיר fervere, zelare)? We reply in the negative,
because the Psalm bears neither an Aramaising nor a North Palestinian
impress. Even in connection with this meaning, the harshness of the ערים
without any suffix would still remain. But, that the cities that are, as
it were, plucked up by the root are cities of the enemy, is evident from
the context.

[Psalms 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 9:7</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:8-9) Without a trace even of the remembrance of them the
enemies are destroyed, while on the other hand Jahve endureth for ever.
This strophe is the continuation of the preceding with the most intimate
connection of contrast (just as the ב-strophe expresses the ground for
what is said in the preceding strophe). The verb ישׁב has not the
general signification "to remain" here (like עמד to endure), but just
the same meaning as in [Psa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010).
Everything that is opposed to Him comes to a terrible end, whereas He
sits, or (which the fut. implies) abides, enthroned for ever, and that
as Judge: He hath prepared His throne for the purpose of judgment. This
same God, who has just given proof that He lives and reigns, will by and
by judge the nations still more comprehensively, strictly, and
impartially. תּכל, a word exclusively poetic and always without the
article, signifies first (in distinction from ארץ the body of the earth
and אדמה the covering or soil of the earth) the fertile (from יבל)
surface of the globe, the οἰκουμένη. It is the last Judgment, of which
all preceding judgments are harbingers and pledges, that is intended. In
later Psalms this Davidic utterance concerning the future is repeated.

[Psalms 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 9:9</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:10-11) Thus judging the nations Jahve shows Himself to be, as a
second ו-strophe says, the refuge and help of His own. The voluntative
with Waw of sequence expresses that which the poet desires for his own
sake and for the sake of the result mentioned in [Psa
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011). משׂגּב, a high, steep place,
where one is removed from danger, is a figure familiar to David from the
experiences of his time of persecution. דּך (in pause דּך) is properly
one who is crushed (from דּכך = דּכא, דּכה to crush, break in pieces,
דקק to pulverize), therefore one who is overwhelmed to the extreme, even
to being completely crushed. The parallel is לעתּות בצּרה with the
datival ל (as probably also in [Psa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)). עתּות from עת (time, and then
both continuance, [Psa 81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016), and
condition) signifies the public relations of the time, or even the
vicissitudes of private life, [Psa
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016); and בצּרה is not הצּרה with בּ
(Bttch.), which gives an expression that is meaninglessly minute ("for
times in the need"), but one word, formed from בּצּר (to cut off, Arab.
to see, prop. to discern keenly), just like בּקּשׁה ekil from בּקּשׁ,
prop. a cutting off, or being cut off, i.e., either restraint,
especially motionlessness (= בּצּרת, [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008), plur. בּצּרות [Jer
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001)), or distress, in which the
prospect of deliverance is cut off. Since God is a final refuge for such
circumstances of hopelessness in life, i.e., for those who are in such
circumstances, the confidence of His people is strengthened, refreshed,
and quickened. They who know His name, to them He has now revealed its
character fully, and that by His acts; and they who inquire after Him,
or trouble and concern themselves about Him (this is what דּרשׁ
signifies in distinction from בּקּשׁ), have now experienced that He also
does not forget them, but makes Himself known to them in the fulness of
His power and mercy.

[Psalms 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 9:11</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:12-13) Thus then the z-strophe summons to the praise of this
God who has done, and will still do, such things. The summons contains a
moral claim, and therefore applies to all, and to each one individually.
Jahve, who is to be praised everywhere and by every one, is called ישׁב
ציּון, which does not mean: He who sits enthroned in Zion, but He who
inhabiteth Zion, Ges. 138, 1. Such is the name by which He is called
since the time when His earthly throne, the ark, was fixed on the castle
hill of Jerusalem, [Psa 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003). It is
the epithet applied to Him during the period of the typical kingship of
promise. That Jahve's salvation shall be proclaimed from Zion to all the
world, even outside Israel, for their salvation, is, as we see here and
elsewhere, an idea which throbs with life even in the Davidic Psalms;
later prophecy beholds its realisation in its wider connections with the
history of the future. That which shall be proclaimed to the nations is
called עלילותיו, a designation which the magnalia Dei have obtained in
the Psalms and the prophets since the time of Hannah's song, [Sa1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#003) (from עלל, root על, to come over
or upon anything, to influence a person or a thing, as it were, from
above, to subject them to one's energy, to act upon them).

With כּי, quod, in [Psa 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013), the
subject of the proclamation of salvation is unfolded as to its
substance. The praett. state that which is really past; for that which
God has done is the assumption that forms the basis of the discourse in
praise of God on account of His mighty acts. They consist in avenging
and rescuing His persecuted church-persecuted even to martyrdom. The
אותם, standing by way of emphasis before its verb, refers to those who
are mentioned afterwards (cf. [Psa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020)): the Chethb calls them עניּים,
the Keri ענוים. Both words alternate elsewhere also, the Ker at one time
placing the latter, at another the former, in the place of the one that
stands in the text. They are both referable to ענה to bend (to bring
low, [Isa 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#005)). The neuter
signification of the verb ענה = ענו, Arab.. ‛nâ, fut o., underlies the
noun ענו (cf. שׁלו), for which in [Num
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003) there is a Ker עניו with an
incorrect Jod (like שׁליו [Job 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#023)).
This is manifest from the substantive ענוה, which does not signify
affliction, but passiveness, i.e., humility and gentleness; and the noun
עני is passive, and therefore does not, like ענו, signify one who is
lowly-minded, in a state of ענוה, but one who is bowed down by
afflictions, עני. But because the twin virtues denoted by ענוה are
acquired in the school of affliction, there comes to be connected with
עני - but only secondarily - the notion of that moral and spiritual
condition which is aimed at by dispensations of affliction, and is
joined with a suffering life, rather than with one of worldly happiness
and prosperity, - a condition which, as [Num
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003) shows, is properly described by
ענו (ταπεινός and πραΰ́ς). It shall be proclaimed beyond Israel, even
among the nations, that the Avenger of blood, דּמים דּרשׁ, thinks of
them (His דּרשׁים), and has been as earnest in His concern for them as
they in theirs for Him. דּמים always signifies human blood that is shed
by violence and unnaturally; the plur. is the plural of the product
discussed by Dietrich, Abhandl. S. 40. דּרשׁ to demand back from any one
that which he has destroyed, and therefore to demand a reckoning,
indemnification, satisfaction for it, [Gen
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005), then absolutely to punish, [Ch2
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#022).

[Psalms 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 9:13</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:14-15) To take this strophe as a prayer of David at the present
time, is to destroy the unity and hymnic character of the Psalm, since
that which is here put in the form of prayer appears in what has
preceded and in what follows as something he has experienced. The
strophe represents to us how the עניּים (ענוים) cried to Jahve before
the deliverance now experienced. Instead of the form חנּני used
everywhere else the resolved, and as it were tremulous, form חננני is
designedly chosen. According to a better attested reading it is חננני
(Pathach with Gaja in the first syllable), which is regarded by Chajug
and others as the imper. Piel, but more correctly (Ewald 251, c) as the
imper. Kal from the intransitive imperative form חנן. מרוממי is the
vocative, cf. [Psa 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007). The gates of
death, i.e., the gates of the realm of the dead (שׁאול, [Isa
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#010)), are in the deep; he who is in
peril of death is said to have sunk down to them; he who is snatched
from peril of death is lifted up, so that they do not swallow him up and
close behind him. The church, already very near to the gates of death,
cried to the God who can snatch from death. Its final purpose in
connection with such deliverance is that it may glorify God. The form
תּהלּתיך is sing. with a plural suffix just like שׂנאתיך [Eze
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#011), אשׁמתימו [Ezr
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#015). The punctuists maintained (as
עצתיך in [Isa 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013) shows) the
possibility of a plural inflexion of a collective singular. In
antithesis to the gates of death, which are represented as beneath the
ground, we have the gates of the daughter of Zion standing on high.
ציּון is gen. appositionis (Ges. 116, 5). The daughter of Zion (Zion
itself) is the church in its childlike, bride-like, and conjugal
relation to Jahve. In the gates of the daughter of Zion is equivalent
to: before all God's people, [Psa
116:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#014). For the gates are the places
of public resort and business. At this period the Old Testament mind
knew nothing of the songs of praise of the redeemed in heaven. On the
other side of the grave is the silence of death. If the church desires
to praise God, it must continue in life and not die.

[Psalms 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 9:15</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:16-17) And, as this ט-strophe says, the church is able to
praise God; for it is rescued from death, and those who desired that
death might overtake it, have fallen a prey to death themselves. Having
interpreted the ה-strophe as the representation of the earlier צעקת
עניּים we have no need to supply dicendo or dicturus, as Seb. Schmidt
does, before this strophe, but it continues the praett. preceding the
ח-strophe, which celebrate that which has just been experienced. The
verb טבע (root טב, whence also טבל) signifies originally to press upon
anything with anything flat, to be pressed into, then, as here and in
[Psa 69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003), [Psa
69:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015), to sink in. טמנוּ זוּ (pausal
form in connection with Mugrash) in the parallel member of the verse
corresponds to the attributive עשׂוּ (cf. יפעל, [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016)). The union of the epicene זוּ
with רשׁת by Makkeph proceeds from the view, that זוּ is demonstrative
as in [Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008) : the net there (which
they have hidden). The punctuation, it is true, recognises a relative
זוּ, [Psa 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#009); [Psa
68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029), but it mostly takes it as
demonstrative, inasmuch as it connects it closely with the preceding
noun, either by Makkeph ([Psa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008);
[Psa 62:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012); [Psa
142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004); [Psa
143:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#008)) or by marking the noun with a
conjunctive accent ([Psa 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002); [Psa
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005); [Psa
132:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012)). The verb לכד (Arabic to hang
on, adhere to, IV to hold fast to) has the signification of seizing and
catching in Hebrew.

In [Psa 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017) Ben Naphtali points נודע
with ā: Jahve is known (part. Niph.); Ben Asher נודע, Jahve has made
Himself known (3 pers. praet. Niph. in a reflexive signification, as in
[Eze 38:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#023)). The readings of Ben Asher
have become the textus receptus. That by which Jahve has made Himself
known is stated immediately: He has executed judgment or right, by
ensnaring the evil-doer (רשׁע, as in [Psa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)) in his own craftily planned work
designed for the destruction of Israel. Thus Gussetius has already
interpreted it. נוקשׁ is part. Kal from נקשׁ. If it were part. Niph.
from יקשׁ the ē, which occurs elsewhere only in a few עע verbs, as נמם
liquefactus, would be without an example. But it is not to be
translated, with Ges. and Hengst.: "the wicked is snared in the work of
his own hands," in which case it would have to be pointed נוקשׁ (3
praet. Niph.), as in the old versions. Jahve is the subject, and the
suffix refers to the evil-doer. The thought is the same as in [Job
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#011); [Isa
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031). This figure of the net, רשׁת
(from ירשׁ capere), is peculiar to the Psalms that are inscribed לדוד.
The music, and in fact, as the combination הגיון סלה indicates, the
playing of the stringed instruments ([Psa
92:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#004)), increases here; or the music is
increased after a solo of the stringed instruments. The song here soars
aloft to the climax of triumph.

[Psalms 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 9:17</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:18-19) Just as in [Psa 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008).
the prospect of a final universal judgment was opened up by Jahve's act
of judgment experienced in the present, so here the grateful retrospect
of what has just happened passes over into a confident contemplation of
the future, which is thereby guaranteed. The lxx translates ישׁוּבוּ by
αποστραφήτωσαν, Jer. convertantur, a meaning which it may have (cf.
e.g., [Ch2 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#025)); but why should it
not be ἀναστραφήτωσαν, or rather: ἀναστραφήσονται, since [Psa
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019) shows that [Psa
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018) is not a wish but a prospect of
that which is sure to come to pass? To be resolved into dust again, to
sink away into nothing (redactio in pulverem, in nihilum) is man's
return to his original condition, - man who was formed from the dust,
who was called into being out of nothing. To die is to return to the
dust, [Psa 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029), cf. [Gen
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019), and here it is called the return
to Sheτl, as in [Job 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023) to death,
and in [Psa 90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003) to atoms, inasmuch as
the state of shadowy existence in Hades, the condition of worn out life,
the state of decay is to a certain extent the renewal (Repristination)
of that which man was before he came into being. As to outward form
לשׁאולה may be compared with לישׁעתה in [Psa
80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003); the ל in both instances is that
of the direction or aim, and might very well come before שׁאולה, because
this form of the word may signify both ἐν ᾅδου and εἰς ᾅδου (cf. מבּבלה
[Jer 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#016)). R. Abba ben Zabda, in
Genesis Rabba cap. 50, explains the double sign of the direction as
giving intensity to it: in imum ambitum orci. The heathen receive the
epithet of שׁכחי אלהים (which is more neuter than שׁכחי, [Psa
50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022)); for God has not left them
without a witness of Himself, that they could not know of Him, their
alienation from God is a forgetfulness of Him, the guilt of which they
have incurred themselves, and from which they are to turn to God ([Isa
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#022)). But because they do not do
this, and even rise up in hostility against the nation and the God of
the revelation that unfolds the plan of redemption, they will be obliged
to return to the earth, and in fact to Hades, in order that the
persecuted church may obtain its longed for peace and its promised
dominion. Jahve will at last acknowledge this ecclesia pressa; and
although its hope seems like to perish, inasmuch as it remains again and
again unfulfilled, nevertheless it will not always continue thus. The
strongly accented לא rules both members of [Psa
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019), as in [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019); [Psa
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002), and also frequently elsewhere
(Ewald 351, a). אביון, from אבה to wish, is one eager to obtain anything
= a needy person. The Arabic ‛bâ, which means the very opposite, and
according to which it would mean "one who restrains himself," viz.,
because he is obliged to, must be left out of consideration.

[Psalms 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 9:19</span></span>

(Heb.: 9:20-21) By reason of the act of judgment already witnessed the
prayer now becomes all the more confident in respect of the state of
things which is still continually threatened. From י the poet takes a
leap to ק which, however, seems to be a substitute for the כ which one
would expect to find, since the following Psalm begins with ל. David's
קוּמה ([Psa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008); [Psa
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007)) is taken from the lips of Moses,
[Num 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035). "Jahve arises, comes,
appears" are kindred expressions in the Old Testament, all of which
point to a final personal appearing of God to take part in human history
from which He has now, as it were, retired into a state of repose
becoming invisible to human eyes. Hupfeld and others wrongly translate
"let not man become strong." The verb עזז does not only mean to be or
become strong, but also to feel strong, powerful, possessed of power,
and to act accordingly, therefore: to defy, [Psa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009), like עז defiant, impudent
(post-biblical עזּוּת shamelessness). אנושׁ, as in [Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010), is man, impotent in comparison
with God, and frail in himself. The enemies of the church of God are not
unfrequently designated by this name, which indicates the impotence of
their pretended power ([Isa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007), [Isa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012)). David prays that God may
repress the arrogance of these defiant ones, by arising and manifesting
Himself in all the greatness of His omnipotence, after His forbearance
with them so long has seemed to them to be the result of impotence. He
is to arise as the Judge of the world, judging the heathen, while they
are compelled to appear before Him, and, as it were, defile before Him
(על־פּני), He is to lay מורה on them. If "razor" be the meaning it is
equivocally expressed; and if, according to [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020), we associate with it the idea of
an ignominious rasure, or of throat-cutting, it is a figure unworthy of
the passage. The signification master (lxx, Syr., Vulg., and Luther)
rests upon the reading אמת, which we do not with Thenius and others
prefer to the traditional reading (even Jerome translates: pone, Domine,
terrorem eis); for מורה rof , which according to the Masora is instead
of מורא (like מכלה [Hab 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017) for
מכלא), is perfectly appropriate. Hitzig objects that fear is not a thing
which one lays upon any one; but מורא means not merely fear, but an
object, or as Hitzig himself explains it in [Mal
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005) a "lever," of fear. It is not
meant that God is to cause them to be overcome with terror (על), nor
that He is to put terror into them (בּ), but that He is to make them (ל(
m in no way differing from [Psa 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#004);
[Psa 140:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#006); [Job
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013)) an object of terror, from which
to their dismay, as the wish is further expressed in [Psa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020), they shall come to know ([Hos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007)) that they are mortal men. As in
[Psa 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#012); [Psa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012); [Psa
50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021); [Psa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006); [Gen
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#013); [Job
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#014); [Amo
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012); [Hos
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#002), ידּעוּ is followed by an only
half indirect speech, without כּי or אשׁר. סּלה has Dag. forte conj.
according to the rule of the אתי מרחיק (concerning which vid., on [Psa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)), because it is erroneously
regarded as an essential part of the text.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 10](psa010)

</div>
