<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa081)  [Next](psa083) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 82](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 82:0</span></span>

God's Judgment upon the Gods of the Earth

As in Ps 81, so also in this Psalm (according to the Talmud the Tuesday
Psalm of the Temple liturgy) God is introduced as speaking after the
manner of the prophets. [Psa 58:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)
and 94 are similar, but more especially [Isa
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#013). Asaph the seer beholds how
God, reproving, correcting, and threatening, appears against the chiefs
of the congregation of His people, who have perverted the splendour of
majesty which He has put upon them into tyranny. It is perfectly
characteristic of Asaph (Ps 50; [Psa
75:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001); Ps 81) to plunge himself into
the contemplation of the divine judgment, and to introduce God as
speaking. There is nothing to militate against the Psalm being written
by Asaph, David's contemporary, except the determination not to allow to
the לאסף of the inscription its most natural sense. Hupfeld,
understanding "angels" by the elohim, as Bleek has done before him,
inscribes the Psalm: "God's judgment upon unjust judges in heaven and
upon earth." But the angels as such are nowhere called elohim in the Old
Testament, although they might be so called; and their being judged here
on account of unjust judging, Hupfeld himself says, is "an obscure point
that is still to be cleared up." An interpretation which, like this,
abandons the usage of the language in order to bring into existence a
riddle that it cannot solve, condemns itself. At the same time the
assertion of Hupfeld (of Knobel, Graf, and others), that in [Exo
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#005); [Exo
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007)., Ex 27,

(Note: In the English authorized version, [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); [Exo
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008). ("judges"), Ex 28 ("gods,"
margin "judges") . - Tr.)

אלהים denotes God Himself, and not directly the authorities of the
nation as being His earthly representatives, finds its most forcible
refutation in the so-called and mortal elohim of this Psalm (cf. also
[Psa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007); [Psa
58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)).

By reference to this Psalm Jesus proves to the Jews ([Joh
10:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034)) that when He calls Himself
the Son of God, He does not blaspheme God, by an argumentatio a minori
ad majus. If the Law, so He argues, calls even those gods who are
officially invested with this name by a declaration of the divine will
promulgated in time (and the Scripture cannot surely, as in general, so
also in this instance, be made invalid), then it cannot surely be
blasphemy if He calls Himself the Son of God, whom not merely a divine
utterance in this present time has called to this or to that worldly
office after the image of God, but who with His whole life is
ministering to the accomplishment of a work to which the Father had
already sanctified Him when He came into the world. In connection with
ἡγίασε one is reminded of the fact that those who are called elohim in
the Psalm are censured on account of the unholiness of their conduct.
The name does not originally belong to them, nor do they show themselves
to be morally worthy of it. With ἡγίασε καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Jesus contrasts
His divine sonship, prior to time, with theirs, which began only in this
present time.

[Psalms 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 82:1</span></span>

God comes forward and makes Himself heard first of all as censuring and
admonishing. The "congregation of God" is, as in [Num
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#017); [Num
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#016); [Jos
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016)., "the congregation of (the sons
of) Israel," which God has purchased from among the nations ([Psa
74:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002)), and upon which as its Lawgiver
He has set His divine impress. The psalmist and seer sees Elohim
standing in this congregation of God. The part. Niph. (as in [Isa
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#013)) denotes not so much the
suddenness and unpreparedness, as, rather, the statue-like immobility
and terrifying designfulness of His appearance. Within the range of the
congregation of God this holds good of the elohim. The right over life
and death, with which the administration of justice cannot dispense, is
a prerogative of God. From the time of [Gen
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006), however, He has transferred the
execution of this prerogative to mankind, and instituted in mankind an
office wielding the sword of justice, which also exists in His
theocratic congregation, but here has His positive law as the basis of
its continuance and as the rule of its action. Everywhere among men, but
here pre-eminently, those in authority are God's delegates and the
bearers of His image, and therefore as His representatives are also
themselves called elohim, "gods" (which the lxx in [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006) renders τὸ κριτήριον τοῦ Θεοῦ,
and the Targums here, as in [Exo
22:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007), [Exo
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027) uniformly, דּיּניּא). The God
who has conferred this exercise of power upon these subordinate elohim,
without their resigning it of themselves, now sits in judgment in their
midst. ישׁפּט of that which takes place before the mind's eye of the
psalmist. How long, He asks, will ye judge unjustly? שׁפט עול is
equivalent to עשׂה עול בּמּשׁפּט, [Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015), [Lev
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#035) (the opposite is שׁפט מישׁרים,
[Psa 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)). How long will ye accept
the countenance of the wicked, i.e., incline to accept, regard, favour
the person of the wicked? The music, which here becomes forte, gives
intensity to the terrible sternness (das Niederdonnernde) of the divine
question, which seeks to bring the "gods" of the earth to their right
mind. Then follow admonitions to do that which they have hitherto left
undone. They are to cause the benefit of the administration of justice
to tend to the advantage of the defenceless, of the destitute, and of
the helpless, upon whom God the Lawgiver especially keeps His eye. The
word רשׁ (ראשׁ), of which there is no evidence until within the time of
David and Solomon, is synonymous with אביון. דל with ויתום is pointed
דל, and with ואביון, on account of the closer notional union, דל (as in
[Psa 72:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#013)). They are words which are
frequently repeated in the prophets, foremost in Isaiah ([Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)), with which is enjoined upon
those invested with the dignity of the law, and with jurisdiction,
justice towards those who cannot and will not themselves obtain their
rights by violence.

[Psalms 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 82:5</span></span>

What now follows in [Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005) is not a
parenthetical assertion of the inefficiency with which the divine
correction rebounds from the judges and rulers. In connection with this
way of taking [Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005), the manner in
which the divine language is continued in [Psa
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006) is harsh and unadjusted. God
Himself speaks in [Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005) of the
judges, but reluctantly alienated from them; and confident of the
futility of all attempts to make them better, He tells them their
sentence in [Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006). The verbs in
[Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005) are designedly without any
object: complaint of the widest compass is made over their want of
reason and understanding; and ידעו takes the perfect form in like manner
to ἐγνώκασι, noverunt, cf. [Psa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001);
[Isa 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#018). Thus, then, no result is
to be expected from the divine admonition: they still go their ways in
this state of mental darkness, and that, as the Hithpa. implies,
stalking on in carnal security and self-complacency. The commands,
however, which they transgress are the foundations (cf. [Psa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003)), as it were the shafts and
pillars ([Psa 75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004), cf. [Pro
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#004)), upon which rests the permanence
of all earthly relationships with are appointed by creation and
regulated by the Tτra. Their transgression makes the land, the earth, to
totter physically and morally, and is the prelude of its overthrow. When
the celestial Lord of the domain thinks upon this destruction which
injustice and tyranny are bringing upon the earth, His wrath kindles,
and He reminds the judges and rulers that it is His own free declaratory
act which has clothed them with the god-like dignity which they bear.
They are actually elohim, but not possessed of the right of
self-government; there is a Most High (עליון) to whom they as sons are
responsible. The idea that the appellation elohim, which they have given
to themselves, is only sarcastically given back to them in [Psa
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001) (Ewald, Olshausen), is refuted by
[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006), according to which they are
really elohim by the grace of God. But if their practice is not an Amen
to this name, then they shall be divested of the majesty which they have
forfeited; they shall be divested of the prerogative of Israel, whose
vocation and destiny they have belied. They shall die off כּאדם, like
common men not rising in any degree above the mass (cf. בּני אדם, opp.
בּני אישׁ, [Psa 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003); [Psa
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003)); they shall fall like any one
([Jdg 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#007), [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)) of the princes who in the course
of history have been cast down by the judgment of God ([Hos
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007)). Their divine office will not
protect them. For although justitia civilis is far from being the
righteousness that avails before God, yet injustitia civilis is in His
sight the vilest abomination.

[Psalms 82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 82:8</span></span>

The poet closes with the prayer for the realization of that which he has
beheld in spirit. He implored God Himself to sit in judgment (שׁפטה as
in [Lam 3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059)), since judgment is so
badly exercised upon the earth. All peoples are indeed His נחלה, He has
an hereditary and proprietary right among (lxx and Vulgate according to
[Num 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020), and frequently), or rather
in (בּ as in משׁל בּ, instead of the accusative of the object, [Zac
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011)), all nations (ἔθνη) - may He
then be pleased to maintain it judicially. The inference drawn from this
point backwards, that the Psalm is directed against the possessors of
power among the Gentiles, is erroneous. Israel itself, in so far as it
acts inconsistently with its theocratic character, belies its sanctified
nationality, is a גוי like the גוים, and is put into the same category
with these. The judgment over the world is also a judgment over the
Israel that is become conformed to the world, and its God-estranged
chiefs.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 83](psa083)

</div>
