<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa044)  [Next](psa046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 45:0</span></span>

Marriage Song in Honour of the Peerless King

To a Korahitic Maskı̂l is appended a song of the same name, and likewise
bearing a royal impress after the style of the Korahitic productions.
But whilst in [Psa 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005) the words
"Thou, Thou art my King, Elohim," are addressed in prayer to the God of
Israel, in this Psalm the person of the king who is celebrated is a
matter of doubt and controversy. The Epistle to the Hebrews ([Heb
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)) proceeds on the assumption that
it is the future Christ, the Son of God. It is supported in this view by
a tradition of the ancient synagogue, in accordance with which the
Targumist renders [Psa 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003), "Thy
beauty, O King Messiah, is greater than that of the children of men."
This Messianic interpretation must be very ancient. Just as [Eze
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#032) refers back to שׁילה, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010), גּבּור אל among the names of
the Messiah in [Isa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005) (cf. [Zac
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#008)) refers back in a similar manner
to Ps 45. And whilst the reception of the Song of Songs into the canon
admits of being understood even without the assumption of any
prophetically allegorical meaning in it, the reception of this Psalm
without any such assumption is unintelligible. But this prophetically
Messianic sense is therefore not the original meaning of the Psalm. The
Psalm is a poem composed for some special occasion the motive of which
is some contemporary event. The king whom it celebrates was a
contemporary of the poet. If, however, it was a king belonging to
David's family, then he was a possessor of a kingship to which were
attached, according to 2 Sam. 7, great promises extending into the
unlimited future, and on which, consequently, hung all the prospects of
the future prosperity and glory of Israel; and the poet is therefore
fully warranted in regarding him in the light of the Messianic idea, and
the church is also fully warranted in referring the song, which took its
rise in some passing occasion, as a song for all ages, to the great King
of the future, the goal of its hope. Moreover, we find only such poems
of an occasional and individual character received into the Psalter, as
were adapted to remain in constant use by the church as prayers and
spiritual songs.

With respect to the historical occasion of the song, we adhere to the
conjecture advanced in our commentary on Canticles and on the Epistle to
the Hebrews, viz., that it was composed in connection with the marriage
of Joram of Judah with Athaliah. The reference to the marriage of Ahab
of Israel with Jezebel of Tyre, set forth by Hitzig, is at once set
aside by the fact that the poet idealizes the person celebrated, as
foreshadowing the Messiah, in a way that can only be justified in
connection with a Davidic king. It could more readily be Solomon the
king of Israel, whose appearance was fair as that of a woman, but
majestic as that of a hero.

(Note: So Disraeli in his romance of Alroy (1845).)

Even to the present day several interpreters

(Note: So even Kurtz in the Dorpater Zeitschrift for 1865, S. 1-24.)

explain the Psalm of Solomon's marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh;
but the entire absence of any mention of Egypt is decisive against this
view. Hence Hupfeld imagines a daughter of Hiram to be the bride, by
reference to the Zidonian Ashtreth which is mentioned among Solomon's
strange gods ([Kg1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005), [Kg1
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033)). But the fact that the king
here celebrated is called upon to go forth to battle, is also strange,
whilst the glory of Solomon consists in his being, in accordance with
his name, the Prince of Peace, or אישׁ מנוּחה, [Ch1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009). Further, the wish is expressed
for him that he may have children who shall take the place of his
ancestors: Solomon, however, had a royal father, but not royal fathers;
and there is the less ground for any retrospective reference to the
princes of Judah as Solomon's ancestors (which Kurtz inclines to), since
of these only one, viz., Nahshon, occurs among the ancestry of David.

All this speaks against Solomon, but just with equal force in favour of
Joram, as being the king celebrated. This Joram is the son of
Jehoshaphat, the second Solomon of the Israelitish history. He became
king even during the lifetime of his pious father, under whom the
Salomonic prosperity of Israel was revived (cf. [Ch2
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#001) with [Psa
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003), [Kg2
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#016), and Winer's Realwrterbuch under
Jehoram); he was also married to Athaliah during his father's lifetime;
and it is natural, that just at that time, when Judah had again attained
to the height of the glory of the days of Solomon, the highest hopes
should be gathered around these nuptials. This explains the name שׁגל
which the queen bears, - a name that is elsewhere Chaldaean ([Dan
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002).) and Persian ([Neh
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#006)), and is more North-Palestinian

(Note: In Deborah's song ([Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030))
probably שׁגל is to be read instead of לצוּארי שׁלל.)

than Jewish; for Athaliah sprang from the royal family of Tyre, and was
married by Joram out of the royal family of Israel. If she is the queen,
then the exhortation to forget her people and her father's house has all
the greater force. And it becomes intelligible why the homage of Tyre in
particular, and only of Tyre, is mentioned. The Salomonic splendour of
Asiatic perfumes and costly things is thus quite as easily explained as
by referring the Psalm to Solomon. For even Jehoshaphat had turned his
attention to foreign wares, more especially Indian gold; he even
prepared a fleet for the purpose of going to Ophir, but, ere it started,
it was wrecked in the harbour of Ezion-geber ([Kg1
22:48-50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#048); [Ch2
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#035).). And Solomon, it is true, had
a throne of ivory ([Kg1 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#018)), and
the Salomonic Song of Songs ([Sol 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005))
makes mention of a tower of ivory; but he had no ivory palace; whereas
the mention of היכלי־שׁן in our Psalm harmonizes surprisingly with the
fact that Ahab, the father of Athaliah, built a palace of ivory
(בּית־שׁן), which the Book of Kings, referring to the annals, announces
as something especially worthy of note, [Kg1
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#039) (cf. [Amo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015), בּתּי השּׁן).

But why should not even Joram, at a crisis of his life so rich in hope,
have been a type of the Messiah? His name is found in the genealogy of
Jesus Christ, [Mat 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#008). Joram and
Athaliah are among the ancestors of our Lord. This significance in
relation to the history of redemption is still left them, although they
have not realized the good wishes expressed by the poet at the time of
their marriage, just as in fact Solomon also began in the spirit and
ended in the flesh. Joram and Athaliah have themselves cut away all
reference of the Psalm to them by their own godlessness. It is with this
Psalm just as it is with the twelve thrones upon which, according to the
promise, [Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028), the twelve
apostles shall sit and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. This promise
was uttered even in reference to Judas Iscariot. One of the twelve seats
belonged to him, but he has fallen away from it. Matthias became heir to
the throne of Judas Iscariot, and who has become the heir to the
promises in this Psalm? All the glorious things declared in the Psalm
depend upon this as the primary assumption, as essential to their being
a blessing and being realized, viz., that the king whom it celebrates
should carry out the idea of the theocratic kingship. To the Old
Testament prophecy and hope, more especially since the days of Isaiah,
the Messiah, and to the New Testament conception of the fulfilment of
prophecy Jesus Christ, is the perfected realization of this idea.

The inscription runs: To the Precentor, upon Lilies, by the Ben-Korah, a
meditation, a song of that which is lovely. Concerning Maskı̂l, vid., on
[Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001). שׁושׁן is the name for the
(six-leafed) lily,

(Note: This name is also ancient Egyptian, vid., the Book of the Dead,
lxxxi. 2: nuk seshni pir am ṫah-en-Phrā, i.e., I am a lily, sprung from
the fields of the sun-god.)

that is wide-spread in its use in the East; it is not the (five-leafed)
rose, which was not transplanted into Palestine until a much later
period. In על־שׁשׁנּים Hengstenberg sees a symbolical reference to the
"lovely brides" mentioned in the Psalm. Luther, who renders it
"concerning the roses," understands it to mean the rosae futurae of the
united church of the future. We would rather say, with Bugenhagen, Joh.
Gerhard, and other old expositors, "The heavenly Bridegroom and the
spiritual bride, they are the two roses or lilies that are discoursed of
in this Psalm." But the meaning of על־שׁשׁנים must be such as will admit
of the inscribed על־שׁוּשׁן עדוּת, [Psa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), and עדוּת על־שׁשׁנּים (which is
probably all one expression notwithstanding the Athnach), [Psa
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001), being understood after the
analogy of it. The preposition על (אל) forbids our thinking of a musical
instrument, perhaps lily-shaped bells.

(Note: Vide C. Jessen, On the lily of the Bible, in Hugo von Mohl's
Botanische Zeitung, 1861, No. 12. Thrupp in his Introduction (1860) also
understands שׁושׁנים to mean cymbals in the form of a lily.)

There must therefore have been some well-known popular song, which began
with the words "A lily is the testimony..." or "Lilies are the
testimonies (עדות)...;" and the Psalm is composed and intended to be
sung after the melody of this song in praise of the Tפra.

(Note: The point of comparison, then, to adopt the language of Gregory
of Nyssa, is τὸ λαμπρόν τε καὶ χιονῶδες εἶδος of the lily.)

It is questionable whether ידידת (Origen ιδιδωθ, Jerome ididoth) in the
last designation of the Psalm is to be taken as a collateral form of
ידידת (love, and metonymically an object of love, [Jer
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)), or whether we are to explain it
after the analogy of צחות, [Isa 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#004),
and נכחות, [Isa 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#010) : it is just on
this neuter use of the plur. fem. that the interchange which sometimes
occurs of ōth with ūth in an abstract signification (Ew. 165, c) is
based. In the former case it ought to be rendered a song of love (Aquila
ᾀσμα προσφιλίας); in the latter, a song of that which is beloved, i.e.,
lovely, or lovable, and this is the more natural rendering. The
adjective ידיד signified beloved, or even ([Psa
84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002)) lovable. It is things that are
loved, because exciting love, therefore lovely, most pleasing things,
which, as שׁיר ידידת says, form the contents of the song. שׁיר ידידת
does not signify a marriage-song; this would be called שׁיר חתנּה (cf.
[Psa 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)). Nor does it signify a
secular erotic song, instead of which the expression שׁיר עגבים, שׁיר
דּודים, would have been used. ידיד is a noble word, and used of holy
love.

[Psalms 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 45:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 45:2-3) The verb רחשׁ, as מרחשׁת shows, signifies originally to
bubble up, boil, and is used in the dialects generally of excited motion
and lively excitement; it is construed with the accusative after the
manner of verbs denoting fulness, like the synonymous נבע, [Psa
119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171) (cf. Talmudic לשׁונך תרחישׁ
רננות, let thy tongue overflow with songs of praise). Whatever the heart
is full of, with that the mouth overflows; the heart of the poet gushes
over with a "good word." דּבר is a matter that finds utterance and is
put into the form of words; and טּוב describes it as good with the
collateral idea of that which is cheerful, pleasing, and rich in promise
([Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007); [Zac
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#013)). The fact that out of the
fulness and oppression of his heart so good a word springs forth, arises
from the subject in which now his whole powers of mind are absorbed: I
am saying or thinking (אני pausal form by Dechמ, in order that the
introductory formula may not be mistaken), i.e., my purpose is: מעשׁי
למלך, my works or creations (not sing., but plur., just as also מקני in
[Exo 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003); [Num
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019), where the connection leads one
to expect the plural) shall be dedicated to the king; or even: the
thought completely fills me, quite carries me away, that they concern or
have reference to the king. In the former case למלך dispenses with the
article because it is used after the manner of a proper name (as in [Psa
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002); [Psa
72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001)); in the latter, because the
person retires before the office of dignity belonging to it: and this
we, in common with Hitzig, prefer on account of the self-conscious and
reflecting אמר אני by which it is introduced. He says to himself that it
is a king to whom his song refers; and this lofty theme makes his tongue
so eloquent and fluent that it is like the style of a γραμματεὺς
ὀξύγραφος. Thus it is correctly rendered by the lxx; whereas סופר מהיר
as an epithet applied to Ezra ([Ezr
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)) does not denote a rapid writer,
but a learned or skilled scribe. Rapidly, like the style of an agile
writer, does the tongue of the poet move; and it is obliged to move thus
rapidly because of the thoughts and words that flow forth to it out of
his heart. The chief thing that inspires him is the beauty of the king.
The form יפיפית, which certainly ought to have a passive sense (Aquila
κάλλει ἐκαλλίωθης), cannot be explained as formed by reduplication of
the first two radicals of the verb יפה (יפי); for there are no examples
to be found in support of quinqueliterals thus derived. What seems to
favour this derivation is this, that the legitimately formed Pealal
יפיפה (cf. the adjective יפהפי = יפיפי, [Jer
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020)) is made passive by a change of
vowels in a manner that is altogether peculiar, but still explicable in
connection with this verb, which is a twofold weak verb. The meaning is:
Thou art beyond compare beautifully fashioned, or endowed with beauty
beyond the children of men. The lips are specially singled out from
among all the features of beauty in him. Over his lips is poured forth,
viz., from above, חן (gracefulness of benevolence), inasmuch as, even
without his speaking, the form of his lips and each of their movements
awakens love and trust; it is evident, however, that from such lips,
full of χάρις, there must proceed also λόγοι τῆς χάριτος ([Luk
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022); [Ecc
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#012)). In this beauty of the king and
this charm of his lips the psalmist sees a manifestation of the
everlasting blessing of God, that is perceptible to the senses. It is
not to be rendered: because Elohim hath blessed thee for ever. The
assertion that על־כּן is used in some passages for על־כּן אשׁר cannot be
proved (vid., on [Psa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007)). But the
meaning of the psalmist is, moreover, not that the king, because he is
so fair and has such gracious lips, is blessed of God. If this were the
idea, then the noble moral qualities of which the beauty of this king is
the transparent form, ought to be more definitely expressed. Thus
personally conceived, as it is here, beauty itself is a blessing, not a
ground for blessing. The fact of the matter is this, beauty is denoted
by על־כן as a reason for the blessing being known or recognised, not as
a reason why the king should be blessed. From his outward appearance it
is at once manifest that the king is one who is blessed by God, and that
blessed for ever. The psalmist could not but know that "grace is
deceitful and beauty vain" ([Pro
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#030)), therefore the beauty of this
king was in his eyes more than mere earthly beauty; it appears to him in
the light of a celestial transfiguration, and for this very reason as an
imperishable gift, in which there becomes manifest an unlimited endless
blessing.

[Psalms 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 45:3</span></span>

(Heb.: 44:4-6) In the ever blessed one the greatest strength and vigour
are combined with the highest beauty. He is a hero. The praise of his
heroic strength takes the form of a summons to exert it and aid the good
in obtaining the victory over evil. Brightness and majesty, as the
objects to חגור, alternating with the sword, are not in apposition to
this which is their instrument and symbol (Hengstenberg), but
permutatives, inasmuch as חגור is zeugmatically referable to both
objects: the king is (1) to gird himself with his sword, and (2) to
surround himself with his kingly, God-like doxa. הוד והדר is the
brilliancy of the divine glory ([Psa
96:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#006)), of which the glory of the
Davidic kingship is a reflection ([Psa
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#006)); mentioned side by side with the
sword, it is, as it were, the panoply that surrounds the king as bright
armour. In [Psa 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005) והדרך, written
accidentally a second time, is probably to be struck out, as Olshausen
and Hupfeld are of opinion. Hitzig points it והדרך, "and step forth;"
but this is not Hebrew. As the text runs, wa-hadārcha (with Legarme
preceded by Illuj, vid., Accentsystem xiii. 8c, 9) looks as though it
were repeated out of [Psa 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004) in the
echo-like and interlinked style that we frequently find in the songs of
degrees, e.g., [Psa 121:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001); and in
fact repeated as an accusative of more exact definition (in the same
bold manner as in [Psa 17:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013)) to
צלח, which, like Arab. ṣlḥ, starting from the primary notion of
cleaving, breaking through, pressing forward, comes to have the notion
of carrying anything through prosperously, of being successful,
pervadere et bene procedere (cf. the corresponding development of
signification in Arab. flḥ, 'flḥ), and, according to Ges. 142, rem. 1,
gives to רכב the adverbial notion of that which is effectual
(victorious) or effective and successful. We cannot determine whether
רכב is here intended to say vehi curru or vehi equo; but certainly not
upon a mule or an ass ([Kg1 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#033); [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)), which are the beasts ridden in a
time of peace. The king going forth to battle either rides in a
war-chariot (like Ahab and Jehoshaphat, 1 Kings 22), or upon a
war-horse, as in [Rev 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011) the Logos
of God is borne upon a white horse. That which he is to accomplish as he
rides forth in majesty is introduced by על־דּבר (for the sake of, on
account of), which is used just as in [Psa
79:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#009), [Sa2
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#005). The combination ענוה־צדק-is very
similar to עריה־בשׁת, [Mic 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)
(nakedness - ignominy = ignominious nakedness), if ענוה = ענוה is to be
taken as the name of a virtue. The two words are then the names of
virtues, like אמת (truth = veracity, which loves and practises that
which is true and which is hostile to lying, falseness, and
dissimulation); and whereas צדק ענוה would signify meek righteousness,
and צדק ענות, righteousness meekness, this conjunction standing in the
middle between an addition and an asyndeton denotes meekness and
righteousness as twin-sisters and reciprocally pervasive. The virtues
named, however, stand for those who exemplify them and who are in need
of help, on whose behalf the king is called upon to enter the strife:
the righteous, if they are at the same time ענוים (עניּים), are doubly
worthy and in need of his help. Nevertheless another explanation of ענוה
presents itself, and one that is all the more probable as occurring just
in this Psalm which has such a North-Palestinian colouring. The
observation, that North-Palestinian writers do not always point the
construct state with ath, in favour of which Hitzig, on [Psa
68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029), wrongly appeals to [Hos
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#006); [Job
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013), but rightly to [Jdg
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#008); [Jdg
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#032) (cf. [Deu
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#004), [Deu
33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027)), is perfectly correct.
Accordingly ענוה may possibly be equivalent to ענות, but not in the
signification business, affair = ענין, parallel with דּבר, but in the
signification afflictio (after the form ראוה, [Eze
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#017)); so that it may be rendered: in
order to put a stop to the oppression of righteousness or the suffering
of innocence. The jussive ותורך, like ויתאו in [Psa
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012), begins the apodosis of a
hypothetical protasis that is virtually there (Ew. 347, b): so shall thy
right hand teach thee, i.e., lead thee forth and cause thee to see
terrible things, i.e., awe-inspiring deeds.

But in [Psa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006) both summons and
desire pass over into the expression of a sure and hopeful prospect and
a vision, in which that which is to be is present to the mind: thine
arrows are sharpened, and therefore deadly to those whom they hit;
peoples shall fall (יפּלוּ)

(Note: It is not יפּלוּ; for the pause falls upon שׁנוּנים, and the
Athnach of יפלו stands merely in the place of Zekaph ([Num
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#012)). The Athnach after Olewejored
does not produce any pausal effect; vid., [Psa
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023); [Psa
68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009), [Psa
68:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014); [Psa
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004); [Psa
129:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001), and cf. supra, p. 56, note 2.)

under thee, i.e., so that thou passest over them as they lie upon the
ground; in the heart of the enemies of the king, viz., they (i.e., the
arrows) will stick. The harsh ellipse is explained by the fact of the
poet having the scene of battle before his mind as though he were an
eye-witness of it. The words "in the heart of the king's enemies" are an
exclamation accompanied by a pointing with the finger. Thither, he means
to say, those sharp arrows fly and smite. Crusius' explanation is
similar, but it goes further than is required: apostrophe per
prosopopaeiam directa ad sagittas quasi jubens, quo tendere debeant. We
are here reminded of [Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002), where
a similar בּקרב occurs in a prophetico-messianic connection. Moreover,
even according to its reference to contemporary history the whole of
this strophe sounds Messianic. The poet desires that the king whom he
celebrates may rule and triumph after the manner of the Messiah; that he
may succour truth and that which is truly good, and overcome the enmity
of the world, or, as [Psa 2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)
expresses it, that the God-anointed King of Zion may shatter everything
that rises up in opposition with an iron sceptre. This anointed One,
however, is not only the Son of David, but also of God. He is called
absolutely בּר, ὁ υἱὸς. Isaiah calls Him, even in the cradle, אל גּבּור,
[Isa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005), cf. [Isa
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021). We shall not, therefore, find
it to be altogether intolerable, if the poet now addresses him as אלהים,
although the picture thus far sketched is thoroughly human in all its
ideality.

[Psalms 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 45:6</span></span>

(Heb.: 45:7-8) In order to avoid the addressing of the king with the
word Elohim, [Psa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006) has been
interpreted, (1) "Thy throne of God is for ever and ever,", - a
rendering which is grammatically possible, and, if it were intended to
be expressed, must have been expressed thus (Nagelsbach, 64, g); (2)
"Thy throne is God (= divine) for ever and ever;" but it cannot possibly
be so expressed after the analogy of "the altar of wood = wooden" (cf.
[Psa 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009)), or "the time is showers of
rain = rainy" ([Ezr 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#013)), since God
is neither the substance of the throne, nor can the throne itself be
regarded as a representation or figure of God: in this case the
predicative Elohim would require to be taken as a genitive for אלהים
כּסּא, which, however, cannot possibly be supported in Hebrew by any
syntax, not even by [Kg2 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#017), cf.
Ges. 110, 2, b. Accordingly one might adopt the first mode of
interpretation, which is also commended by the fact that the earthly
throne of the theocratic king is actually called יהוה כסא in [Ch1
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023). But the sentence "thy throne of
God is an everlasting one" sounds tautological, inasmuch as that which
the predicate asserts is already implied in the subject; and we have
still first of all to try whether אלהים cannot, with the lxx ὁ θρόνος
σου, ὁ Θεὸς, εἰς αἰῶνα αἰῶνος, be taken as a vocative. Now, since before
everything else God's throne is eternal ([Psa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016); [Lam
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#019)), and a love of righteousness and
a hatred of evil is also found elsewhere as a description of divine
holiness ([Psa 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#005); [Psa
61:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#008)), אלהים would be obliged to be
regarded as addressed to God, if language addressed to the king did not
follow with על־כּן. But might אלהים by any possibility be even addressed
to the king who is here celebrated? It is certainly true that the custom
with the Elohim-Psalms of using Elohim as of equal dignity with Jahve is
not favourable to this supposition; but the following surpassing of the
אלהים by אלהים אלהיך renders it possible. And since elsewhere earthly
authorities are also called אלהים, [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); [Exo
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007)., [Psa
82:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001), cf. [Psa
138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001), because they are God's
representatives and the bearers of His image upon earth, so the king who
is celebrated in this Psalm may be all the more readily styled Elohim,
when in his heavenly beauty, his irresistible doxa or glory, and his
divine holiness, he seems to the psalmist to be the perfected
realization of the close relationship in which God has set David and his
seed to Himself. He calls him אלהים, just as Isaiah calls the exalted
royal child whom he exultingly salutes in [Psa
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001), אל־גּבּור. He gives him this
name, because in the transparent exterior of his fair humanity he sees
the glory and holiness of God as having attained a salutary of merciful
conspicuousness among men. At the same time, however, he guards this
calling of the king by the name Elohim against being misapprehended by
immediately distinguishing the God, who stands above him, from the
divine king by the words "Elohim, thy God," which, in the Korahitic
Psalms, and in the Elohimic Psalms in general, is equivalent to Jahve,
thy God" ([Psa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004); 48:15; [Psa
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007)); and the two words are
accordingly united by Munach.

(Note: The view that the Munach is here vicarius Tiphchae anterioris
(Dachselt in his Biblia Accentuata) is erroneous, vid.,
Accentuationssystem, xviii. 4. It is the conjunctive to אלהיך, which, in
Heidenheim and Baer, on the authority of the Codices, has Tiphcha
anterior, not Athnach as in the editions heretofore published. The
proper place for the Athnach would at first be by שׁשׁון; but according
to Accentuationssystem, xix. 6, it cannot stand there.)

Because the king's sceptre is a "sceptre of uprightness" (cf. [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)), because he loves righteousness
and consequently (fut. consec.) hates iniquity, therefore God, his God,
has anointed him with the oil of joy ([Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003); cf. on the construction [Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)) above his fellows. What is
intended is not the anointing to his office (cf. [Psa
89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021) with [Act
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)) as a dedication to a happy and
prosperous reign, but that God has poured forth upon him, more
especially on this his nuptial day, a superabundant joy, both outwardly
and in his spirit, such as He has bestowed upon no other king upon the
face of the earth. That he rises high above all those round about him is
self-evident; but even among his fellows of royal station, kings like
himself, he has no equal. It is a matter of question whether the writer
of the Epistle to the Hebrews ([Heb
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)) has taken the first ὁ Θεὸς of the
expression ὁ Θεὸς ὁ Θεὸς σου as a vocative. Apollinaris does not seem so
to have understood him; for he renders it τοὔνεκά σοι Θεὸς αὐτὸς ἑὴν
περίχηευεν ἀλοιφήν χηρίσας τερπωλῆς μετόχηοις παρὰ πάντας ἐλαίῳ, and the
Greek expositors also take ὁ Θεὸς here as a nominative.

[Psalms 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 45:8</span></span>

(Heb.: 45:9-10) The song of that which is lovely here reaches the height
towards which it aspires from the beginning. It has portrayed the lovely
king as a man, as a hero, and as a divine ruler; now it describes him as
a bridegroom on the day of his nuptials. The sequence of the thoughts
and of the figures corresponds to the history of the future. When
Babylon is fallen, and the hero riding upon a white horse, upon whom is
inscribed the name "King of kings and Lord of lords," shall have smitten
the hostile nations with the sword that goeth out of His mouth, there
then follows the marriage of the Lamb, for which the way has been
prepared by these avenging victories ([Rev
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007).). It is this final ga'mos which
the Psalm, as a song of the congregation, when the light was dawning
upon the Old Testament church, sees by anticipation, and as it were goes
forth to meet it, rejoicing to behold it afar off. The king's garments
are so thoroughly scented with costly spices that they seem to be
altogether woven out of them. And מנּי out of the ivory palaces enchant
him. This מנּי has been taken mostly, according to [Isa
59:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#018) (cf. also [Isa
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#006)), as a repetition of the מן: "out
of ivory palaces, whence they enchant thee." But this repetition serves
no special purpose. Although the apocopated plural in ı̂, instead of ı̂m,
is controvertible in Biblical Hebrew (vid., on [Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017); [Sa2
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044)), still there is the venture
that in this instance מנּי is equivalent to מנּים, the music of stringed
instruments ([Psa 150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004)); and if in
connection with any Psalm at all, surely we may venture in connection
with this Psalm, which in other respects has such an Aramaic or
North-Palestinian colouring, to acknowledge this apocope, here perhaps
chosen on account of the rhythm. In accordance with our historical
rendering of the Psalm, by the ivory palaces are meant the magnificent
residences of the king, who is the father of the bride. Out of the inner
recesses of these halls, inlaid within with ivory and consequently
resplendent with the most dazzling whiteness, the bridegroom going to
fetch his bride, as he approaches and enters them, is met by the sounds
of festive music: viewed in the light of the New Testament, it is that
music of citherns or harps which the seer ([Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002)) heard like the voice of many
waters and of mighty thunder resounding from heaven. The Old Testament
poet imagines to himself a royal citadel that in its earthly splendour
far surpasses that of David and of Solomon. Thence issues forth the
sound of festive music zealous, as it were, to bid its welcome to the
exalted king.

Even the daughters of kings are among his precious ones. יקר is the name
for that which is costly, and is highly prized and loved for its
costliness ([Pro 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#026)). The form
בּיקּרותיך resembles the form ליקּהת, [Pro
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017), in the appearance of the i and
supplanting the Sheba mobile, and also in the Dag. dirimens in the ק
(cf. עקּבי, [Gen 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017); מקּדשׁ, [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)).

(Note: It is the reading of Ben-Naphtali that has here, as an exception,
become the receptus; whereas Ben-Asher reads בּיקּרותיך. Saadia, Rashi,
Simson ha-Nakdan and others, who derive the word from בּקּר (to visit,
wait on), follow the receptus, comparing משׁיסּה, [Isa
42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024), in support of the form of
writing. Also in ליקּהת, [Pro 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017);
ויללת, [Jer 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#036); כּיתרון, [Ecc
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#013), the otherwise rejected
orthography of Ben-Naphtali (who pointed ויחלּוּ, [Job
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#021), לישׂראל, ויתּן, and the like)
is retained, as quite an exception, in the textus receptus. Vide S. D.
Luzzatto, Prolegomeni, cxcix., and Grammatica della Lingua Ebraica,
193.)

Now, however, he has chosen for himself his own proper wife, who is here
called by a name commonly used of Chaldaean and Persian queens, and, as
it seems (cf. on [Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030)), a
North-Palestinian name, שׁגל,

(Note: Bar-Ali says that in Babylonia Venus is called ודלפת שגל, vid.,
Lagarde, Gesammelte Abhandl. S. 17. Windischmann (Zoroastrische Studien,
S. 161) erroneously compares ćagar (pronounced tshagar) as a name of one
of the two wives of Zarathustra; but it happens that this is not the
name of the wife who holds the first rank (Neo-Persic padishāh-zen), but
of the second (ćakir-zen, bond-woman).)

instead of גּבירה. From the fact that, glittering with gold of Ophir,
she has taken the place of honour at the right hand of the king (נצּבה,
3rd praet., not part.), it is evident that her relationship to the king
is at this time just in the act of being completed. Who are those
daughters of kings and who is this queen standing in closest
relationship to the king? The former are the heathen nations converted
to Christ, and the latter is the Israel which is remarried to God in
Christ, after the fulness of the heathen is come in. It is only when
Israel is won to Him, after the fulness of the heathen is come in ([Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)), that the morning of the great
day will dawn, which this Psalm as a song of the church celebrates.
בּנות מלכים cannot certainly, like בּת־צר, be a personificative
designation of heathen kingdoms, although שׁגל is the believing Israel
conceived of as one person. It is actually kings' daughters as the
representatives of their nations that are intended; and the relation of
things is just the same here as in [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023), where, of the Israelitish
church of the future, it is predicted that kings shall be its
foster-fathers and their princesses its nursing-mothers.

[Psalms 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 45:10</span></span>

(Heb.: 45:11-13) The poet next turns to address the one bride of the
king, who is now honoured far above the kings' daughters. With שׁמעי he
implores for himself a hearing; by ראי yb ;gni he directs her eye
towards the new relationship into which she is just entering; by הטּי
אזנך he bespeaks her attention to the exhortation that follows; by בּת
he puts himself in a position in relation to her similar to that which
the teacher and preacher occupies who addresses the bridal pair at the
altar. She is to forget her people and her father's house, to sever her
natural, inherited, and customary relationships of life, both as regards
outward form and inward affections; and should the king desire her
beauty, to which he has a right, - for he, as being her husband ([Pe1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006)), and more especially as being
king, is her lord, - she is to show towards him her profoundest,
reverent devotion. ויתאו is a hypothetical protasis according to Ges.
128, 2, c. The reward of this willing submission is the universal homage
of the nations. It cannot be denied on the ground of syntax that וּבת־צר
admits of being rendered "and O daughter of Tyre" (Hitzig), - a
rendering which would also give additional support to our historical
interpretation of the Psalm, - although, apart from the one insecure
passage, [Jer 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#012) (Ew. 340, c),
there is no instance to be found in which a vocative with ו occurs ([Pro
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#005); [Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023); [Isa
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021)), when another vocative has not
already preceded it. But to what purpose would be, in this particular
instance, this apostrophe with the words בּת־צר, from which it looks as
though she were indebted to her ancestral house, and not to the king
whose own she is become, for the acts of homage which are prospectively
set before her? Such, however, is not the case; "daughter of Tyre" is a
subject-notion, which can all the more readily be followed by the
predicate in the plural, since it stands first almost like a nomin.
absol. The daughter, i.e., the population of Tyre - approaching with
presents shall they court (lit., stroke) thy face, i.e., meeting thee
bringing love, they shall seek to propitiate thy love towards
themselves. (פּני) חלּה corresponds to the Latin mulcere in the sense of
delenire; for חלה, Arab. ḥlâ (root חל, whence חלל, Arab. ḥll, solvit,
laxavit), means properly to be soft and tender, of taste to be sweet (in
another direction: to be lax, weak, sick); the Piel consequently means
to soften, conciliate, to make gentle that which is austere. Tyre,
however, is named only by way of example; עשׁירי עם is not an
apposition, but a continuation of the subject: not only Tyre, but in
general those who are the richest among each separate people or nation.
Just as אביוני אדם ([Isa 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#019)) are
the poorest of mankind, so עשׁירי עם are the richest among the peoples
of the earth.

As regards the meaning which the congregation or church has to assign to
the whole passage, the correct paraphrase of the words "and forget thy
people" is to be found even in the Targum: "Forget the evil deeds of the
ungodly among thy people, and the house of the idols which thou hast
served in the house of thy father." It is not indeed the hardened mass
of Israel which enters into such a loving relationship to God and to His
Christ, but, as prophecy from Deut. 32 onward declares, a remnant
thoroughly purged by desolating and sifting judgments and rescued,
which, in order to belong wholly to Christ, and to become the holy seed
of a better future ([Isa 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013)), must
cut asunder all bonds of connection with the stiff-neckedly unbelieving
people and paternal house, and in like manner to Abram secede from them.
This church of the future is fair; for she is expiated ([Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)), washed ([Isa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004)), and adorned ([Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)) by her God. And if she does
homage to Him, without looking back, He not only remains her own, but in
Him everything that is glorious belonging to the world also becomes her
own. Highly honoured by the King of kings, she is the queen among the
daughters of kings, to whom Tyre and the richest among peoples of every
order are zealous to express their loving and joyful recognition. Very
similar language to that used here of the favoured church of the Messiah
is used in [Psa 72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010). of the Messiah
Himself.

[Psalms 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 45:13</span></span>

(Heb.: 45:14-16) Now follows the description of the manner in which she
absolutely leaves her father's house, and richly adorned and with a
numerous train is led to the king and makes her entry into his palace;
and in connection therewith we must bear in mind that the poet combines
on the canvas of one picture (so to speak) things that lie wide apart
both as to time and place. He sees her first of all in her own chamber
(פּנימה, prop. towards the inside, then also in the inside, Ges. 90, 2,
b), and how there

(Note: In Babylonia these words, according to B. Jebamoth 77a, are cited
in favour of domesticity as a female virtue; in Palestine (במערבא), more
appropriately, [Gen 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#009). The lxx
Codd. Vat. et Sinait. has Ἐσεβών (Eusebius), which is meaningless; Cod.
Alex. correctly, ἔσωθεν (Italic, Jerome, Syriac, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Apollinaris).)

she is nothing but splendour (כּל־כּבוּדּה, prop. mere splendour, fem.
of כבוד as in [Eze 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041); cf. כּל־הבל,
[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006), mere nothingness), her
clothing is gold-interwoven textures (i.e., such as are interwoven with
threads of gold, or woven in squares or diamond patterns and adorned
with gold in addition). She, just like Esther ([Est
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012)), is being led to the king, her
husband, and this takes place לרקמות, in variegated, embroidered
garments (ל used just as adverbially as in [Ch2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021), להדרת), with a retinue of
virgins, her companions, who at the same time with herself become the
property of her spouse. According to the accents it is to be rendered:
virgines post eam, sociae ejus, adducuntur tibi, so that רעותיה is an
apposition. This is also in harmony with the allegorical interpretation
of the Psalm as a song of the church. The bride of the Lamb, whom the
writer of the Apocalypse beheld, arrayed in shining white linen
(byssus), which denotes her righteousness, just as here the variegated,
golden garments denote her glory, is not just one person nor even one
church, but the church of Israel together with the churches of the
Gentiles united by one common faith, which have taken a hearty and
active part in the restoration of the daughter of Zion. The procession
moves on with joy and rejoicing; it is the march of honour of the one
chosen one and of the many chosen together with her, of her friends or
companions; and to what purpose, is shown by the hopes which to the mind
of the poet spring up out of the contemplation of this scene.

[Psalms 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 45:16</span></span>

(Heb.: 45:17-18) All this has its first and most natural meaning in
relation to contemporary history but without being at variance with the
reference of the Psalm to the King Messiah, as used by the church. Just
as the kings of Judah and of Israel allowed their sons to share in their
dominion ([Sa2 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018); [Kg1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#007), cf. [Ch2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#023); [Kg1
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#015)), so out of the loving
relationship of the daughter of Zion and of the virgins of her train to
the King Messiah there spring up children, to whom the regal glory of
the house of David which culminates in Him is transferred, - a royal
race among which He divides the dominion of the earth (vid., [Psa
149:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001)); for He makes His own people
"kings and priests, and they shall reign on the earth" ([Rev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010)). Those children are to be
understood here which, according to [Psa
110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001), are born to Him as the dew
out of the womb of the morning's dawn - the every-youthful nation, by
which He conquers and rules the world. When, therefore, the poet says
that he will remember the name of the king throughout all generations,
this is based upon the twofold assumption, that he regards himself as a
member of an imperishable church (Sir. 37:25), and that he regards the
king as a person worthy to be praised by the church of every age.
Elsewhere Jahve's praise is called a praise that lives through all
generations ([Psa 102:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013); [Psa
135:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#013)); here the king is the object
of the everlasting praise of the church, and, beginning with the church,
of the nations also. First of all Israel, whom the psalmist represents,
is called upon to declare with praise the name of the Messiah from
generation to generation. But it does not rest with Israel alone. The
nations are thereby roused up to do the same thing. The end of the
covenant history is that Israel and the nations together praise this
love-worthy, heroic, and divine King: "His name shall endure for ever;
as long as the sun shall His name bud, and all nations shall be blessed
in Him (and) shall praise Him" ([Psa
72:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 46](psa046)

</div>
