<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa009)  [Next](psa011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 10:0</span></span>

Plaintive and Supplicatory Prayer under the Pressure of Heathenish Foes
at Home and Abroad

This Psalm and Ps 33 are the only ones that are anonymous in the First
book of the Psalms. But Ps 10 has something peculiar about it. The lxx
gives it with Ps 9 as one Psalm, and not without a certain amount of
warrant for so doing. Both are laid out in tetrastichs; only in the
middle portion of Ps 10 some three line strophes are mixed with the four
line. And assuming that the ק-strophe, with which Ps 9 closes, stands in
the place of a כ-strophe which one would look for after the י-strophe,
then Ps 10, beginning with ל, continues the order of the letters. At any
rate it begins in the middle of the alphabet, whereas Ps 9 begins at the
beginning. It is true the ל-strophe is then followed by strophes without
the letters that come next in order; but their number exactly
corresponds to the letters between ל and ק, ר, שׁ, ת with which the last
four strophes of the Psalm begin, viz., six, corresponding to the
letters מ, נ, ס, ע, פ, צ, which are not introduced acrostically. In
addition to this it is to be remarked that Ps 9 and [Psa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001) are most intimately related to
one another by the occurrence of rare expressions, as לעתּות בצּרה and
דּך; by the use of words in the same sense, as אנושׁ and גּוים; by
striking thoughts, as "Jahve doth not forget" and "Arise;" and by
similarities of style, as the use of the oratio directa instead of
obliqua, Ps 9:21; [Psa 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#013). And yet
it is impossible that the two Psalms should be only one. Notwithstanding
all their community of character they are also radically different. Ps 9
is a thanksgiving Psalm, Ps 10 is a supplicatory Psalm. In the latter
the personality of the psalmist, which is prominent in the former, keeps
entirely in the background. The enemies whose defeat Ps 9 celebrates
with thanksgiving and towards whose final removal it looks forward are
גּוים, therefore foreign foes; whereas in Ps 10 apostates and
persecutors of his own nation stand in the foreground, and the גוים are
only mentioned in the last two strophes. In their form also the two
Psalms differ insofar as Ps 10 has no musical mark defining its use, and
the tetrastich strophe structure of Ps 9, as we have already observed,
is not carried out with the same consistency in Ps 10. And is anything
really wanting to the perfect unity of Ps 9? If it is connected with Ps
10 and they are read together uno tenore, then the latter becomes a
tail-piece which disfigures the whole. There are only two things
possible: Ps 10 is a pendant to Ps 9 composed either by David himself,
or by some other poet, and closely allied to it by its continuance of
the alphabetical order. But the possibility of the latter becomes very
slight when we consider that Ps 10 is not inferior to Ps 9 in the
antiquity of the language and the characteristic nature of the thoughts.
Accordingly the mutual coincidences point to the same author, and the
two Psalms must be regarded as "two co-ordinate halves of one whole,
which make a higher unity" (Hitz.). That hard, dull, and tersely laconic
language of deep-seated indignation at moral abominations for which the
language has, as it were, no one word, we detect also elsewhere in some
Psalms of David and of his time, those Psalms, which we are accustomed
to designate as Psalms written in the indignant style (in grollendem
Stil).

[Psalms 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 10:1</span></span>

The Psalm opens with the plaintive inquiry, why Jahve tarries in the
deliverance of His oppressed people. It is not a complaining murmuring
at the delay that is expressed by the question, but an ardent desire
that God may not delay to act as it becomes His nature and His promise.
למּה, which belongs to both members of the sentence, has the accent on
the ultima, as e.g., before עזבתּני in [Psa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002), and before הרעתה in [Exo
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#022), in order that neither of the two
gutturals, pointed with a, should be lost to the ear in rapid speaking
(vid., on [Psa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008), and Luzzatto on
[Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002), נחה עליו).

(Note: According to the Masora למּה without Dag. is always Milra with
the single exception of [Job 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020), and
ימּה with Dag. is Milel; but, when the following closely connected word
begins with one of the letters אהע it becomes Milra, with five
exceptions, viz., [Psa 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006); [Sa1
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015); [Sa2
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#031) (three instances in which the
guttural of the second word has the vowel i), and [Sa2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#022), and [Jer
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018). In the Babylonian system of
pointing, למה is always written without Dag. and with the accent on the
penultimate, vid., Pinsker, Einleitung in das Babylonish-hebrishce
Punktationssystem, S. 182-184.)

For according to the primitive pronunciation (even before the Masoretic)
it is to be read: lam h Adonaj; so that consequently ה and א are
coincident. The poet asks why in the present hopeless condition of
affairs (on בצּרה vid., on [Psa 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010))
Jahve stands in the distance (בּרחוק, only here, instead of מרחוק), as
an idle spectator, and why does He cover (תּעלּים with orthophonic
Dagesh, in order that it may not be pronounced תּעלים), viz., His eyes,
so as not to see the desperate condition of His people, or also His ears
([Lam 3:56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056)) so as not to hear their
supplication. For by the insolent treatment of the ungodly the poor
burns with fear (Ges., Stier, Hupf.), not vexation (Hengst.). The
assault is a πύρωσις, [Pe1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012). The
verb דּלק which calls to mind דּלּקת, πυρετός, is perhaps chosen with
reference to the heat of feeling under oppression, which is the result
of the persecution, of the (בּו) דּלק אחריו of the ungodly. There is no
harshness in the transition from the singular to the plural, because עני
and רשׁע are individualising designations of two different classes of
men. The subject to יתּפשׁוּ is the עניּים, and the subject to חשׁבוּ is
the רשׁעים. The futures describe what usually takes place. Those who,
apart from this, are afflicted are held ensnared in the crafty and
malicious devices which the ungodly have contrived and plotted against
them, without being able to disentangle themselves. The punctuation,
which places Tarcha by זוּ, mistakes the relative and interprets it: "in
the plots there, which they have devised."

[Psalms 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 10:3</span></span>

The prominent features of the situation are supported by a detailed
description. The praett. express those features of their character that
have become a matter of actual experience. הלּל, to praise aloud,
generally with the accus., is here used with על of the thing which calls
forth praise. Far from hiding the shameful desire or passion ([Psa
112:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010)) of his soul, he makes it an
object and ground of high and sounding praise, imagining himself to be
above all restraint human or divine. Hupfeld translates wrongly: "and he
blesses the plunderer, he blasphemes Jahve." But the רשׁע who persecutes
the godly, is himself a בּצע a covetous or rapacious person; for such is
the designation (elsewhere with בּצע [Pro
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#019), or רע בּצע [Hab
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009)) not merely of one who "cuts off"
(Arab. bḍ‛), i.e., obtains unjust gain, by trading, but also by plunder,
πλεονέκτης. The verb בּרך (here in connection with Mugrash, as in [Num
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#020) with Tiphcha בּרך) never
directly signifies maledicere in biblical Hebrew as it does in the alter
Talmudic (whence בּרכּת השּׁם blasphemy, B. Sanhedrin 56a, and
frequently), but to take leave of any one with a benediction, and then
to bid farewell, to dismiss, to decline and abandon generally, [Job
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005), and frequently (cf. the word
remercier, abdanken; and the phrase "das Zeitliche segnen" = to depart
this life). The declaration without a conjunction is climactic, like
[Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004); [Amo
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#005); [Jer
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007). נאץ, properly to prick, sting,
is sued of utter rejection by word and deed.

(Note: Pasek stands between נאץ and יהוה, because to blaspheme God is a
terrible thought and not to be spoken of without hesitancy, cf. the
Pasek in [Psa 74:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#018); [Psa
89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052); [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024) ([Kg2
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#023)).)

In [Psa 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004), "the evil-doer according
to his haughtiness" (cf. [Pro 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018))
is nom. absol., and בּל־ידרשׁ אין אלהים (contrary to the accentuation)
is virtually the predicate to כּל־מזמּותיו. This word, which denotes the
intrigues of the ungodly, in [Psa
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002), has in this verse, the general
meaning: thoughts (from זמם, Arab. zmm, to join, combine), but not
without being easily associated with the secondary idea of that which is
subtly devised. The whole texture of his thoughts is, i.e., proceeds
from and tends towards the thought, that he (viz., Jahve, whom he does
not like to name) will punish with nothing (בּל the strongest form of
subjective negation), that in fact there is no God at all. This second
follows from the first; for to deny the existence of a living, acting,
all-punishing (in one word: a personal) God, is equivalent to denying
the existence of any real and true God whatever (Ewald).

[Psalms 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 10:5</span></span>

This strophe, consisting of only three lines, describes his happiness
which he allows nothing to disturb. The signification: to be lasting
(prop. stiff, strong) is secured to the verb חיל (whence חיל) by [Job
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021). He takes whatever ways he
chooses, they always lead to the desired end; he stands fast, he neither
stumbles nor goes astray, cf. [Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001). The Chethמb דרכו (דּרכו) has no
other meaning than that give to it by the Kerמ (cf. [Psa
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006); [Psa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)). Whatever might cast a cloud
over his happiness does not trouble him: neither the judgments of God,
which are removed high as the heavens out of his sight, and consequently
do not disturb his conscience (cf. [Psa
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005), [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012); and the opposite, [Psa
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#023)), nor his adversaries whom he
bloweth upon contemptuously. מרום is the predicate: altissime remota.
And הפיח בּ, to breathe upon, does not in any case signify: actually to
blow away or down (to express which נשׁב or נשׁף would be used), but
either to "snub," or, what is more appropriate to [Psa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005), to blow upon them disdainfully,
to puff at them, like הפּיח in [Mal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013), and flare rosas (to despise the
roses) in Prudentius. The meaning is not that he drives his enemies away
without much difficulty, but that by his proud and haughty bearing he
gives them to understand how little they interfere with him.

[Psalms 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 10:6</span></span>

Then in his boundless carnal security he gives free course to his wicked
tongue. That which the believer can say by reason of his fellowship with
God, בּל־אמּוט ([Psa 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007); [Psa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)), is said by him in godless
self-confidence. He looks upon himself in age after age, i.e., in the
endless future, as אשׁר לא ברע, i.e., as one who (אשׁר as in [Isa
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020)) will never be in evil case (ברע
as in [Exo 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#019); [Sa2
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#008)). It might perhaps also be
interpreted according to [Zac 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#020),
[Zac 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023) (vid., Kצhler, in loc.): in
all time to come (it will come to pass) that I am not in misfortune. But
then the personal pronoun (אני or הוּא) ought not be omitted; whereas
with our interpretation it is supplied from אמּוט, and there is no need
to supply anything if the clause is taken as an apposition: in all time
to come he who.... In connection with such unbounded self-confidence his
mouth is full of אלה, cursing, execratio (not perjury, perjurium, a
meaning the word never has), מרמות, deceit and craft of every kind, and
תּך, oppression, violence. And that which he has under his tongue, and
consequently always in readiness for being put forth ([Psa
140:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#004), cf. [Psa
66:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#017)), is trouble for others, and in
itself matured wickedness. Paul has made use of this [Psa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007) in his contemplative description
of the corruptness of mankind, [Rom
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#014).

[Psalms 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 10:8</span></span>

The ungodly is described as a lier in wait; and one is reminded by it of
such a state of anarchy, as that described in [Hos
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009) for instance. The picture fixes
upon one simple feature in which the meanness of the ungodly culminates;
and it is possible that it is intended to be taken as emblematical
rather than literally. חצר (from חצר to surround, cf. Arab. hdr, hṣr,
and especially hdr) is a farm premises walled in (Arab. hadar, hadâr,
hadâra), then losing the special characteristic of being walled round it
comes to mean generally a settled abode (with a house of clay or stone)
in opposition to a roaming life in tents (cf. [Lev
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#031); [Gen
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016)). In such a place where men are
more sure of falling into his hands than in the open plain, he lies in
wait (ישׁב, like Arab. q‛d lh, subsedit = insidiatus est ei), murders
unobserved him who had never provoked his vengeance, and his eyes להלכה
יצפּנוּ. צפה to spie, [Psa 37:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#032),
might have been used instead of צפן; but צפן also obtains the meaning,
to lie in ambush ([Psa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#007); [Pro
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#011), [Pro
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#018)) from the primary notion of
restraining one's self (Arab. ḍfn, fut. i. in Beduin Arabic: to keep
still, to be immoveably lost in thought, vid., on [Job
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)), which takes a transitive turn
in צפן "to conceal." חלכה, the dative of the object, is pointed just as
though it came from חיל: Thy host, i.e., Thy church, O Jahve. The pausal
form accordingly is חלכה with Segol, in [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014), not with Ṣere as in incorrect
editions. And the appeal against this interpretation, which is found in
the plur. חלכאים [Psa 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#010), is set
aside by the fact that this plural is taken as a double word: host (חל =
חיל = חיל as in [Oba 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)) of the
troubled ones (כּאים, not as Ben-Labrat supposes, for נכאים, but from
כּאה weary, and mellow and decayed), as the Ker (which is followed by
the Syriac version) and the Masora direct, and accordingly it is pointed
חלכּאים with Ṣere. The punctuation therefore sets aside a word which was
unintelligible to it, and cannot be binding on us. There is a verb הלך,
which, it is true, does not occur in the Old Testament, but in the
Arabic, from the root Arab. ḥk, firmus fuit, firmum fecit (whence also
Arab. ḥkl, intrans. to be firm, ferm, i.e., closed), it gains the
signification in reference to colour: to be dark (cognate with חכל,
whence חכלילי) and is also transferred to the gloom and blackness of
misfortune.

(Note: Cf. Samachschari's Golden Necklaces, Proverb 67, which Fleischer
translates: "Which is blacker: the plumage of the raven, which is black
as coal, or thy life, O stranger among strangers?" The word "blacker" is
here expressed by Arab. ahlaku, just as the verb Arab. halika, with its
infinitives halak or hulkat and its derivatives is applied to sorrow and
misery.)

From this an abstract is formed חלך or חלך (like חפשׁ): blackness,
misfortune, or also of a defective development of the senses:
imbecility; and from this an adjective חלכּה = חלכּי, or also (cf.
חפשׁי, עלפּה [Eze 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#015) = one in a
condition of languishing, עלף) חלכּה = חלכּי, plur. חלכּאים, after the
form דּוּדאים, from דּוּדי, Ew. 189, g.

[Psalms 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 10:9</span></span>

The picture of the רשׁע, who is become as it were a beast of prey, is
now worked out further. The lustrum of the lion is called סך [Jer
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038), or סכּה [Job
38:40](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#040) : a thicket, from סכך, which
means both to interweave and to plait over = to cover (without any
connection with שׂך a thorn, Arab. shôk, a thistle). The figure of the
lion is reversed in the second line, the עני himself being compared to
the beast of prey and the רשׁע to a hunter who drives him into the
pit-fall and when he has fallen in hastens to drag him away (משׁך, as in
[Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003); [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022)) in, or by means of ([Hos
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#004), [Job
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001)), his net, in which he has become
entangled.

[Psalms 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 10:10</span></span>

The comparison to the lion is still in force here and the description
recurs to its commencement in the second strophe, by tracing back the
persecution of the ungodly to its final cause. Instead of the Chethb
ודכה (ודכה perf. consec.), the Kerמ reads ידכּה more in accordance with
the Hebrew use of the tenses. [Job
38:40](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#040) is the rule for the
interpretation. The two futures depict the settled and familiar lying in
wait of the plunderer. True, the Kal דּכה in the signification "to
crouch down" finds no support elsewhere; but the Arab. dakka to make
even (cf. Arab. rṣd, firmiter inhaesit loco, of the crouching down of
beasts of prey, of hunters, and of foes) and the Arab. dagga, compared
by Hitzig, to move stealthily along, to creep, and dugjeh a hunter's
hiding-place exhibit synonymous significations. The ταπεινώσει αὐτὸν of
the lxx is not far out of the way. And one can still discern in it the
assumption that the text is to be read ישׁח ודכה: and crushed he sinks
(Aquila: ὁ δὲ λασθεὶς καμφθήσεται); but even דּכה is not found
elsewhere, and if the poet meant that, why could he not have written
דּכה? (cf. moreover [Jdg 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#027)). If
דּכה is taken in the sense of a position in which one is the least
likely to be seen, then the first two verbs refer to the sculker, but
the third according to the usual schema (as e.g., [Psa
124:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#005)) is the predicate to חלכּאים
(חלכּאים) going before it. Crouching down as low as possible he lies on
the watch, and the feeble and defenceless fall into his strong ones,
עצוּמיו, i.e., claws. Thus the ungodly slays the righteous, thinking
within himself: God has forgotten, He has hidden His face, i.e., He does
not concern Himself about these poor creatures and does not wish to know
anything about them (the denial of the truth expressed in [Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013), [Psa
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)); He has in fact never been one
who sees, and never will be. These two thoughts are blended; עב with the
perf. as in [Job 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#003), and the
addition of לנצח (cf. [Psa 94:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007))
denies the possibility of God seeing now any more than formerly, as
being an absolute absurdity. The thought of a personal God would disturb
the ungodly in his doings, he therefore prefers to deny His existence,
and thinks: there is only fate and fate is blind, only an absolute and
it has no eyes, only a notion and that cannot interfere in the affairs
of men.

[Psalms 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 10:12</span></span>

The six strophes, in which the consecutive letters from מ to צ are
wanting, are completed, and now the acrostic strophes begin again with
ק. In contrast to those who have no God, or only a lifeless idol, the
psalmist calls upon his God, the living God, to destroy the appearance
that He is not an omniscient Being, by arising to action. We have more
than one name of God used here; אל is a vocative just as in [Psa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001); [Psa
83:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#002); [Psa
139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017), [Psa
139:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#023). He is to lift up His hand in
order to help and to punish (נשׂא יד, whence comes the imperat. נשׂא =
שׂא, cf. נסה [Psa 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007), like שׁלח יד
[Psa 138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007) and נטה יד [Exo
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#005) elsewhere). Forget not is
equivalent to: fulfil the לא שׁכח of [Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013), put to shame the שׁכח אל of the
ungodly, [Psa 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#011)! Our translation
follows the Kerמ ענוים. That which is complained of in [Psa
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003), [Psa
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004) is put in the form of a question
to God in [Psa 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#013) : wherefore
(על־מה, instead of which we find על־מה in [Num
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#032); [Jer
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#011), because the following words
begin with letters of a different class) does it come to pass, i.e., is
it permitted to come to pass? On the perf. in this interrogative clause
vid., [Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003). מדּוּע inquires the
cause, למּה the aim, and על־מה the motive, or in general the reason: on
what ground, since God's holiness can suffer no injury to His honour? On
לא תדרשׁ with כּי, the oratio directa instead of obliqua, vid., on Ps
9:21.

[Psalms 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 10:14</span></span>

Now comes the confirmation of his cry to God: It is with Him entirely
different from what the ungodly imagine. They think that He will not
punish; but He does see (cf. [Ch2
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#022)), and the psalmist knows and
confesses it: ראתה (defective = ראיתה [Psa
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#022)), Thou hast seen and dost see
what is done to Thine own, what is done to the innocent. This he
supports by a conclusion a genere ad speciem thus: the trouble which is
prepared for others, and the sorrow (כּעס, as in [Ecc
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#003)) which they cause them, does not
escape the all-seeing eye of God, He notes it all, to give it into (lay
it in) His hand. "To give anything into any one's hand" is equivalent
to, into his power ([Kg1 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#028), and
frequently); but here God gives (lays) the things which are not to be
administered, but requited, into His own hand. The expression is meant
to be understood according to [Psa
56:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#009), cf. [Isa
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#016) : He is observant of the
afflictions of His saints, laying them up in His hand and preserving
them there in order, in His own time, to restore them to His saints in
joy, and to their enemies in punishment. Thus, therefore, the feeble and
helpless (read חלכּה or חלכּה; according to the Masoretic text חלכה Thy
host, not חלכה, which is contrary to the character of the form, as
pausal form for חלכה) can leave to Him, viz., all his burden (יהבו, [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023)), everything that vexes and
disquiets him. Jahve has been and will be the Helper of the fatherless.
יתום stands prominent by way of emphasis, like אותם [Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013), and Bakius rightly remarks in
voce pupilli synecdoche est, complectens omnes illos, qui humanis
praesidiis destituuntur.

[Psalms 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 10:15</span></span>

The desire for Jahve's interposition now rises again with fresh
earnestness. It is a mistake to regard דּרשׁ and מצא as correlative
notions. In the phrase to seek and not find, when used of that which has
totally disappeared, we never have דּרשׁ, but always בּקּשׁ, [Psa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036); [Isa
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#012); [Jer
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#020), and frequently. The verb דּרשׁ
signifies here exactly the same as in [Psa
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004), [Psa
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#013), and [Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013) : "and the wicked (nom. absol. as
in [Psa 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004)) - mayst Thou punish his
wickedness, mayst Thou find nothing more of it." It is not without a
meaning that, instead of the form of expression usual elsewhere ([Psa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036); [Job
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#008)), the address to Jahve is
retained: that which is no longer visible to the eye of God, not merely
of man, has absolutely vanished out of existence. This absolute conquest
of evil is to be as surely looked for, as that Jahve's universal
kingship, which has been an element of the creed of God's people ever
since the call and redemption of Israel ([Exo
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#018)), cannot remain without being
perfectly and visibly realised. His absolute and eternal kingship must
at length be realised, even in all the universality and endless duration
foretold in [Zac 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009); [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014), [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015). Losing himself in the
contemplation of this kingship, and beholding the kingdom of God, the
kingdom of good, as realised, the psalmist's vision stretches beyond the
foes of the church at home to its foes in general; and, inasmuch as the
heathen in Israel and the heathen world outside of Israel are blended
together into one to his mind, he comprehends them all in the collective
name of גּוים, and sees the land of Jahve ([Lev
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023)), the holy land, purified of all
oppressors hostile to the church and its God. It is the same that is
foretold by Isaiah ([Isa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)), Nahum
([Nah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)), and in other passages,
which, by the anticipation of faith, here stands before the mind of the
suppliant as an accomplished fact - viz. the consummation of the
judgment, which has been celebrated in the hymnic half (Ps 9) of this
double Psalm as a judgment already executed in part.

[Psalms 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 10:17</span></span>

Still standing on this eminence from which he seems to behold the end,
the poet basks in the realisation of that which has been obtained in
answer to prayer. The ardent longing of the meek and lowly sufferers for
the arising, the parusia of Jahve ([Isa
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#008)), has now been heard by Him, and
that under circumstances which find expression in the following futt.,
which have a past signification: God has given and preserved to their
hearts the right disposition towards Himself (הכין, as in [Psa
78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008); [Job
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013), Sir. 2:17 ἑτοιμάζειν καρδίας,
post-biblical כּוּן

(Note: B. Berachoth 31a: the man who prays must direct his heart
steadfastly towards God (יכוּן לבּו לשּׁמים).)

and to be understood according to [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003); [Ch2
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#033), cf. לב נכון [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012); [Psa
78:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037); it is equivalent to "the single
eye" in the language of the New Testament), just as, on the other hand,
He has set His ear in the attitude of close attention to their prayer,
and even to their most secret sighings (הקשׁיב with אזן, as in [Pro
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002); to stiffen the ear, from קשׁב,
Arab. qasuba, root קש to be hard, rigid, firm from which we also have
קשׁה, Arab. qsâ, קשׁה, Arab. qsh, qsn, cf. on [Isa
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)). It was a mutual relation, the
design of which was finally and speedily to obtain justice for the
fatherless and oppressed, yea crushed, few, in order that mortal man of
the earth may no longer (בּל, as in [Isa
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#021), and in post-biblical Hebrew בּל
and לבל instead of פּן) terrify. From the parallel conclusion, Ps
9:20-21, it is to be inferred that אנושׁ does not refer to the oppressed
but to the oppressor, and is therefore intended as the subject; and then
the phrase מן־הארץ also belongs to it, as in [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014), people of the world, [Psa
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014) boar of the woods, whereas in
[Pro 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#014) מארץ belongs to the verb
(to devour from off the earth). It is only in this combination that
מן־הארץ אנושׁ forms with לערץ a significant paronomasia, by contrasting
the conduct of the tyrant with his true nature: a mortal of the earth,
i.e., a being who, far removed from any possibility of vying with the
God who is in heaven, has the earth as his birth-place. It is not
מן־האדמה, for the earth is not referred to as the material out of which
man is formed, but as his ancestral house, his home, his bound, just as
in the expression of John ὁ ὢν ἐκ τῆς γῆς, [Joh
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031) (Lat. ut non amplius terreat homo
terrenus). A similar play of words was attempted before in [Psa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020) אנושׁ אל־יעז. The Hebrew verb ערץ
signifies both to give way to fear, [Deu
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#021), and to put in fear, [Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019), [Isa
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021); [Isa
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012). It does mean "to defy, rebel
against," although it might have this meaning according to the Arabic
‛rḍ (to come in the way, withstand, according to which Wetzstein
explains ערוּץ [Job 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#006), like Arab.
‛irḍ, "a valley that runs slantwise across a district, a gorge that
blocks up the traveller's way"

(Note: Zeitschrift fr Allgem. Erdkunde xviii. (1865) 1, S. 30.)).

It is related to Arab. ‛rṣ, to vibrate, tremble (e.g., of lightning).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 11](psa011)

</div>
