<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa059)  [Next](psa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 60:0</span></span>

Drill Psalm after a Lost Battle

This last of the Elohimic Michtammı̂m of David is dated from the time of
the Syro-Ammonitish war: When he (David) waged war (Hiph. of נצה, to
pull, to seize by the hair) with (את like על in [Num
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#009); according to Ben-Asher, with
Segol instead of Makkeph here, as in [Psa
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005), [Pro
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012), three passages which are noted
by the Masora) Aram of the two rivers (the people of the land of the
twin streams, Mesopotami'a) and with Aram Zobah (probably between the
Euphrates and Orontes north-east of Damascus), and Joab returned
(ויּשׁב, transition from the infinitive to the finite verb, Ges. 132,
rem. 2) and smote Edom in the Valley of Salt (the Edomitish Ghor, i.e.,
the salt plain, some ten miles wide, at the southern extremity of the
Dead Sea) with twelve thousand men. This historical inscription comes
from an historical work which gave the Psalm in this connection. It is
not take out of any of the histories that have been preserved to us. For
both in [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013) and in [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012) we find the number eighteen
thousand instead of twelve. In the former passage, in which עשׂה שׁם is
substantially equivalent to the Roman triumphum agere, we have to read
את־עדם after the inscription of our Psalm instead of את־ארם. It is,
however, still more probable that the words ויּך את־עדם (lxx ἐπάταξε τὴν
Ἰδουμαίαν) have accidentally fallen out. The fact that here in the Psalm
the victory over the Edomites is ascribed to Joab, in the Chronicles to
Abshai (Abishai), and in 2 Sam. to David, is a difference which may
easily be reconciled by the consideration that the army of David was
under the supreme command of Joab, and this battle in the Valley of Salt
was fought against the Edomites by Joab indirectly through his brother
(cf. [Sa2 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#010)).

The inscription carries us into the time of the greatest, longest, and
most glorious of David's wars, that with the Ammonites, which, so far as
these were concerned, ended in the second year in the conquest of Rabbah
(vid., [Psa 21:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)), and with their
Aramaean allies, among whom Hadadezer, the ruler of the powerful kingdom
of Zobah, was defeated in the first year at Chlam on the other side the
Jordan. Then when, in the second year, he endeavoured to fortify himself
anew in the districts on the banks of the Euphrates, he was completely
subjugated together with the Syrians who had come to his assistance.
Thus are the accounts of Aramaean wars related in 2 Sam. 8 and [Sa2
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#001) to be combined. Whilst, now, the
arms of David were making such triumphant progress in the north, the
Edomites in the south had invaded the land which was denuded of troops,
and here a new war, which jeopardized all the results that had been
gained in the north, awaited the victorious army. [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001) refers more especially to this
Edomitish war. Hengstenberg is wrong when he infers from the inscription
that it was composed after the victory in the Valley of Salt and before
the conquest of Idumaea. The inscription only in a general way gives to
the Psalm its historical setting. It was composed before the victory in
the Valley of Salt, and presupposes the Israelitish south had been at
that time grievously laid waste by the Edomites, against whom they were
unable to oppose an adequate force. We may also infer from other
indications how the occupation of the neighbouring and brother-country
by the Edomites called for vengeance against them; vid., on Ps 44. That
Korahitic Psalm may have been composed after the Davidic Psalm, and is
designedly, by [Psa 60:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#010), brought
into relationship with it. In the cento Psalms 108:7-14 correspond to
Psalms 60:7-14.

The Michtam character of the Psalm manifests itself both in the fact
that a divine oracle is unfolded in it, and also in the fact that the
language of complaint, "Elohim, Thou hast cast us off" (cf. [Psa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010)), is repeated as its favourite
utterance. Concerning על־שׁוּשׁן עדוּת, after "A Lily is the testimony"
(or "The Lily of the testimony"), vid., on [Psa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001). The addition of ללמּד is to be
interpreted according to ללמּד בּני־יהוּדה קשׁת, [Sa2
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#018) : the song is thereby appointed
to be sung in connection with the practice of the bow. The elegy on Saul
and Jonathan was suited to this by reason of the praise which is therein
given to the bow of Jonathan, the favourite weapon of that brave
warrior, and by the indirect remembrance of the skilful Philistine
archers, who brought a disgrace upon the name of Israel in the battle on
Gilboa, that needed as speedily as possible to be wiped out. [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), this most martial of all the
Psalms, is also a song at the practice of arms, which was designed to
inflame and to hallow the patriotic martial ardour of the young men when
they were being exercised.

Hengstenberg and others, who reckon according to the Masoretic verses,
divide the Psalm into three strophes of four Masoretic verses each. The
fact that the use made of [Psa 60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)
in [Psa 108:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001) begins with [Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007), למען יחלצון, lends some colour
to this division, which is also strengthened by the Sela. Nevertheless
[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006) and [Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007) belong inseparably together.

[Psalms 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 60:1</span></span>

This first strophe contains complaint and prayer; and establishes the
prayer by the greatness of the need and Israel's relationship to God.
The sense in which פּרצתּנוּ is intended becomes clear from [Sa2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020), where David uses this word of
the defeat of the Philistines, and explains it figuratively. The word
signifies to break through what has hitherto been a compact mass, to
burst, blast, scatter, disperse. The prayer is first of all timidly
uttered in תּשׁובב לנוּ in the form of a wish; then in רפה ([Psa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004)) and הושׁיעה ([Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007)) it waxes more and more eloquent.
שׁובב ל here signifies to grant restoration (like הניח ל, to give rest;
[Psa 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003); [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)). The word also signifies to
make a turn, to turn one's self away, in which sense, however, it cannot
be construed with ל. On פּצמתּהּ Dunash has already compared Arab. fṣm,
rumpere, scindere, and Mose ha-Darshan the Targumic פּצּם = פרע, [Jer
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#014). The deep wounds which the
Edomites had inflicted upon the country, are after all a wrathful
visitation of God Himself - reeling or intoxicating wine, or as יין
תּרעלה (not יין), properly conceived of, is: wine which is sheer
intoxication (an apposition instead of the genitive attraction, vid., on
[Isa 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020)), is reached out by Him to
His people. The figure of the intoxicating cup has passed over from the
Psalms of David and of Asaph to the prophets (e.g., [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), [Isa
51:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#021)). A kindred thought is expressed
in the proverb: Quem Deus perdere vult, eum dementat. All the preterites
as far as השׁקיתנוּ ([Psa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005)) glance
back plaintively at that which has been suffered.

But [Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006) cannot be thus intended;
for to explain with Ewald and Hitzig, following the lxx, "Thou hast set
up a banner for those who reverence Thee, not for victory, but for
flight," is inadmissible, notwithstanding the fact that מפּני קשׁת nuwc
is a customary phrase and the inscribed ללמּד is favourable to the
mention of the bow. For (1) The words, beginning with נתתּ, do not sound
like an utterance of something worthy of complaint - in this case it
ought at least to have been expressed by עך להתנוסס (only for flight,
not for victory); (2) it is more than improbable that the bow, instead
of being called קשׁת (feminine of the Arabic masculine kaus), is here,
according to an incorrect Aramaic form of writing, called קשׁט, whereas
this word in its primary form קשׁט ([Pro
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#021)) corresponds to the Aramaic
קוּשׁטא not in the signification "a bow," but (as it is also intended in
the Targum of our passage) in the signification "truth" (Arabic ḳisṭ of
strict unswerving justice, root קש, to be hard, strong, firm; just as,
vice versa, the word ṣidḳ, coming from a synonymous root, is equivalent
to "truth"). We therefore take the perfect predication, like [Psa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004), as the foundation of the prayer
which follows: Thou hast given those who fear Thee a banner to muster
themselves (sich aufpanieren), i.e., to raise themselves as around a
standard or like a standard, on account of the truth - help then, in
order that Thy beloved ones may be delivered, with Thy right hand, and
answer me. This rendering, in accordance with which [Psa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006) expresses the good cause of
Israel in opposition to its enemies, is also favoured by the heightened
effect of the music, which comes in here, as Sela prescribes. The
reflexive התנוסס here therefore signifies not, as Hithpal. of נוּס, "to
betake one's self to flight," but "to raise one's self" - a
signification on behalf of which we cannot appeal to [Zac
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016), where מתנוססות is apparently
equivalent to מתנוצצות "sparkling," but which here results from the
juxtaposition with נס (cf. נסה, [Psa
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007)), inasmuch as נס itself, like
Arab. naṣṣun, is so called from נסס, Arab. naṣṣ, to set up, raise,
whether it be that the Hithpo. falls back upon the Kal of the verb or
that it is intended as a denominative (to raise one's self as a banner,
sich aufpanieren).

(Note: This expression wel illustrates the power of the German language
in coining words, so that the language critically dealt with may be
exactly reproduced to the German mind. The meaning will at once be clear
when we inform our readers that Panier is a banner of standard; the
reflexive denominative, therefore, in imitation of the Hebrew, sich
aufpanieren signifies to "up-standard one's self," to raise one's self
up after the manner of a standard, which being "done into English" may
mean to rally (as around a standard). We have done our best above
faithfully to convey the meaning of the German text, and we leave our
readers to infer from this illustration the difficulties with which
translators have not unfrequently to contend. - Tr.\])

It is undeniable that not merely in later (e.g., [Neh
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#015)), but also even in older Hebrew,
מפּני denotes the reason and motive (e.g., [Deu
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#020)). Moreover Ps 44 is like a
commentary on this מפּני קשׁט, in which the consciousness of the people
of the covenant revelation briefly and comprehensively expresses itself
concerning their vocation in the world. Israel looks upon its battle
against the heathen, as now against Edom, as a rising for the truth in
accordance with its mission. By reason of the fact and of the
consciousness which are expressed in [Psa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006), arises the prayer in [Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007), that Jahve would interpose to
help and to rescue His own people from the power of the enemy. ימינך is
instrumental (vid., on [Psa 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)). It
is to be read ענני according to the Ker, as in [Psa
108:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#007), instead of עננוּ; so that here
the king of Israel is speaking, who, as he prays, stands in the place of
his people.

[Psalms 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 60:6</span></span>

A divine utterance, promising him victory, which he has heard, is
expanded in this second strophe. By reason of this he knows himself to
be in the free and inalienable possession of the land, and in opposition
to the neighbouring nations, Moab, Edom, and Philistia, to be the
victorious lord to whom they must bow. The grand word of promise in [Sa2
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#009). is certainly sufficient in itself
to make this feeling of certainty intelligible, and perhaps [Psa
60:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008) are only a pictorial
reproduction of that utterance; but it is also possible that at the time
when Edom threatened the abandoned bordering kingdom, David received an
oracle from the high priest by means of the Urim and Thummim, which
assured him of the undiminished and continued possession of the Holy
Land and the sovereignty over the bordering nations. That which God
speaks "in His holiness" is a declaration or a promise for the sure
fulfilment and inviolability of which He pledges His holiness; it is
therefore equal to an oath "by His holiness" ([Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036); [Amo
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#002)). The oracle does not follow in a
direct form, for it is not God who speaks (as Olshausen thinks), to whom
the expression אעלזה is unbecoming, nor is it the people (as De Wette
and Hengstenberg), but the king, since what follows refers not only to
the districts named, but also to their inhabitants. כּי might have stood
before אעלזה, but without it the mode of expression more nearly
resembles the Latin me exultaturum esse (cf. [Psa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012)). Shechem in the centre of the
region on this side the Jordan, and the valley of Succoth in the heart
of the region on the other side, from the beginning; for there is not
only a \[Arab.\] sâkût (the name both of the eminence and of the
district) on the west side of the Jordan south of Beisn (Scythopolis),
but there must also have been another on the other side of the Jordan
([Gen 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017)., [Jdg
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#004).) which has not as yet been
successfully traced. It lay in the vicinity of Jabbok (ez-Zerka), about
in the same latitude with Shechem (Sichem), south-east of Scythopolis,
where Estori ha-Parchi contends that he had found traces of it not far
from the left bank of the Jordan. [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027) gives some information
concerning the עמק (valley) of Succoth. The town and the valley belonged
to the tribe of Gad. Gilead, side by side with Manasseh, [Psa
60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009), comprehends the districts
belonging to the tribes of Gad and Reuben. As far as [Psa
60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009), therefore, free dominion in the
cis-and trans-Jordanic country is promised to David. The proudest
predicates are justly given to Ephraim and Judah, the two chief tribes;
the former, the most numerous and powerful, is David's helmet (the
protection of his head), and Judah his staff of command (מחקק, the
command-giving = staff of command, as in [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010); [Num
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#018)); for Judah, by virtue of the
ancient promise, is the royal tribe of the people who are called to the
dominion of the world. This designation of Judah as the king's staff or
sceptre and the marshal's baton shows that it is the king who is
speaking, and not the people. To him, the king, who has the promise, are
Joab, Edom, and Philistia subject, and will continue so. Joab the
boastful serves him as a wash-basin;

(Note: A royal attendant, the tasht-dâr, cup-or wash-basin-bearer,
carried the wash-basin for the Persian king both when in battle and on a
journey (vid., Spiegel, Avesta ii. LXIX). Moab, says the Psalmist, not
merely waits upon him with the wash-basin, but himself serves as such to
him.)

Edom the crafty and malicious is forcibly taken possession of by him and
obliged to submit; and Philistia the warlike is obliged to cry aloud
concerning him, the irresistible ruler. סיר רחץ is a wash-pot or basin
in distinction from a seething-pot, which is also called סיר. The
throwing of a shoe over a territory is a sign of taking forcible
possession, just as the taking off of the shoe (חליצה) is a sign of the
renunciation of one's claim or right: the shoe is in both instances the
symbol of legal possession.

(Note: The sandal or the shoe, I as an object of Arab. wt'̣, of treading
down, oppressing, signifies metaphorically, (1) a man that is weak and
incapable of defending himself against oppression, since one says, ma
kuntu na‛lan, I am no shoe, i.e., no man that one can tread under his
feet; (2) a wife (quae subjicitur), since one says, g'alaa‛ na‛lahu, he
has taken off his shoe, i.e., cast off his wife (cf. Lane under Arab.
ḥiḏa'â', which even signifies a shoe and a wife). II As an instrument of
Arab. wṭ‛, tropically of the act of oppressing and of reducing to
submission, the Arab. wa‛l serves as a symbol of subjugation to the
dominion of another. Rosenmller (Das alte und neue Morgenland, No. 483)
shows that the Abyssinian kings, at least, cast a shoe upon anything as
a sign of taking forcible possession. Even supposing this usage is based
upon the above passage of the Psalms, it proves, however, that a people
thinking and speaking after the Oriental type associated this meaning
with the casting of a shoe upon anything. - Fleischer. Cf. Wetzstein's
Excursus at the end of this volume.)

The rendering of the last line, with Hitzig and Hengstenberg: "exult
concerning me, O Philistia," i.e., hail me, though compelled to do so,
as king, is forbidden by the עלי, instead of which we must have looked
for לי. The verb רוּע certainly has the general signification "to break
out into a loud cry," and like the Hiph. (e.g., [Isa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004)) the Hithpal. can also be used of
a loud outcry at violence.

[Psalms 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 60:9</span></span>

The third strophe reverts to prayer; but the prayer now breathes more
freely with a self-conscious courage for the strife. The fortified city
(עיר מצור) is not Rabbath Ammon; but, as becomes evident from the
parallel member of the verse and [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007), the Idumaean chief city of Sela'
(סלע) or Petra (vid., Knobel on [Gen
36:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#042), cf. [Psa
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022); [Ch2
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#005); [Ch2
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005) together with [Psa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005)). The wish: who will conduct me =
Oh that one would conduct me (Ges. 136, 1)! expresses a martial desire,
joyful at the prospect of victory; concerning מי נחני, quis perduxerit
me, vid., on [Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003). What follows
is not now to be rendered: Not Thou (who but Thou), Elohim,
who...(Hitzig) - for in order to have been understood thus and not as in
[Psa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003), [Psa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010), the poet could not have omitted
אשׁר - on the contrary, the interrogatory הלא is the foundation on which
the supplicatory הבה is raised. The king of Israel is hard pressed in
the battle, but he knows that victory comes from above, from the God who
has hitherto in anger refused it to His people, inasmuch as He has given
power to Edom to break through the defensive forces of Israel (vid.,
[Psa 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010)). עזרת (not עזרת = עזרה)
is, as in [Psa 108:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#013), equivalent to
עזרתה. The view that it is equal to עזרתי, the suffix being cast away,
is not confirmed in this instance, vid., on [Psa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006), cf. [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003). How vain is human succour, has
been seen only very recently in the case of the kings of Zobah and
Ammon, who have succumbed in spite of their confederates. Israel prays
for its victorious power from above, and also obtains it thence, as is
most confidently expressed in v. 14. עשׂה חיל, to do valiantly, to show
valour, is equivalent to: to be victorious, as in [Psa
118:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016). In God does Israel conquer,
and God, who is in Israel, will by means of Israel tread down Edom in
accordance with its deserts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 61](psa061)

</div>
