<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa058)  [Next](psa060) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 59](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 59:0</span></span>

Prayer of an innocent Man Whom Men Are Trying to Take

This Michtam, after the melody Al-tashcheth, coinciding with [Psa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005) and [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007) in the figure used in [Psa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008), is the earliest among the
Davidic Psalms which are dated from the time of Saul's persecution. When
Saul sent and they (those who were sent by him) watched the house in
order to slay him (David); it therefore belongs to the time spoken of in
[Sa1 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011). This inscription is no
more intended to imply that the Psalm was composed on that night before
the flight, which was rendered possible by the artifice of Michal, than
the inscription of Ps 51 is meant to imply that the origin of the Psalm
was coincident with the arrival of Nathan. The בּ of such inscriptions
only sets forth in a general way the historical groundwork of the song.
If we consider the contents of the Psalm from this point of view, we
shall obtain a tolerably distinct picture of the situation. We must
imagine that Saul, even before he issued that command to watch David's
house the night through and to slay him in the morning, i.e., to
assassinate him behind Michal's back ([Sa1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011)), sought to get rid of him in
some more secret way; that the venal men of his court, themselves not
less ill-disposed towards David, had offered him their hand for the
deed; and that in consequence of this, great activity, which was
probably seen through by him whose life was threatened, was observable
in Gibea, and that more especially every evening, when the bandits
strolled through the city in order to meet with the dreaded rival and
give him his deathblow. The Psalms and the Prophets are often the medium
through which we gain a deeper insight into events which are only
sketched in the historical books after their most prominent outward
features.

In consideration of the fact that the description of the nightly
proceedings of the enemies is repeated after the manner of a refrain,
and that the poet in [Psa 59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017)
contrasts his believingly joyous prospects for the coming morning with
the ineffectual ardour with which they pass the night patrolling the
streets, Psalms 59 seems to be an evening song belonging to those
perilous days spent in Gibea.

[Psalms 59:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 59:1</span></span>

First part. As far as [Psa 59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004) we
recognise strains familiar in the Psalms. The enemies are called מתקוממי
as in [Job 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#007), cf. [Psa
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007); עזּים as shameless, עזּי פנים or
עזּי נפשׁ; as in [Isa 56:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#011), on
account of their bold shameless greediness, dogs. On לא in a subordinate
clause, vid., Ewald, ֗286, g: without there being transgression or sin
on my side, which might have caused it. The suffix (transgression on my
part) is similar to [Psa 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#024).
בּליּ־עון (cf. [Job 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#006)) is a similar
adverbial collateral definition: without there existing any sin, which
ought to be punished. The energetic future jeruzûn depicts those who
servilely give effect to the king's evil caprice; they run hither and
thither as if attacking and put themselves in position. הכונן = התכונן,
like the Hithpa. הכּסּה, [Pro 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#026),
the Hothpa. הכּבּס, [Lev 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#055)., and
the Hithpa. נכּפּר, [Deu 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#008).
Surrounded by such a band of assassins, David is like one besieged, who
sighs for succour; and he calls upon Jahve, who seems to be sleeping and
inclined to abandon him, with that bold עוּרה לקראתי וּראה, to awake to
meet him, i.e., to join him with His help like a relieving army, and to
convince Himself from personal observation of the extreme danger in
which His charge finds himself. The continuation was obliged to be
expressed by ואתּה, because a special appeal to God interposes between
עוּרה and הקיצה. In the emphatic "Thou," however, after it has been once
expressed, is implied the conditional character of the deliverance by
the absolute One. And each of the divine names made use of in this
lengthy invocation, which corresponds to the deep anxiety of the poet,
is a challenge, so to speak, to the ability and willingness, the power
and promise of God. The juxtaposition Jahve Elohim Tsebaoth (occurring,
besides this instance, in [Psa 80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005),
20; [Psa 84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009)), which is peculiar to
the Elohimic Psalms, is to be explained by the consideration that Elohim
had become a proper name like Jahve, and that the designation Jahve
Tsebaoth, by the insertion of Elohim in accordance with the style of the
Elohimic Psalms, is made still more imposing and solemn; and now צבאות
is a genitive dependent not merely upon יהוה but upon יהוה אלהים
(similar to [Psa 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001), [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001); Symbolae, p. 15). אלהי ישׂראל is
in apposition to this threefold name of God. The poet evidently reckons
himself as belonging to an Israel from which he excludes his enemies,
viz., the true Israel which is in reality the people of God. Among the
heathen, against whom the poet invokes God's interposition, are included
the heathen-minded in Israel; this at least is the view which brings
about this extension of the prayer. Also in connection with the words
און כּל־בּגדי the poet, in fact, has chiefly before his mind those who
are immediately round about him and thus disposed. It is those who act
treacherously from extreme moral nothingness and worthlessness (און
genit. epexeg.). The music, as Sela directs, here becomes more
boisterous; it gives intensity to the strong cry for the judgment of
God; and the first unfolding of thought of this Michtam is here brought
to a close.

The second begins by again taking up the description of the movements of
the enemy which was begun in [Psa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004), [Psa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005). We see at a glance how here [Psa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007) coincides with [Psa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005), and [Psa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008) with [Psa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004), and [Psa
59:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#009) with [Psa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006). Hence the imprecatory rendering
of the futures of [Psa 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007) is not for
a moment to be entertained. By day the emissaries of Saul do not venture
to carry out their plot, and David naturally does not run into their
hands. They therefore come back in the evening, and that evening after
evening (cf. [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014)); they snarl
or howl like dogs (המה, used elsewhere of the growling of the bear and
the cooing of the dove; it is distinct from נבח, Arab. nbb, nbḥ, to
bark, and כלב, to yelp), because they do not want to betray themselves
by loud barking, and still cannot altogether conceal their vexation and
rage; and they go their rounds in the city (like סובב בּעיר, [Sol
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002), cf. supra [Psa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#011)), in order to cut off their
victim from flight, and perhaps, what would be very welcome to them, to
run against him in the darkness. The further description in [Psa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008) follows them on this patrol. What
they belch out or foam out is to be inferred from the fact that swords
are in their lips, which they, as it were, draw so soon as they merely
move their lips. Their mouth overflows with murderous thoughts and with
slanders concerning David, by which they justify their murderous greed
to themselves as if there were no one, viz., no God, who heard it. But
Jahve, from whom nothing, as with men, can be kept secret, laughs at
them, just as He makes a mockery of all heathen, to whom this murderous
band, which fears the light and in unworthy of the Israelitish name, is
compared. This is the primary passage to [Psa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013); [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004); for Ps 59 is perhaps the oldest
of the Davidic Psalms that have come down to us, and therefore also the
earliest monument of Israelitish poetry in which the divine name Jahve
Tsebaoth occurs; and the chronicler, knowing that it was the time of
Samuel and David that brought it into use, uses this name only in the
life of David. Just as this strophe opened in [Psa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007) with a distich that recurs in
[Psa 59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015), so it also closes now in
[Psa 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010) with a distich that recurs
below in v. 18, and that is to be amended according to the text of that
passage. For all attempts to understand עזּי as being genuine prove its
inaccuracy. With the old versions it has to be read עזּי; but as for the
rest, אשׁמרה must be retained in accordance with the usual variation
found in such refrains: my strength, Thee will I regard ([Sa1
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#015); observe, [Sa2
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#016)), or upon Thee will I wait (cf.
ל, [Psa 130:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#006)); i.e., in the
consciousness of my own feebleness, tranquil and resigned, I will look
for Thine interposition on my behalf.

[Psalms 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 59:10</span></span>

In this second half of the Psalm the cry of fear is hushed. Hope reigns,
and anger burns more fiercely. The Ker says that [Psa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011) is to be read: אלהי חסדּי
יקדּמני, my gracious God will anticipate me, - but with what? This
question altogether disappears if we retain the Chethb and point אלהי
הסדּו: my God will anticipate me with His mercy (cf. [Psa
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004)), i.e., will meet me bringing His
mercy without any effort of mine. Even the old translators have felt
that chcdw must belong to the verb as a second object. The lxx is
perfectly correct in its rendering, ὁ Θεὸς μου τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ προφθάσει
με. The Ker has come into existence in looking to v. 18, according to
which it seems as though אלהי הסדּי ought to be added to the refrain,
[Psa 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010) (cf. a similar instance in
[Psa 42:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006)). But [Psa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011) would be stunted by doing this,
and it accords with Biblical poetic usage that the refrain in v. 18
should be climactic in comparison with [Psa
59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010) (just as it also does not
altogether harmonize in its first half); so that Olshausen's proposal to
close [Psa 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010) with אלהי חסדי and to
begin [Psa 59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011) with חסדו (cf. [Psa
79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008)) is only just to be put on
record. The prayer "slay them not" does not contradict the prayer that
follows for their destruction. The poet wishes that those who lie in
wait for him, before they are totally swept away, may remain for a
season before the eyes of this people as an example of punishment. In
accordance with this, הניעמו, by a comparison of the Hiph. in [Num
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#013), and of the Kal in [Psa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016), [Psa
109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010), is to be rendered: cause them
to wander about (Targum, cf. Genesis Rabba, ch. 38 init., טלטלמו); and
in connection with בחילך one is involuntarily reminded of [Psa
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#010), [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014), and is tempted to read בחלך or
בחלך: cause them to wander about in adversity or wretchedness, = Arab.
‛umr ḥâlik, vita caliginosa h. e. misera), and more especially since
בחילך occurs nowhere else instead of בּזרעך or בּימינך. But the Jod in
בחילך is unfavourable to this supposition; and since the martial
apostrophe of God by "our shield" follows, the choice of the word is
explained by the consideration that the poet conceives of the power of
God as an army ([Joe 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)), and
perhaps thinks directly of the heavenly host ([Joe
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#011)), over which the Lord of Hosts
holds command (Hitzig). By means of this He is first of all to cause
them to go astray (נע ונד, [Gen 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012)),
then utterly to cast them down ([Psa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)). The Lord (אדני) is to do this,
as truly as He is Israel's shield against all the heathen and all
pseudo-Israelites who have become as heathen. The first member of [Psa
59:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#013) is undoubtedly meant
descriptively: "the sin of their mouth (the sin of the tongue) is the
word of their lips" (with the dull-toned suffix mo, in the use of which
Ps 59 associates itself with the Psalms of the time of Saul, [Psa
56:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001), [Psa
11:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001), [Psa
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001), 22, 35, [Psa
64:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001)). The combination ולילּכדוּ
בגאונם, however, more readily suggests parallel passages like [Pro
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#006) than [Pro
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#002); and moreover the מן of the
expression וּמאלה וּמכּחשׁ, which is without example in connection with
ספּר, and, taken as expressing the motive (Hupfeld), ought to be joined
with some designations of the disposition of mind, is best explained as
an appended statement of the reason for which they are to be ensnared,
so that consequently יספּרוּ (cf. [Psa
69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027); [Psa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006)) is an attributive clause; nor is
this contrary to the accentuation, if one admits the Munach to be a
transformation of Mugrash. It is therefore to be rendered: "let them,
then, be taken in their pride, and on account of the curse and deceit
which they wilfully utter." If, by virtue of the righteousness of the
Ruler of the world, their sin has thus become their fall, then, after
they have been as it were a warning example to Israel, God is utterly to
remove them out of the way, in order that they (it is unnecessary to
suppose any change of subject), while perishing, may perceive that
Elohim is Ruler in Jacob (בּ, used elsewhere of the object, e.g., [Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001), is here used of the place of
dominion), and as in Jacob, so from thence unto the ends of the earth (ל
like על, [Psa 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#011)) wields the
sceptre. Just like the first group of the first part, this first group
of the second part also closes with Sela.

The second group opens like the second group in the first part, but with
this exception, that here we read וישׁבוּ, which loosely connects it
with what precedes, whereas there it is ישׁוּבוּ. The poet's gaze is
again turned towards his present straitened condition, and again the
pack of dogs by which Saul is hunting him present themselves to his
mind. המּה points towards an antithesis that follows, and which finds
its expression in ואני. ויּלינוּ and לבּקר stand in direct contrast to
one another, and in addition to this לערב has preceded. The reading of
the lxx (Vulgate, Luther, \[and authorized version\]), καὶ γογγύσουσιν =
ויּלּינוּ or ויּלּנוּ, is thereby proved to be erroneous. But if
ויּלינוּ is the correct reading, then it follows that we have to take
[Psa 59:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016) not as foretelling what
will take place, but as describing that which is present; so that
consequently the fut. consec. (as is frequently the case apart from any
historical connection) is only a consecutive continuation of ינוּעוּן
(for which the Ker has יניעוּן; the form that was required in [Psa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012), but is inadmissible here): they
wander up and down (נוּע as in [Psa
109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010), cf. נוּד, [Job
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023)) to eat (that is to say, seeking
after food); and if they are not satisfied, they pass the night, i.e.,
remain, eager for food and expecting it, over night on the spot. This
interpretation is the most natural, the simplest, and the one that
harmonizes best not only with the text before us (the punctuation
ישׂבּעוּ, not ישׂבּעוּ, gives the member of the clause the impress of
being a protasis), but also with the situation. The poet describes the
activity of his enemies, and that by completing or retouching the
picture of their comparison to dogs: he himself is the food or prey for
which they are so eager, and which they would not willingly allow to
escape them, and which they nevertheless cannot get within their grasp.
Their morbid desire remains unsatisfied: he, however, in the morning, is
able to sing of the power of God, which protects him, and exultantly to
praise God's loving-kindness, which satiates and satisfies him ([Psa
90:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014)); for in the day of fear, which
to him is now past, God was his inaccessible stronghold, his
unapproachable asylum. To this God, then, even further the play of his
harp shall be directed (אזמּרה), just as was his waiting or hoping
(אשׁמרה, [Psa 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 60](psa060)

</div>
