<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa013)  [Next](psa015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 14:0</span></span>

The Prevailing Corruption and the Redemption Desired

Just as the general lamentation of [Psa
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001) assumes a personal character in
[Psa 13:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001), so in [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001) it becomes again general; and
the personal desire יגל לבּי, [Psa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005), so full of hope, corresponds to
יגל יעקב, which is extended to the whole people of God in [Psa
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007). Moreover, [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001), as being a gloomy picture of
the times in which the dawn of the divine day is discernible in the
background, is more closely allied to [Psa
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001) than to [Psa
13:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001), although this latter is not
inserted between them without some recognised reason. In the reprobation
of the moral and religious character of the men of the age, which [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001) has in common with [Psa
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001), we at once have a confirmation
of the לדוד. But [Psa 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007) does not
necessitate our coming down to the time of the Exile.

In [Psa 53:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001) we find this Psalm
which is Jehovic, occurring again as Elohimic. The position of [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001) in the primary collection
favours the presumption, that it is the earlier and more original
composition. And since this presumption will bear the test of a critical
comparison of the two Psalms, we may leave the treatment of [Psa
53:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001) to its proper place, without
bringing it forward here. It is not as though [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001) were intact. It is marked out
as seven three-line verses, but [Psa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005) and [Psa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006), which ought to be the fifth and
sixth three lines, are only two; and the original form appears to be
destroyed by some deficiency. The difficulty is got over in [Psa
53:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001), by making the two two-line
verses into one three-line verse, so that it consists only of six
three-line verses. And in that Psalm the announcement of judgment is
applied to foreign enemies, a circumstance which has influenced some
critics and led them astray in the interpretation of [Psa
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001).

[Psalms 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 14:1</span></span>

The perfect אמר, as in [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); [Psa
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003), is the so-called abstract
present (Ges. 126, 3), expressing a fact of universal experience,
inferred from a number of single instances. The Old Testament language
is unusually rich in epithets for the unwise. The simple, פּתי, and the
silly, כּסיל, for the lowest branches of this scale; the fool, אויל, and
the madman, הולל, the uppermost. In the middle comes the notion of the
simpleton or maniac, נבל - a word from the verbal stem נבל which,
according as that which forms the centre of the group of consonants lies
either in נב (Genesis S. 636), or in בל (comp. אבל, אול, אמל, קמל),
signifies either to be extended, to relax, to become frail, to wither,
or to be prominent, eminere, Arab. nabula; so that consequently נבל
means the relaxed, powerless, expressed in New Testament language:
πνεῦμα οὐκ ἔχοντα. Thus Isaiah ([Isa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006)) describes the נבל: "a simpleton
speaks simpleness and his heart does godless things, to practice tricks
and to say foolish things against Jahve, to leave the soul of the hungry
empty, and to refuse drink to the thirsty." Accordingly נבל is the
synonym of לץ the scoffer (vid., the definition in [Pro
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#024)). A free spirit of this class is
reckoned according to the Scriptures among the empty, hollow, and devoid
of mind. The thought, אין אלהים, which is the root of the thought and
action of such a man, is the climax of imbecility. It is not merely
practical atheism, that is intended by this maxim of the נבל. The heart
according to Scripture language is not only the seat of volition, but
also of thought. The נבל is not content with acting as though there were
no God, but directly denies that there is a God, i.e., a personal God.
The psalmist makes this prominent as the very extreme and depth of human
depravity, that there can be among men those who deny the existence of a
God. The subject of what follows are, then, not these atheists but men
in general, among whom such characters are to be found: they make the
mode of action, (their) doings, corrupt, they make it abominable. עלילה,
a poetical brevity of expression for עלילותם, belongs to both verbs,
which have Tarcha and Mercha (the two usual conjunctives of Mugrash) in
correct texts; and is in fact not used as an adverbial accusative
(Hengstenberg and others), but as an object, since השׁהית is just the
word that is generally used in this combination with עלילה [Zep
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#007) or, what is the same thing, דּרך
[Gen 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012); and התעיב (cf. [Kg1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#026)) is only added to give a
superlative intensity to the expression. The negative: "there is none
that doeth good" is just as unrestricted as in [Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002). But further on the psalmist
distinguishes between a דור צדיק, which experiences this corruption in
the form of persecution, and the corrupt mass of mankind. He means what
he says of mankind as κόσμος, in which, at first the few rescued by
grace from the mass of corruption are lost sight of by him, just as in
the words of God, [Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005), [Gen
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012). Since it is only grace that
frees any from the general corruption, it may also be said, that men are
described just as they are by nature; although, be it admitted, it is
not hereditary sin but actual sin, which springs up from it, and grows
apace if grace do not interpose, that is here spoken of.

[Psalms 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 14:2</span></span>

The second tristich appeals to the infallible decision of God Himself.
The verb השׁקיף means to look forth, by bending one's self forward. It
is the proper word for looking out of a window, [Kg2
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030) (cf. Niph. [Jdg
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028), and frequently), and for God's
looking down from heaven upon the earth, [Psa
102:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#020), and frequently; and it is
cognate and synonymous with השׁגּיח, [Psa
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#013), [Psa
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#014); cf. moreover, [Sol
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009). The perf. is used in the sense of
the perfect only insofar as the divine survey is antecedent to its
result as given in [Psa 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003). Just as
השׁהיתוּ reminds one of the history of the Flood, so does לראות of the
history of the building of the tower of Babel, [Gen
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005), cf. [Psa
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021). God's judgment rests upon a
knowledge of the matter of fact, which is represented in such passages
after the manner of men. God's all-seeing, all-piercing eyes scrutinise
the whole human race. Is there one who shows discernment in thought and
act, one to whom fellowship with God is the highest good, and
consequently that after which he strives? - this is God's question, and
He delights in such persons, and certainly none such would escape His
longing search. On את־אלהים, τὸν Θεόν, vid., Ges. 117, 2.

[Psalms 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 14:3</span></span>

The third tristich bewails the condition in which He finds humanity. The
universality of corruption is expressed in as strong terms as possible.
הכּל they all (lit., the totality); יחדּו with one another (lit., in its
or their unions, i.e., universi); אין גּם־אחד not a single one who might
form an exception. סר (probably not 3 praet. but partic., which passes
at once into the finite verb) signifies to depart, viz., from the ways
of God, therefore to fall away (ἀποστάτης). נאלח, as in [Job
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016), denotes the moral corruptness
as a becoming sour, putrefaction, and suppuration. Instead of אין
גּם־אחד, the lxx translates οὐκ ἔστιν ἕως ἑνός (as though it were
עד־אחד, which is the more familiar form of expression). Paul quotes the
first three verses of this Psalm ([Rom
3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)) in order to show how the
assertion, that Jews and heathen all are included under sin, is in
accordance with the teaching of Scripture. What the psalmist says,
applies primarily to Israel, his immediate neighbours, but at the same
time to the heathen, as is self-evident. What is lamented is neither the
pseudo-Israelitish corruption in particular, nor that of the heathen,
but the universal corruption of man which prevails not less in Israel
than in the heathen world. The citations of the apostle which follow his
quotation of the Psalm, from τάφος ἀνεῳγμένος to ἀπέναντι τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν
αὐτῶν were early incorporated in the Psalm in the Κοινή of the lxx. They
appear as an integral part of it in the Cod. Alex., in the Greco-Latin
Psalterium Vernonense, and in the Syriac Psalterium Mediolanense. They
are also found in Apollinaris' paraphrase of the Psalms as a later
interpolation; the Cod. Vat. has them in the margin; and the words
σύντπιμμα καὶ ταλαιπωρία ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς αὐτῶν have found admittance in
the translation, which is more Rabbinical than Old Hebrew, מזּל רע וּפגע
רע בּדרכיהם even in a Hebrew codex (Kennicott 649). Origen rightly
excluded this apostolic Mosaic work of Old Testament testimonies from
his text of the Psalm; and the true representation of the matter is to
be found in Jerome, in the preface to the xvi. book of his commentary on
Isaiah.

(Note: Cf. Plschke's Monograph on the Milanese Psalterium Syriacum,
1835, p. 28-39.)

[Psalms 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 14:4</span></span>

Thus utterly cheerless is the issue of the divine scrutiny. It ought at
least to have been different in Israel, the nation of the positive
revelation. But even there wickedness prevails and makes God's purpose
of mercy of none effect. The divine outburst of indignation which the
psalmist hears here, is applicable to the sinners in Israel. Also in
[Isa 3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#013) the Judge of the world
addresses Himself to the heads of Israel in particular. This one feature
of the Psalm before us is raised to the consistency of a special
prophetic picture in the Psalm of Asaph, [Psa
82:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001). That which is here clothed in
the form of a question, הלא ידעוּ, is reversed into an assertion in [Psa
82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005) of that Psalm. It is not to be
translated: will they not have to feel (which ought to be ידעוּ); but
also not as Hupfeld renders it: have they not experienced. "Not to know"
is intended to be used as absolutely in the signification non sapere,
and consequently insipientem esse, as it is in [Psa
82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005); [Psa
73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022); [Psa
92:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007); [Isa
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#018), cf. 9, [Isa
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#020), and frequently. The perfect is
to be judged after the analogy of novisse (Ges. 126, 3), therefore it is
to be rendered: have they attained to no knowledge, are they devoid of
all knowledge, and therefore like the brutes, yea, according to [Isa
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002) even worse than the brutes, all
the workers of iniquity? The two clauses which follow are, logically at
least, attributive clauses. The subordination of אכלוּ לחם to the
participle as a circumstantial clause in the sense of כּאכל לחם is
syntactically inadmissible; neither can אכלו לחם, with Hupfeld, be
understood of a brutish and secure passing away of life; for, as
Olshausen, rightly observes אכל לחם does not signify to feast and
carouse, but simply to eat, take a meal. Hengstenberg correctly
translates it "who eating my people, eat bread," i.e., who think that
they are not doing anything more sinful, - indeed rather what is
justifiable, irreproachable and lawful to them, - than when they are
eating bread; cf. the further carrying out of this thought in [Mic
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001) (especially [Mic
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#003) extr.: "just as in the pot and as
flesh within the caldron."). Instead of לא קראוּ ה Jeremiah says in [Jer
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#021) (cf. however, [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)): לא דרשׁוּ ואת־ה. The meaning
is like that in [Hos 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007). They do not
pray as it becomes man who is endowed with mind, therefore they are like
cattle, and act like beasts of prey.

[Psalms 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 14:5</span></span>

When Jahve thus bursts forth in scorn His word, which never fails in its
working, smites down these brutish men, who are without knowledge and
conscience. The local demonstrative שׁם is used as temporal in this
passage just as in [Psa 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006); [Hos
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#017); [Zep
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014); [Job
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#007); [Job
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#012), and is joined with the perfect
of certainty, as in [Job 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#013), where
it has not so much a temporal as a local sense. It does not mean "there
= at a future time," as pointing into the indefinite future, but "there
= then," when God shall thus speak to them in His anger. Intensity is
here given to the verb פּחד by the addition of a substantival object of
the same root, just as is frequently the case in the more elevated
style, e.g., [Hab 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009); and as is done
in other cases by the addition of the adverbial infinitive. Then, when
God's long-suffering changes into wrath, terror at His judgement seizes
them and they tremble through and through. This judgment of wrath,
however, is on the other hand a revelation of love. Jahve avenges and
thus delivers those whom He calls עמּי (My people); and who are here
called דּור צדּיק, the generation of the righteous, in opposition to the
corrupted humanity of the time ([Psa
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)), as being conformed to the will
of God and held together by a superior spirit to the prevailing spirit
of the age. They are so called inasmuch as דּור passes over from the
signification generatio to that of genus hominum here and also
elsewhere, when it is not merely a temporal, but a moral notion; cf.
[Psa 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006); [Psa
83:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#015); [Psa
112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002), where it uniformly denotes the
whole of the children of God who are in bondage in the world and longing
for deliverance, not Israel collectively in antithesis to the Scythians
and the heathen in general (Hitzig).

[Psalms 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 14:6</span></span>

The psalmist himself meets the oppressed full of joyous confidence, by
reason of the self-manifestation of God in judgment, of which he is now
become so confident and which so fills him with comfort. Instead of the
sixth tristich, which we expected, we have another distich. The Hiph.
הבישׁ with a personal object signifies: to put any one to shame, i.e.,
to bring it about that any one must be ashamed, e.g., [Psa
44:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#008) (cf. [Psa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#006), where the accusative of the
person has to be supplied), or absolutely: to act shamefully, as in the
phrase used in Proverbs, בּן מיבישׁ (a prodigal son). It appears only
here with a neuter accusative of the object, not in the signification to
defame (Hitz.), - a meaning it never has (not even in [Pro
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#005), where it is blended with הבאישׁ
to make stinking, i.e., a reproach, [Gen
34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030)) - but to confound, put to shame
= to frustrate (Hupf.), which is at once the most natural meaning in
connection with עצת. But it is not to be rendered: ye put to shame,
because..., for to what purpose is this statement with this inapplicable
reason in support of it? The fut. תּבישׁוּ is used with a like shade of
meaning as in [Lev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017), and the
imperative elsewhere; and כּי gives the reason for the tacitly implied
clause, or if a line is really lost from the strophe, the lost clause
(cf. [Isa 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009).): ye will not
accomplish it. עצה is whatsoever the pious man, who as such suffers
reproach, plans to do for the glory of his God, or even in accordance
with the will of his God. All this the children of the world, who are in
possession of worldly power, seek to frustrate; but viewed in the light
of the final decision their attempt is futile: Jahve is his refuge, or,
literally the place whither he flees to hide himself and finds a hiding
or concealment (צל, Arab. dall, סתר, Arab. sitr, Arabic also drâ).
מחסּהוּ has an orthophonic Dag., which obviates the necessity for the
reading מחסּהוּ (cf. תּעלּים [Psa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001), טעמּו [Psa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001), לאסּר [Psa
105:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#022), and similar instances).

[Psalms 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 14:7</span></span>

This tristich sounds like a liturgical addition belonging to the time of
the Exile, unless one is disposed to assign the whole Psalm to this
period on account of it. For elsewhere in a similar connection, as e.g.,
in [Psa 126:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001), שׁוּב שׁבוּת means to
turn the captivity, or to bring back the captives. שׁוּב has here, - as
in [Psa 126:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004); [Psa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003) (followed by את), cf. [Eze
47:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#007), the Kal being preferred to the
Hiph. השׁיב ([Jer 32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044); [Jer
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#011)) in favour of the alliteration
with שׁבוּת (from שׁבה to make any one a prisoner of war), - a
transitive signification, which Hengstenberg (who interprets it: to turn
back, to turn to the captivity, of God's merciful visitation), vainly
hesitates to admit. But [Isa 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006), for
instance, shows that the exiles also never looked for redemption
anywhere but from Zion. Not as though they had thought, that Jahve still
dwelt among the ruins of His habitation, which indeed on the contrary
was become a ruin because He had forsaken it (as we read in Ezekiel);
but the moment of His return to His people is also the moment when He
entered again upon the occupation of His sanctuary, and His sanctuary,
again appropriated by Jahve even before it was actually reared, is the
spot whence issues the kindling of the divine judgment on the enemies of
Israel, as well as the spot whence issues the brightness of the reverse
side of this judgment, viz., the final deliverance, hence even during
the Exile, Jerusalem is the point (the kibla) whither the eye of the
praying captive was directed, [Dan
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011). There would therefore be nothing
strange if a psalm-writer belonging to the Exile should express his
longing for deliverance in these words: who gives = oh that one would
give = oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! But since
שׁוב שׁבות also signifies metaphorically to turn misfortune, as in [Job
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010); [Eze
16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053) (perhaps also in [Psa
85:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#002), cf. [Psa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005)), inasmuch as the idea of שׁבוּת
has been generalised exactly like the German "Elend," exile (Old High
German elilenti = sojourn in another country, banishment, homelessness),
therefore the inscribed לדוד cannot be called in question from this
quarter. Even Hitzig renders: "if Jahve would but turn the misfortune of
His people," regarding this Psalm as composed by Jeremiah during the
time the Scythians were in the land. If this rendering is possible, and
that it is is undeniable, then we retain the inscription לדוד. And we do
so the more readily, as Jeremiah's supposed authorship rests upon a
non-recognition of his reproductive character, and the history of the
prophet's times make no allusion to any incursion by the Scythians.

The condition of the true people of God in the time of Absolom was
really a שׁבוּת in more than a figurative sense. But we require no such
comparison with contemporary history, since in these closing words we
have only the gathering up into a brief form of the view which prevails
in other parts of the Psalm, viz., that the "righteous generation" in
the midst of the world, and even of the so-called Israel, finds itself
in a state of oppression, imprisonment, and bondage. If God will turn
this condition of His people, who are His people indeed and of a truth,
then shall Jacob rejoice and Israel be glad. It is the grateful duty of
the redeemed to rejoice. - And how could they do otherwise!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 15](psa015)

</div>
