<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa032)  [Next](psa034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 33:0</span></span>

Praise of the Ruler of the World as Being the Defender of His People

The Davidic Maskl, [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), is
followed by an anonymous congregational song of a hymnic character,
which begins just like the former closes. It owes its composition
apparently to some deliverance of the nation from heathen oppression,
which had resulted from God's interposition and without war. Moreover it
exhibits no trace of dependence upon earlier models, such as might
compel us to assign a late date to it; the time of Jeremiah, for
instance, which Hitzig adopts. The structure is symmetrical. Between the
two hexastichs, [Psa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001), [Psa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020), the materia laudis is set forth
in eight tetrastichs.

[Psalms 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 33:1</span></span>

The call contained in this hexastich is addressed to the righteous and
upright, who earnestly seek to live a godly and God-pleasing life, and
the sole determining rule of whose conduct is the will and good pleasure
of God. These alone know God, whose true nature finds in them a clear
mirror; so on their part they are joyfully to confess what they possess
in Him. For it is their duty, and at the same time their honour, to
praise him, and make their boast in Him. נאוה is the feminine of the
adjective נאוה (formed out of נאוי), as in [Psa
147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001), cf. [Pro
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#010). On כּנּור (lxx κιθάρα, κινύρα)
and נבל (lxx ψαλτήριον, νάβλα, ναῦλα, etc.) vid., Introduction @a7II.
נבל is the name given to the harp or lyre on account of its resemblance
to a skin bottle or flash (root נב, to swell, to be distended), and נבל
עשׂור, "harp of the decade,"' is the ten-stringed harp, which is also
called absolutely עשׂור, and distinguished from the customary נבל, in
[Psa 92:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#004). By a comparison of the
asyndeton expressions in [Psa 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014),
[Jer 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019), Aben-Ezra understands by
נבל עשור two instruments, contrary to the tenour of the words.
Gecatilia, whom he controverts, is only so far in error as that he
refers the ten to holes (נקבים) instead of to strings. The בּ is Beth
instrum., just like the expression κιθαρίζειν ἐν κιθάραις, [Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002). A "new song" is one which, in
consequence of some new mighty deeds of God, comes from a new impulse of
gratitude in the heart, [Psa 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004), and
frequently in the Psalms, [Isa 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010),
Judith 6:13, [Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). In היטיבוּ the
notions of scite and strenue, suaviter and naviter, blend. With
בּתרוּעה, referring back to רננו, the call to praise forms, as it were,
a circle as it closes.

[Psalms 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 33:4</span></span>

Now beings the body of the song. The summons to praise God is supported
(1) by a setting forth of His praiseworthiness

(Note: We have adopted the word "praiseworthiness" for the sake of
conciseness of expression, in order to avoid an awkward periphrasis, in
the sense of being worthy to be praised. - Tr.)

\(a\) as the God of revelation in the kingdom of Grace. His word is
ישׂר, upright in intention, and, without becoming in any way whatever
untrue to itself, straightway fulfilling itself. His every act is an act
in אמוּנה, truth, which verifies the truth of His word, and one which
accomplishes itself. On אהב, equivalent to אהב הוּא, vid., [Psa
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010); [Psa
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029). צדקה is righteousness as
conduct; משׁפּט is right as a rule of judgment and a state or condition.
חסד is an accusative, as in [Psa
119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064) : misericordia Domini plena est
terra (the introit for Misercordias Sunday or the second Sunday after
Easter).

[Psalms 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 33:6</span></span>

God's praiseworthiness (b) as the Creator of the world in the kingdom of
Nature. Jahve's דּבר is His almighty "Let there be;" and רוח פּיו
(inasmuch as the breath is here regarded as the material of which the
word is formed and the bearer of the word) is the command, or in
general, the operation of His commanding omnipotence ([Job
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030), cf. [Job
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#009); [Isa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#016), cf. [Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004)). The heavens above and the
waters beneath stand side by side as miracles of creation. The display
of His power in the waters of the sea consists in His having confined
them within fixed bounds and keeping them within these. נד is a pile,
i.e., a piled up heap (Arabic nadd), and more especially an inference to
harvest: like such a heap do the convex waters of the sea, being firmly
held together, rise above the level of the continents. The expression is
like that in [Jos 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013), [Jos
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015), cf. [Exo
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008); although there the reference is
to a miracle occurring in the course of history, and in this passage to
a miracle of creation. כּנס refers to the heap itself, not to the walls
of the storehouses as holding together. This latter figure is not
introduced until [Psa 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#007): the bed of
the sea and those of the rivers are, as it were, אוצרות, treasuries or
storehouses, in which God has deposited the deep, foaming waves or
surging mass of waters. The inhabitants (ישׁבי, not יושׁבי) of the earth
have cause to fear God who is thus omnipotent (מן, in the sense of
falling back from in terror); for He need only speak the word and that
which He wills comes into being out of nothing, as we see from the
hexameron or history of Creation, but which is also confirmed in human
history ([Lam 3:37](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037)). He need only
command and it stands forth like an obedient servant, that appears in
all haste at the call of his lord, [Psa
119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091).

[Psalms 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 33:10</span></span>

His praiseworthiness (c) as the irresistible Ruler in the history of
men. Since in [Sa2 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#034); [Sa2
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014), and frequently, הפר עצה is a
common phrase, therefore heepiyr as in [Psa
89:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#034), [Eze
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#019), is equivalent to הפר (Ges. ֗67,
rem. 9). The perfects are not used in the abstract, but of that which
has been experienced most recently, since the "new song" presupposes new
matter. With [Psa 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#011) compare [Pro
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021). The עצת of God is the unity of
the "thoughts of His heart," i.e., of the ideas, which form the inmost
part, the ultimate motives of everything that takes place. The whole
history of the world is the uninterrupted carrying out of a divine plan
of salvation, the primary object of which is His people, but in and with
these are included humanity at large.

[Psalms 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 33:12</span></span>

Hence the call to praise God is supported (2) by a setting forth of that
which His people possess in Him. This portion of the song is like a
paraphrase of the אשׁרי in [Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029).
The theme in [Psa 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012) is proved in
[Psa 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#013) by the fact, that Jahve is
the omniscient Ruler, because He is the Creator of men, without whose
knowledge nothing is undertaken either secretly or openly, and
especially if against His people. Then in [Psa
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#016) it is supported by the fact,
that His people have in Jahve a stronger defence than the greatest
worldly power would be. Jahve is called the fashioner of all the hearts
of men, as in [Zac 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001), cf. [Pro
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#012), as being their Maker. As such
He is also the observer of all the works of men; for His is acquainted
with their origin in the laboratory of the heart, which He as Creator
has formed. Hupfeld takes יחד as an equalisation (pariter ac) of the two
appositions; but then it ought to be וּמבין (cf. [Psa
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003), [Psa
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011)). The lxx correctly renders it
καταμόνας, singillatim. It is also needless to translate it, as Hupfeld
does: He who formed, qui finxit; for the hearts of men were not from the
very first created all at one time, but the primeval impartation of
spirit-life is continued at every birth in some mysterious way. God is
the Father of spirits, [Heb 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009). For
this very reason everything that exists, even to the most hidden thing,
is encompassed by His omniscience and omnipotence. He exercises an
omniscient control over all things, and makes all things subservient to
the designs of His plan of the universe, which, so far as His people are
concerned, is the plan of salvation. Without Him nothing comes to pass;
but through Him everything takes place. The victory of the king, and the
safety of the warrior, are not their own works. Their great military
power and bodily strength can accomplish nothing without God, who can
also be mighty in the feeble. Even for purposes of victory (תּשׁוּעה,
cf. ישׁוּעה, [Psa 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002)) the war-horse
is שׁקר, i.e., a thing that promises much, but can in reality do
nothing; it is not its great strength, by which it enables the trooper
to escape (ימלּט). "The horse," says Solomon in [Pro
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#031), "is equipped for the day of
battle, but התּשׁוּעה לה, Jahve's is the victory," He giveth it to
whomsoever He will. The ultimate ends of all things that come to pass
are in His hands, and - as [Psa 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018).
say, directing special attention to this important truth by הנּה - the
eye of this God, that is to say the final aim of His government of the
world, is directed towards them that fear Him, is pointed at them that
hope in His mercy (למיחלים). In [Psa
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#019), the object, לחסדּו, is expanded
by way of example. From His mercy or loving-kindness, not from any acts
of their own, conscious of their limited condition and feebleness, they
look for protection in the midst of the greatest peril, and for the
preservation of their life in famine. [Psa
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008) is very similar; but the one
passage sounds as independent as the other.

[Psalms 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 33:20</span></span>

Accordingly, in this closing hexastich, the church acknowledges Him as
its help, its shield, and its source of joy. Besides the passage before
us, חכּה occurs in only one other instance in the Psalter, viz., [Psa
106:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#013). This word, which belongs to
the group of words signifying hoping and waiting, is perhaps from the
root חך (Arab. ḥk', ḥkâ, firmiter constringere sc. nodum), to be firm,
compact, like קוּה from קוה, to pull tight or fast, cf. the German
harren (to wait) and hart (hard, compact). In [Psa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020) we still hear the echo of the
primary passage [Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029) (cf. [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)). The emphasis, as in [Psa
115:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#009), rests upon הוּא, into which
בּו, in [Psa 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#021), puts this thought,
viz., He is the unlimited sphere, the inexhaustible matter, the
perennial spring of our joy. The second כּי confirms this subjectively.
His holy Name is His church's ground of faith, of love, and of hope; for
from thence comes its salvation. It can boldly pray that the mercy of
the Lord may be upon it, for it waits upon Him, and man's waiting or
hoping and God's giving are reciprocally conditioned. This is the
meaning of the כּאשׁר. God is true to His word. The Te Deum laudamus of
Ambrose closes in the same way.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 34](psa034)

</div>
