<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa043)  [Next](psa045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 44:0</span></span>

A Litany of Israel, Hard Pressed by the Enemy, and Yet Faithful to Its
God

The Korahitic Maskı̂l [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001),
with its counterpart [Psa 43:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001), if
followed by a second, to which a place is here assigned by manifold
accords with Ps 42-43, viz., with its complaints (cf. Ps[Psa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026) with the refrain of [Psa
43:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001), [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001); [Psa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010), [Psa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024). with [Psa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002); [Psa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010)), and prayers (cf. [Psa
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005) with [Psa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003); [Psa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009)). The counterpart to this Psalm
is [Psa 85:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001). Just as Ps 42-43 and
[Psa 84:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001) form a pair, so do Ps 44
and [Psa 85:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001) as being Korahitic
plaintive and supplicatory Psalms of a national character. Moreover,
[Psa 60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001) by David, Ps 80 by Asaph,
and Ps 89 by Ethan, are nearest akin to it. In all these three there are
similar lamentations over the present as contrasting with the former
times and with the promise of God; but they do not contain any like
expression of consciousness of innocence, a feature in which Ps 44 has
no equal.

In this respect the Psalm seems to be most satisfactorily explained by
the situation of the חסידים (saints), who under the leadership of the
Maccabees defended their nationality and their religion against the
Syrians and fell as martyrs by thousands. The war of that period was, in
its first beginnings at least, a holy war of religion; and the nation
which then went forth on the side of Jahve against Jupiter Olympius, was
really, in distinction from the apostates, a people true to its faith
and confession, which had to lament over God's doom of wrath in 1 Macc.
1:64, just as in this Psalm. There is even a tradition that it was a
stated lamentation Psalm of the time of the Maccabees. The Levites daily
ascended the pulpit (דוכן) and raised the cry of prayer: Awake, why
sleepest Thou, O Lord?! These Levite criers praying for the
interposition of God were called מעוררים (wakers). It is related in B.
Sota 48a of Jochanan the high priest, i.e., John Hyrcanus (135-107
b.c.), that he put an end to these מעוררים, saying to them: "Doth the
Deity sleep? Hath not the Scripture said: Behold the Keeper of Israel
slumbereth not and sleepeth not!? Only in a time when Israel was in
distress and the peoples of the world in rest and prosperity, only in
reference to such circumstances was it said: Awake, why sleepest Thou, O
Lord?"

Nevertheless many considerations are opposed to the composition of the
Psalm in the time of the Maccabees. We will mention only a few. In the
time of the Maccabees the nation did not exactly suffer any overthrow of
its "armies" ([Psa 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010)) after having
gathered up its courage: the arms of Judah, of Jonathan, and of Simon
were victorious, and the one defeat to which Hitzig refers the Psalm,
viz., the defeat of Joseph and Azaria against Gorgias in Jamnia (1 Macc.
5:55ff.), was a punishment brought upon themselves by an indiscreet
enterprise. The complaints in [Psa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010). are therefore only partially
explained by the evmnts of that time; and since a nation is a unit and
involved as a whole, it is also surprising that no mention whatever is
made of the apostates. But Ewald's reference of the Psalm to the time of
the post-exilic Jerusalem is still more inadmissible; and when, in
connection with this view, the question is asked, What disaster of war
is then intended? no answer can be given; and the reference to the time
of Jehoiachin, which Tholuck in vain endeavours to set in a more
favourable light - a king who did evil in the eyes of Jahve, [Ch2
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009), with which the descriptions of
character drawn by Jeremiah, [Jer
22:20-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#020), and by Ezekiel, [Eze
19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001), fully accord - is also
inadmissible. On the other hand, the position of the Psalm in the
immediate neighbourhood of Psalms belonging to the time of Jehoshaphat,
and also to a certain extent its contents, favours the early part of the
reign of king Joash, in which, as becomes evident from the prophecy of
Joel, there was no idolatry on the part of the people to be punished,
and yet there were severe afflictions of the people to be bewailed. It
was then not long since the Philistines and Arabs from the neighbourhood
of the Cushites had broken in upon Judah, ransacked Jerusalem and sold
the captive people of Judah for a mere song to the Greeks ([Ch2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016)., [Joe
3:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)). But this reference to
contemporary history is also untenable. That unhappy event, together
with others, belongs to the category of well-merited judgments, which
came upon king and people in the reign of Jehoram; nor does the Psalm
sound like a retrospective glance at the time of Jehoram from the
standpoint of the time of Joash: the defeat of which it complains, is
one that is now only just experienced.

Thus we seem consequently driven back to the time of David; and the
question arises, whether the Psalm does not admit, with [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), with which it forms a twin
couple, of being understood as the offspring of a similar situation,
viz., of the events which resulted from the Syro-Ammonitish war. The
fact that a conflict with the foes of the kingdom in the south, viz.,
with the Edomites, was also mixed up with the wars with the Ammonites
and their Syrian allies at that period, becomes evident from [Psa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001). when compared with [Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013), where the words ἐπάταξε τὴν
Ἰδουμαίαν (lxx) have fallen out. Whilst David was contending with the
Syrians, the Edomites came down upon the country that was denuded of
troops. And from [Kg1 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015) it is very
evident that they then caused great bloodshed; for, according to that
passage, Joab buried the slain and took fearful revenge upon the
Edomites: he marched, after having slain them in the Valley of Salt,
into Idumaea and there smote every male. Perhaps, with Hengstenberg,
Keil, and others, the Psalm is to be explained from the position of
Israel before this overthrow of the Edomites. The fact that in [Psa
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012) the nation complains of a
dispersion among the heathen may be understood by means of a deduction
from [Amo 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006), according to which the
Edomites had carried on a traffic in captive Israelites. And the lofty
self-consciousness, which finds expression in the Psalm, is after all
best explained by the times of David; for these and the early part of
the times of Solomon are the only period in the history of Israel when
the nation as a whole could boast of being free and pure of all foreign
influence in its worship. In the kindred [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001); 80 (also Ps 89), it is true
this self-consciousness does not attain the same lofty expression in
this respect Ps 40 stands perfectly alone: it is like the national
mirroring of the Book of Job, and by reason of this takes a unique
position in the range of Old Testament literature side by side with Lam.
3 and the deutero-Isaiah. Israel's affliction, which could not possibly
be of a punitive character, resembles the affliction of Job; in this
Psalm, Israel stands in exactly the same relation to God as Job and the
"Servant of Jahve" in Isaiah, if we except all that was desponding in
Job's complaint and all that was expiatory in the affliction of the
Servant of Jahve. But this very self-consciousness does somewhat
approximately find expression even in [Psa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004). In that passage also no
distinction is made between Israel and the God-fearing ones, and the
battle, in which Israel is defeated, but not without hope of final
victory, is a battle for the truth.

The charge has been brought against this Psalm, that it manifests a very
superficial apprehension of the nature of sin, in consequence of which
the writer has been betrayed into accusing God of unfaithfulness,
instead of seeking for guilt in the congregation of Israel. This
judgment is unjust. The writer certainly cannot mean to disown the sins
of individuals, nor even this or that transgression of the whole people.
but any apostasy on the part of the nation from its God, such as could
account for its rejection, did not exist at that time. The supremacy
granted to the heathen over Israel is, therefore, an abnormal state of
things, and for this very reason the poet, on the ground of Israel's
fidelity and of God's loving-kindness, prays for speedy deliverance. A
Psalm born directly out of the heart of the New Testament church would
certainly sound very differently. For the New Testament church is not a
national community; and both as regards the relation between the reality
and idea of the church, and as regards the relation between its
afflictions and the motive and design of God, the view of the New
Testament church penetrates far deeper. It knows that it is God's love
that makes it conformable to the passion of Christ, in order that, being
crucified unto the world, it may become through suffering partaker of
the glory of its Lord and Head.

[Psalms 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 44:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 44:2-4) The poet opens with a tradition coming down from the time
of Moses and of Joshua which they have heard with their own ears, in
order to demonstrate the vast distance between the character of the
former times and the present, just as Asaph, also, in [Psa
78:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003), appeals not to the written but
to the spoken word. That which has been heard follows in the oratio
directa. [Psa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003) explains what kind
of "work" is intended: it is the granting of victory over the peoples of
Canaan, the work of God for which Moses prays in [Psa
90:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#016). Concerning ידך, vid., on [Psa
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005); [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014). The position of the words here,
as in [Psa 69:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#011); 83:19, leads one to
suppose that ידך is treated as a permutative of אתּה, and consequently
in the same case with it. The figure of "planting" (after [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)) is carried forward in
ותּשׁלּחם; for this word means to send forth far away, to make
wide-branching, a figure which is wrought up in Ps 80. It was not
Israel's own work, but (כּי, no indeed, for \[Germ. nein, denn\] = imo)
God's work: "Thy right hand and Thine arm and the light of Thy
countenance," they it was which brought Israel salvation, i.e., victory.
The combination of synonyms ימינך וּזרועך is just as in [Psa
74:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#011), Sir. 33:7, χείρα καὶ βραχίονα
δεξιόν, and is explained by both the names of the members of the body as
applied to God being only figures: the right hand being a figure for
energetic interposition, and the arm for an effectual power that carries
through the thing designed (cf. e.g., [Psa
77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016); [Psa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001)), just as the light of His
countenance is a figure for His loving-kindness which lights up all
darkness. The final cause was His purpose of love: for (inasmuch as)
Thou wast favourable to them (רצה as in [Psa
85:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#002)). The very same thought, viz.,
that Israel owes the possession of Canaan to nothing but Jahve's free
grace, runs all through Deut. 9.

[Psalms 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 44:4</span></span>

(Heb.: 44:5-9) Out of the retrospective glance at the past, so rich in
mercy springs up ([Psa 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005)) the
confident prayer concerning the present, based upon the fact of the
theocratic relationship which began in the time of the deliverance
wrought under Moses ([Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005)). In
the substantival clause אתּה הוּא מלכּי, הוּא is neither logical copula
nor predicate (as in [Psa 102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028); [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039), there equivalent to אתּה הוּא
אשׁר, cf. [Ch1 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#017)), but an
expressive resumption of the subject, as in [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); [Jer
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012); [Neh
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006)., [Ezr
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#011), and in the frequently recurring
expression יהוה הוא האלהים; it is therefore to be rendered: Thou-He who
(such an one) is my King. May He therefore, by virtue of His duty as
king which He has voluntarily taken upon Himself, and of the kingly
authority and power indwelling in Him, command the salvation of Jacob,
full and entire (Ps 18:51; 53:7). צוּה as in [Psa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009). Jacob is used for Israel just as
Elohim is used instead of Jahve. If Elohim, Jacob's King, now turns
graciously to His people, they will again be victorious and invincible,
as [Psa 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006) affirms. נגּח with
reference to קרן as a figure and emblem of strength, as in [Psa
89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025) and frequently; קמינוּ
equivalent to קמים עלינוּ. But only in the strength of God (בּך as in
[Psa 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#030)); for not in my bow do I
trust, etc., [Psa 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#007). This teaching
Israel has gathered from the history of the former times; there is no
bidding defiance with the bow and sword and all the carnal weapons of
attack, but Thou, etc., [Psa 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#008).
This "Thou" in הושׁעתּנוּ is the emphatic word; the preterites describe
facts of experience belonging to history. It is not Israel's own might
that gives them the supremacy, but God's gracious might in Israel's
weakness. Elohim is, therefore, Israel's glory or pride: "In Elohim do
we praise," i.e., we glory or make our boast in Him; cf. הלּל על, [Psa
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003). The music here joins in after
the manner of a hymn. The Psalm here soars aloft to the more joyous
height of praise, from which it now falls abruptly into bitter
complaint.

[Psalms 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 44:9</span></span>

(Heb.: 44:10-13) Just as אף signifies imo vero ([Psa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)) when it comes after an
antecedent clause that is expressly or virtually a negative, it may mean
"nevertheless, ho'moos," when it opposes a contrastive to an affirmative
assertion, as is very frequently the case with גּם or וגם. True, it does
not mean this in itself, but in virtue of its logical relation: we
praise Thee, we celebrate Thy name unceasingly - also (= nevertheless)
Thou hast cast off. From this point the Psalm comes into closest
connection with [Psa 89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039), on a still
more extended scale, however, with [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), which dates from the time of
the Syro-Ammonitish war, in which Psalm [Psa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010) recurs almost word for word. The
צבאות are not exactly standing armies (an objection which has been
raised against the Maccabean explanation), they are the hosts of the
people that are drafted into battle, as in [Exo
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041), the hosts that went forth out
of Egypt. Instead of leading these to victory as their victorious
Captain ([Sa2 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024)), God leaves them
to themselves and allows them to be smitten by the enemy. The enemy
spoil למו, i.e., just as they like, without meeting with any resistance,
to their hearts' content. And whilst He gives over (נתן as in [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002), and the first יתּן in [Isa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002)) one portion of the people as
"sheep appointed for food," another becomes a diaspora or dispersion
among the heathen, viz., by being sold to them as slaves, and that
בּלא־הון, "for not-riches," i.e., for a very low price, a mere nothing.
We see from [Joe 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003) in what way this
is intended. The form of the litotes is continued in [Psa
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#013): Thou didst not go high in the
matter of their purchase-money; the rendering of Maurer is correct: in
statuendis pretiis eorum. The ב is in this instance not the Beth of the
price as in [Psa 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#013), but, as in the
phrase הלּל בּ, the Beth of the sphere and thereby indirectly of the
object. רבּה in the sense of the Aramaic רבּי (cf. [Pro
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#016), and the derivatives תּרבּית,
מרבּית), to make a profit, to practise usury (Hupfeld), produces a
though that is unworthy of God; vid., on the other hand, [Isa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003). At the heads of the strophe
stands ([Psa 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010)) a perfect with an
aorist following: ולא תצא is consequently a negative ותּצא. And [Psa
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#018), which sums up the whole, shows
that all the rest is also intended to be retrospective.

[Psalms 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 44:13</span></span>

(Heb.: 44:14-17) To this defeat is now also added the shame that springs
out of it. A distinction is made between the neighbouring nations, or
those countries lying immediately round about Israel (סביבות, as in the
exactly similar passage [Psa 79:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#004), cf.
[Psa 80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007), which closely resembles
it), and the nations of the earth that dwell farther away from Israel.
משׁל is here a jesting, taunting proverb, and one that holds Israel up
as an example of a nation undergoing chastisement (vid., [Hab
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006)). The shaking of the head is, as
in [Psa 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008), a gesture of malicious
astonishment. In נגדּי תּמיד (as in [Psa
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018)) we have both the permanent
aspect or look and the perpetual consciousness. Instead of "shame covers
my face," the expression is "the shame of my face covers me," i.e., it
has overwhelmed my entire inward and outward being (cf. concerning the
radical notions of בּושׁ, Ps 6:11, and חפר, [Psa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006)). The juxtaposition of "enemy and
revengeful man" has its origin in [Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003). In [Psa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017) מקּול and מפּני alternate; the
former is used of the impression made by the jeering voice, the other of
the impression produced by the enraged mien.

[Psalms 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 44:17</span></span>

(Heb.: 44:18-22) If Israel compares its conduct towards God with this
its lot, it cannot possibly regard it as a punishment that it has justly
incurred. Construed with the accusative, בּוא signifies, as in [Psa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008); [Psa
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#012), to come upon one, and more
especially of an evil lot and of powers that are hostile. שׁקּר, to lie
or deceive, with בּ of the object on whom the deception or treachery is
practised, as in [Psa 89:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#034). In [Psa
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019) אשּׁוּר is construed as fem.,
exactly as in [Job 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#008); the fut.
consec. is also intended as such (as e.g., in [Job
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010); [Num
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#014)): that our step should have
declined from, etc.; inward apostasy is followed by outward wandering
and downfall. This is therefore not one of the many instances in which
the לא of one clause also has influence over the clause that follows
(Ges. 152, 3). כּי, [Psa 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#020), has
the sense of quod: we have not revolted against Thee, that Thou
shouldest on that account have done to us the thing which is now
befallen us. Concerning תּנּיּם vid., [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022). A "place of jackals" is, like a
habitation of dragons ([Jer 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022)),
the most lonesome and terrible wilderness; the place chosen was,
according to this, an inhospitable מדבר, far removed from the dwellings
of men. כּסּה is construed with על of the person covered, and with בּ of
that with which ([Sa1 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013)) he is
covered: Thou coveredst us over with deepest darkness (vid., [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)). אם, [Psa
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021), is not that of asseveration
(verily we have not forgotten), but, as the interrogatory apodosis [Psa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022) shows, conditional: if we have
(= should have) forgotten. This would not remain hidden from Him who
knoweth the heart, for the secrets of men's hearts are known to Him.
Both the form and matter here again strongly remind one of Job 31, more
especially [Job 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#004); cf. also on
תּעלמות, [Job 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006); [Job
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#011).

[Psalms 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 44:22</span></span>

(Heb.: 44:23-27) The church is not conscious of any apostasy, for on the
contrary it is suffering for the sake of its fidelity. Such is the
meaning intended by כּי, [Psa 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023)
(cf. [Psa 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020)). The emphasis lies on
עליך, which is used exactly as in [Psa
69:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#008). Paul, in [Rom
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036), transfers this utterance to the
sufferings of the New Testament church borne in witnessing for the
truth, or I should rather say he considers it as a divine utterance
corresponding as it were prophetically to the sufferings of the New
Testament church, and by anticipation, coined concerning it and for its
use, inasmuch as he cites it with the words καθὼς γέγραπται. The
suppliant cries עוּרה and הקיצה are Davidic, and found in his earlier
Ps; [Psa 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007); [Psa
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023); [Psa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005)., cf. [Psa
78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065). God is said to sleep when He
does not interpose in whatever is taking place in the outward world here
below; for the very nature of sleep is a turning in into one's own self
from all relationship to the outer world, and a resting of the powers
which act outwardly. The writer of our Psalm is fond of couplets of
synonyms like ענינוּ ולחצנוּ in [Psa
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#025); cf. [Psa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004), ימינך וּזרועך. [Psa
119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025) is an echo of [Psa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026). The suppliant cry קוּמה (in
this instance in connection with the עזרתה which follows, it is to be
accented on the ultima) is Davidic, [Psa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008); [Psa
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007); but originally it is Mosaic.
Concerning the ah of עזרתה, here as also in [Psa
63:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#008) of like meaning with לעזרתי, [Psa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020), and frequently, vid., on [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 45](psa045)

</div>
