<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa023)  [Next](psa025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 24:0</span></span>

Preparation for the Reception of the Lord Who Is About to Come

[Psa 23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001) expressed a longing after
the house of Jahve on Zion; [Psa
24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001) celebrates Jahve's entrance
into Zion, and the true character of him who may enter with Him. It was
composed when the Ark was brought from Kirjath Jearim to Mount Zion,
where David had caused it to be set up in a tabernacle built expressly
for it, [Sa2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017), cf. [Sa2
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#011), [Kg1
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039); or else, which is rendered the
more probable by the description of Jahve as a warrior, at a time when
the Ark was brought back to Mount Zion, after having been taken to
accompany the army to battle (vid., Ps 68). [Psa
15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001) is very similar. But only [Psa
24:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001) is the counterpart of that
Psalm; and there is nothing wanting to render the first part of [Psa
24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001) complete in itself. Hence
Ewald divides [Psa 24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001) into two
songs, belonging to different periods, although both old Davidic songs,
viz., [Psa 24:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007), the song of
victory sung at the removal of the Ark to Zion; and [Psa
24:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001), a purely didactic song
pre-supposing this event which forms an era in their history. And it is
relatively more natural to regard this Psalm rather than [Psa
19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001), as two songs combined and
made into one; but these two songs have an internal coherence; in
Jahve's coming to His temple is found that which occasioned them and
that towards which They point; and consequently they form a whole
consisting of two divisions. To the inscription לדוד מזמור the lxx adds
τῆς μιᾷs σαββάτου

(Note: The London Papyrus fragments, in Tischendorf Monum. i. 247, read
ΤΗ ΜΙΑ ΤΩΝ ΣΑΒΒΑΤΩΝ. In the Hexaplarian text, this addition to the
inscription was wanting.)

(= שׁל אחד בשׁבת, for the first day of the week), according to which
this Psalm was a customary Sunday Psalm. This addition is confirmed by
B. Tamı̂d extr., Rosh ha-Shana 31a, Sofrim xviii. (cf. supra p. 19). In
the second of these passages cited from the Talmud, R. Akiba seeks to
determine the reasons for this choice by reference to the history of the
creation.

Incorporated in Israel's hymn-book, this Psalm became, with a regard to
its original occasion and purpose, an Old Testament Advent hymn in
honour of the Lord who should come into His temple, [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); and the cry: Lift up, ye gates,
your heads, obtained a meaning essentially the same as that of the voice
of the crier in [Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003) : Prepare ye
Jahve's way, make smooth in the desert a road for our God! In the New
Testament consciousness, the second appearing takes the place of the
first, the coming of the Lord of Glory to His church, which is His
spiritual temple; and in this Psalm we are called upon to prepare Him a
worthy reception. The interpretation of the second half of the Psalm of
the entry of the Conqueror of death into Hades-an interpretation which
has been started by the Gospel of Nicodemus (vid., Tischendorf's Evv.
apocrypha p. 306f.) and still current in the Greek church, - and the
patristic interpretation of it of the εἰς οὐρανοῦς ἀνάληψις τοῦ κυρίου,
do as much violence to the rules of exegesis as to the parallelism of
the facts of the Old and New Testaments.

[Psalms 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 24:1</span></span>

Jahve, whose throne of grace is now set upon Zion, has not a limited
dominion, like the heathen deities: His right to sovereignty embraces
the earth and its fulness ([Psa 50:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012);
[Psa 89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012)), i.e., everything that is
to be found upon it and in it.

(Note: In [Co1 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026), Paul founds on
this verse (cf. [Psa 50:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012)) the
doctrine that a Christian (apart from a charitable regard for the weak)
may eat whatever is sold in the shambles, without troubling himself to
enquire whether it has been offered to idols or not. A Talmudic teacher,
B. Berachoth 35a, infers from this passage the duty of prayer before
meat: He who eats without giving thanks is like one who lays hands upon
קדשׁי שׁמים (the sacred things of God); the right to eat is only
obtained by prayer.)

For He, הוא, is the owner of the world, because its Creator. He has
founded it upon seas, i.e., the ocean and its streams, נהרות, ῥέεθρα
([Jon 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004)); for the waters existed
before the dry land, and this has been cast up out of them at God's
word, so that consequently the solid land, - which indeed also conceals
in its interior a תּהום רבּה ([Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011)), - rising above the surface of
the sea, has the waters, as it were, for its foundation ([Psa
136:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#006)), although it would more readily
sink down into them than keep itself above them, if it were not in
itself upheld by the creative power of God. Hereupon arises the
question, who may ascend the mountain of Jahve, and stand above in His
holy place? The futures have a potential signification: who can have
courage to do it? what, therefore, must he be, whom Jahve receives into
His fellowship, and with whose worship He is well-pleased? Answer: he
must be one innocent in his actions and pure in mind, one who does not
lift up his soul to that which is vain (לשּׁוא, according to the Masora
with Waw minusculum). (ל) נשׂא נפשׁ אל, to direct one's soul, [Psa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001), or longing and striving, towards
anything, [Deu 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015); [Pro
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#018); [Hos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008). The Ker נפשׁי is old and
acknowledged by the oldest authorities.

(Note: The reading נפשׁי is adopted by Saadia (in Enumoth ii., where
נפשׁי is equivalent to שׁמי), Juda ha-Levi (Cuzari iii. 27), Abulwalid
(Rikma p. 180), Rashi, Kimchi, the Sohar, the Codices (and among others
by that of the year 1294) and most editions (among which, the
Complutensis has נפשׁי in the text). Nor does Aben-Ezra, whom Norzi has
misunderstood, by any means reverse the relation of the Chethb and Ker;
to him נפשׁי is the Ker, and he explains it as a metaphor (an
anthropomorphism): וכתוב נפשי דוך כנוי. Elias Levita is the only one who
rejects the Ker נפשׁי; but he does so though misunderstanding a Masora
(vid., Baer's Psalterium p. 130) and not without admitting Masoretic
testimony in favour of it (וכן ראיתי ברוב נוסחאות המסורת). He is the
only textual critic who rejects it. For Jacob b. Chajim is merely
astonished that נפשׁו is not to be found in the Masoreth register of
words written with Waw and to be read with Jod. And even Norzi does not
reject this Ker, which he is obliged to admit has greatly preponderating
testimony in its favour, and he would only too gladly get rid of it.)

Even the lxx Cod. Alex. translates: τὴν ψυχὴν μου; whereas Cod. Vat.
(Eus., Apollin., Theodor., et al.): τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ. Critically it is
just as intangible, as it is exegetically incomprehensible; נפשׁי might
then be equivalent to שׁמי. [Exo 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007),
an explanation, however, which does not seem possible even from [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008); [Jer
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014). We let this Kerמ alone to its
undisturbed critical rights. But that the poet did actually write thus,
is incredible.

In [Psa 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#005) (just as at the close of
[Psa 15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)), in continued predicates,
we are told the character of the man, who is worthy of this privilege,
to whom the question in [Psa 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003)
refers. Such an one shall bear away, or acquire (נשׁא, as e.g., [Est
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#017)) blessing from Jahve and
righteousness from the God of his salvation ([Psa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005); [Psa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#009)). Righteousness, i.e., conformity
to God and that which is well-pleasing to God, appears here as a gift,
and in this sense it is used interchangeably with ישׁע (e.g., [Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009), [Psa
132:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#016)). It is the righteousness of
God after which the righteous, but not the self-righteous, man hungers
and thirsts; that moral perfection which is the likeness of God restored
to him and at the same time brought about by his own endeavours; it is
the being changed, or transfigured, into the image of the Holy One
Himself. With [Psa 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#005) the answer to
the question of [Psa 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003) is at an
end; [Psa 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006) adds that those thus
qualified, who may accordingly expect to receive God's gifts of
salvation, are the true church of Jahve, the Israel of God. דּור (lit.,
a revolution, Arabic dahr, root דר, to turn, revolve) is used here, as
in [Psa 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005); [Psa
73:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015); [Psa
112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002), of a collective whole, whose
bond of union is not contemporaneousness, but similarity of disposition;
and it is an alliteration with the דּרשׁיו (Chethb דרשו, without the Jod
plur.) which follows. מבקשׁי פּניך is a second genitive depending on
דּור, as in [Psa 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#008). Here at the
close the predication passes into the form of invocation (Thy face). And
יעקב is a summarising predicate: in short, these are Jacob, not merely
after the flesh, but after the spirit, and thus in truth ([Isa
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002), cf. [Rom
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006); [Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)). By interpolating אלהי, as is
done in the lxx and Peshto, and adopted by Ewald, Olshausen, Hupfeld,
and Bttcher, the nerve, as it were, of the assertion is cut through. The
predicate, which has been expressed in different ways, is concentrated
intelligibly enough in the one word יעקב, towards which it all along
tends. And here the music becomes forte. The first part of this double
Psalm dies away amidst the playing of the instruments of the Levitical
priests; for the Ark was brought in בּכל־עז וּבשׁירים, as [Sa2
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#005) (cf. [Sa2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014)) is to be read.

[Psalms 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 24:7</span></span>

The festal procession has now arrived above at the gates of the citadel
of Zion. These are called פּתחי עולם, doors of eternity (not "of the
world" as Luther renders it contrary to the Old Testament usage of the
language) either as doors which pious faith hopes will last for ever, as
Hupfeld and Hitzig explain it, understanding them, in opposition to the
inscription of the Psalm, to be the gates of Solomon's Temple; or, what
seems to us much more appropriate in the mouth of those who are now
standing before the gates, as the portals dating back into the hoary
ages of the past (עולם as e.g., in [Gen
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026); [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)), the time of the Jebusites, and
even of Melchizedek, though which the King of Glory, whose whole being
and acts is glory, is now about to enter. It is the gates of the citadel
of Zion, to which the cry is addressed, to expand themselves in a manner
worthy of the Lord who is about to enter, for whom they are too low and
too strait. Rejoicing at the great honour, thus conferred upon them,
they are to raise their heads ([Job
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015); [Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004)), i.e., lift up their portals
(lintels); the doors of antiquity are to open high and wide.

(Note: On the Munach instead of Metheg in והנּשׂיאוּ, vid., Baer's
Accentsystem vii. 2.)

Then the question echoes back to the festal procession from Zion's gates
which are wont only to admit mighty lords: who, then (זה giving
vividness to the question, Ges. 122, 2), is this King of Glory; and they
describe Him more minutely: it is the Hero-god, by whom Israel has
wrested this Zion from the Jebusites with the sword, and by whom he has
always been victorious in time past. The adjectival climactic form
עזּוּז (like למּוּד, with ı̆ instead of the ă in חנּוּן, קשּׁוּב) is only
found in one other passage, viz., [Isa
43:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#017). גּבּור מלחמה refers back to
[Exo 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003). Thus then shall the gates
raise their heads and the ancient doors lift themselves, i.e., open high
and wide; and this is expressed here by Kal instead of Niph. (נשׂא to
lift one's self up, rise, as in [Nah
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#005); [Hos
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001); [Hab
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003)), according to the well-known
order in which recurring verses and refrain-like repetitions move gently
onwards. The gates of Zion ask once more, yet now no longer
hesitatingly, but in order to hear more in praise of the great King. It
is now the enquiry seeking fuller information; and the heaping up of the
pronouns (as in [Jer 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021), cf. [Psa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007); [Est
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#005)) expresses its urgency (quis
tandem, ecquisnam). The answer runs, "Jahve Tsebaoth, He is the King of
Glory (now making His entry)." צבאות ה is the proper name of Jahve as
King, which had become His customary name in the time of the kings of
Israel. צבאות is a genitive governed by ה and, while it is otherwise
found only in reference to human hosts, in this combination it gains, of
itself, the reference to the angels and the stars, which are called
צבאיו in [Psa 103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021); [Psa
148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002) : Jahve's hosts consisting of
celestial heroes, [Joe 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011), and of
stars standing on the plain of the havens as it were in battle array,
[Isa 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026) -a reference for which
experiences and utterances like those recorded in [Gen
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002)., [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); [Jdg
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020), have prepared the way. It is,
therefore, the Ruler commanding innumerable and invincible
super-terrestrial powers, who desires admission. The gates are silent
and open wide; and Jahve, sitting enthroned above the Cherubim of the
sacred Ark, enters into Zion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 25](psa025)

</div>
