<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa007)  [Next](psa009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 8:0</span></span>

The Praise of the Creator's Glory Sung by the Starry Heavens to Puny Man

Ps. 7 closed with a similar prospect of his enemies being undeceived by
the execution of the divine judgments to [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001). The former is the pendant or
companion to the latter, and enters into detail, illustrating it by
examples. Now if at the same time we call to mind the fact, that [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001), if it be not a morning hymn,
at any rate looks back upon sleepless nights of weeping, then the idea
of the arrangement becomes at once clear, when we find a hymn of the
night following [Psa 6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001) with its
pendant, Ps 7. David composes even at night; Jahve's song, as a Korahite
psalmist says of himself in [Psa 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009),
was his companionship even in the loneliness of the night. The omission
of any reference to the sun in [Psa
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004) shows that [Psa
8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001) is a hymn of this kind composed
in the night, or at least one in which the writer transfers himself in
thought to the night season. The poet has the starry heavens before him,
he begins with the glorious revelation of Jahve's power on earth and in
the heavens, and then pauses at man, comparatively puny man, to whom
Jahve condescends in love and whom He has made lord over His creation.
Ewald calls it a flash of lightning cast into the darkness of the
creation.

Even Hitzig acknowledges David's authorship here; whereas Hupfeld is
silent, and Olshausen says that nothing can be said about it. The idea,
that David composed it when a shepherd boy on the plains of Judah, is
rightly rejected again by Hitzig after he has been at the pains to
support it. (This thought is pleasingly worked out by Nachtigal, Psalmen
gesungen vor David's Thronbesteigung, 1797, after the opinion of E. G.
von Bengel, cum magna veri specie.) For, just as the Gospels do not
contain any discourses of our Lord belonging to the time prior to His
baptism, and just as the New Testament canon does not contain any
writings of the Apostles from the time prior to Pentecost, so the Old
Testament canon contains no Psalms of David belonging to the time prior
to his anointing. It is only from that time, when he is the anointed one
of the God of Jacob, that he becomes the sweet singer of Israel, on
whose tongue is the word of Jahve, [Sa2
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001).

The inscription runs: To the Precentor, on the Gittith, a Psalm of
David. The Targum translates it super cithara, quam David de Gath
attulit. According to which it is a Philistine cithern, just as there
was (according to Athenaeus and Pollux) a peculiar Phoenician and Carian
flute played at the festivals of Adonis, called γίγγρας, and also an
Egyptian flute and a Doric lyre. All the Psalms bearing the inscription
על־הגּתּית ([Psa 8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001), 81, [Psa
84:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001)) are of a laudatory character.
The gittith was, therefore, an instrument giving forth a joyous sound,
or (what better accords with its occurring exclusively in the
inscriptions of the Psalms), a joyous melody, perhaps a march of the
Gittite guard, [Sa2 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#018) (Hitzig).

Kurtz makes this Psalm into four tetrastichic strophes, by taking [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002) and v. 10 by themselves as the
opening and close of the hymn, and putting [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002) (Thou whose majesty...) to the
first strophe. But אשׁר is not rightly adapted to begin a strophe; the
poet, we think, would in this case have written אתה אשׁר תנה הודו.

[Psalms 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 8:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 8:2-3) Here, for the first time, the subject speaking in the
Psalm is not one individual, but a number of persons; and who should
they be but the church of Jahve, which (as in [Neh
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#030)) can call Jahve its Lord
(אדנינוּ, like אדני from אדנים plur. excellentiae, Ges. ֗108, 2); but
knowing also at the same time that what it has become by grace it is
called to be for the good of the whole earth? The שׁם of God is the
impress (cognate Arabic wasm, a sign, Greek σῆμα) of His nature, which
we see in His works of creation and His acts of salvation, a nature
which can only be known from this visible and comprehensible
representation (nomen = gnomen).

(Note: Cf. Oehler's art. Name in Herzog's Real-Encyklopdie.)

This name of God is certainly not yet so known and praised everywhere,
as the church to which it has been made known by a positive revelation
can know and praise it; but, nevertheless, it, viz., the divine name
uttered in creation and its works, by which God has made Himself known
and capable of being recognised and named, ifs אדּיר amplum et
gloriosum, everywhere through out the earth, even if it were entirely
without any echo. The clause with אשׁר must not be rendered: Who, do
Thou be pleased to put Thy glory upon the heavens (Gesenius even: quam
tuam magnificentiam pone in caelis), for such a use of the imperat.
after אשׁר is unheard of; and, moreover, although it is true a thought
admissible in its connection with the redemptive history ([Psa
57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006), 12) is thus obtained, it is
here, however, one that runs counter to the fundamental tone, and to the
circumstances, of the Psalm. For the primary thought of the Psalm is
this, that the God, whose glory the heavens reflect, has also glorified
Himself in the earth and in man; and the situation of the poet is this,
that he has the moon and stars before his eyes: how then could he wish
that heaven to be made glorious whose glory is shining into his eyes! It
is just as impracticable to take תּנה as a contraction of נתנה, like
תּתּה [Sa2 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#041), = נתתּה, as Ammonius
and others, and last of all Bhl, have done, or with Thenius (Stud. u.
Krit. 1860 S. 712f.) to read it so at once. For even if the thought:
"which (the earth) gives (announces) Thy glory all over the heavens" is
not contrary to the connection, and if נתן עז, [Psa
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034), and נתן כבוד, [Jer
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016), can be compared with this נתן
הוד, still the phrase נתן הוד על means nothing but to lay majesty on any
one, to clothe him with it, [Num
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#020); [Ch1
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#025); [Dan
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#021), cf. [Psa
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#006); and this is just the thought one
looks for, viz., that the name of the God, who has put His glory upon
the heavens ([Psa 148:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#013)) is also
glorious here below. We must, therefore, take תּנה, although it is
always the form of the imper. elsewhere, as infin., just as רדה occurs
once in [Gen 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#003) as infin. (like the
Arab. rı̆da a giving to drink, lı̆da a bringing forth - forms to which לדה
and the like in Hebrew certainly more exactly correspond).

תּנה הודך signifies the setting of Thy glory (prop. τὸ τιθέναι τὴν δόξαν
σου) just like דּעה את־ה the knowledge of Jahve, and Obad. [Psa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005), שׂים קנּך, probably the setting
of thy nest, Ges. 133. 1. It may be interpreted: O Thou whose laying of
Thy glory is upon the heavens, i.e., Thou who hast chosen this as the
place on which Thou hast laid Thy glory (Hengst.). In accordance with
this Jerome translates it: qui posuisti gloriam tuam super caelos. Thus
also the Syriac version with the Targum: dejabt (דיהבת) shubhoch 'al
shemajo, and Symmachus: ὃς ἔταξας τὸν ἔπαινόν σου ὑπεράνω τῶν οὐρανῶν.
This use of the nomen verbale and the genitival relation of אשׁר to תּנה
הודך, which is taken as one notion, is still remarkable. Hitzig
considers that no reasonable man would think and write thus: but thereby
at the same time utterly condemns his own conjecture תּן ההודך (whose
extending of glory over the heavens). This, moreover, goes beyond the
limits of the language, which is only acquainted with תּן as the name of
an animal. All difficulty would vanish if one might, with Hupfeld, read
נתתּה. But תנה has not the slightest appearance of being a corruption of
נתתה. It might be more readily supposed that תּנה is an erroneous
pointing for תּנה (to stretch or extend, cf. [Hos
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#010) to stretch forth, distribute):
Thou whose glory stretches over the heavens, - an interpretation which
is more probable than that it is, with Paulus and Kurtz, to be read
תּנּה: Thou whose glory is praised (pass. of the תּנּה in [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011); [Jdg
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#040), which belongs to the dialect of
Northern Palestine), instead of which one would more readily expect
יתנּה. The verbal notion, which is tacitly implied in [Psa
113:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#004); [Psa
148:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#013), would then be expressed here.
But perhaps the author wrote תּנה הודך instead of נתתּ הודך, because he
wishes to describe the setting out of the heavens with divine splendour

(Note: In the first Sidonian inscription אדּיר occurs as a by-name of
the heavens (שמם אדרם).)

as being constantly repeated and not as done once for all. There now
follows, in [Psa 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003), the confirmation
of [Psa 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002): also all over the earth,
despite its distance from the heavens above, Jahve's name is glorious;
for even children, yea even sucklings glorify him there, and in fact not
mutely and passively by their mere existence, but with their mouth. עולל
(= מעולל), or עולל is a child that is more mature and capable of
spontaneous action, from עולל (Poel of עלל ludere),

(Note: According to this derivation עולל (cf. Beduin עאלול, ‛âlûl a
young ox) is related to תּעלוּל; whereas עוּל as a synonym of יונק
signifies one who is supported, sustained. For the radical signification
of עוּל according to the Arabic ‛âl, fut. o. is "to weigh heavy, to be
heavy, to lie upon; to have anything incumbent upon one's self, to
carry, support, preserve," whence ‛ajjil the maintained child of the
house, and (ajjila (Damascene ‛êla) he who is dependent upon one for
support and the family depending upon the paterfamilias for sustenance.
Neither Arab. ‛âl, fut. o., nor gâl, fut. i. usually applied to a
pregnant woman who still suckles, has the direct signification to
suckle. Moreover, the demon Ghul does not receive its name from
swallowing up or sucking out (Ges.), but from destroying (Arab. gâl,
fut. o.).)

according to [Sa1 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019); [Psa
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003), distinct from יונק, i.e., a
suckling, not, however, infans, but, - since the Hebrew women were
accustomed to suckle their children for a long period, - a little child
which is able to lisp and speak (vid., 2 Macc. 7:27). Out of the mouth
of beings such as these Jahve has founded for Himself עז. The lxx
translates it the utterance of praise, αἶνον; and עז certainly sometimes
has the meaning of power ascribed to God in praise, and so a laudatory
acknowledgment of His might; but this is only when connected with verbs
of giving, [Psa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001); [Psa
68:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035); [Psa
96:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007). In itself, when standing alone,
it cannot mean this. It is in this passage: might, or victorious power,
which God creates for Himself out of the mouths of children that confess
Him. This offensive and defensive power, as Luther has observed on this
passage, is conceived of as a strong building, עז as מעוז ([Jer
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019)) i.e., a fortress, refuge,
bulwark, fortification, for the foundation of which He has taken the
mouth, i.e., the stammering of children; and this He has done because of
His enemies, to restrain (השׁבּית to cause any one to sit or lie down,
rest, to put him to silence, e.g., [Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010); [Eze
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#024)) such as are enraged against Him
and His, and are inspired with a thirst for vengeance which expresses
itself in curses (the same combination is found in [Psa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017)). Those meant, are the fierce
and calumniating opponents of revelation. Jahve has placed the mouth of
children in opposition to these, as a strong defensive controversive
power. He has chosen that which is foolish and weak in the eyes of the
world to put to shame the wise and that which is strong ([Co1
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)). It is by obscure and naturally
feeble instruments that He makes His name glorious here below. and
overcomes whatsoever is opposed to this glorifying.

[Psalms 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 8:3</span></span>

(Heb.: 8:4-6) Stier wrongly translates: For I shall behold. The
principal thought towards which the rest tends is [Psa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005) (parallel are [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002) a, 3), and consequently [Psa
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004) is the protasis (par., [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)), and כּי accordingly is = quum,
quando, in the sense of quoties. As often as he gazes at the heavens
which bear upon themselves the name of God in characters of light
(wherefore he says שׁמיך), the heavens with their boundless spaces (an
idea which lies in the plur. שׁמים) extending beyond the reach of mortal
eye, the moon (ירח, dialectic ורח, perhaps, as Maurer derives it, from
ירח = ירק subflavum esse), and beyond this the innumerable stars which
are lost in infinite space (כּוכבים = כּבכּבים prop. round, ball-shaped,
spherical bodies) to which Jahve appointed their fixed place on the
vault of heaven which He has formed with all the skill of His creative
wisdom (כּונן to place and set up, in the sense of existence and
duration): so often does the thought "what is mortal man...?" increase
in power and intensity. The most natural thought would be: frail, puny
man is as nothing before all this; but this thought is passed over in
order to celebrate, with grateful emotion and astonished adoration, the
divine love which appears in all the more glorious light, - a love which
condescends to poor man, the dust of earth. Even if אנושׁ does not come
from אנשׁ to be fragile, nevertheless, according to the usage of the
language, it describes man from the side of his impotence, frailty, and
mortality (vid., [Psa 103:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#015); [Isa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012), and on [Gen
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026)). בּן־אדם, also, is not without a
similar collateral reference. With retrospective reference to עוללים
וינקים, בּן־אדם is equivalent to ילוּד־אשּׁה in [Job
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001) : man, who is not, like the
stars, God's directly creative work, but comes into being through human
agency born of woman. From both designations it follows that it is the
existing generation of man that is spoken of. Man, as we see him in
ourselves and others, this weak and dependent being is, nevertheless,
not forgotten by God, God remembers him and looks about after him (פּקד
of observing attentively, especially visitation, and with the accus. it
is generally used of lovingly provident visitation, e.g., [Jer
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015)). He does not leave him to
himself, but enters into personal intercourse with him, he is the
special and favoured object whither His eye turns (cf. [Psa
144:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#003), and the parody of the tempted
one in [Job 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#017).).

It is not until [Psa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006) that the
writer glances back at creation. ותּחסּרהוּ (differing from the fut.
consec. [Job 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#018)) describes that
which happened formerly. חסּר מן signifies to cause to be short of,
wanting in something, to deprive any one of something (cf. [Ecc
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#008)). מן is here neither comparative
(paullo inferiorem eum fecisti Deo), nor negative (paullum derogasti ei,
ne esset Deus), but partitive (paullum derogasti ei divinae naturae);
and, without אלהים being on that account an abstract plural, paullum
Deorum, = Dei (vid., Genesis S. 66f.), is equivalent to paullum numinis
Deorum. According to [Gen 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027) man is
created בּצלם אלהים, he is a being in the image of God, and, therefore,
nearly a divine being. But when God says: "let us make man in our image
after our likeness," He there connects Himself with the angels. The
translation of the lxx ἠλάττωσας αὐτὸν βραχύ τι παρ ̓ ἀγγέλους, with
which the Targum and the prevailing Jewish interpretations also
harmonize, is, therefore, not unwarranted. Because in the biblical mode
of conception the angels are so closely connected with God as the
nearest creaturely effulgence of His nature, it is really possible that
in מאלהים David may have thought of God including the angels. Since man
is in the image of God, he is at the same time in the likeness of an
angel, and since he is only a little less than divine, he is also only a
little less than angelic. The position, somewhat exalted above the
angels, which he occupies by being the bond between all created things,
in so far as mind and matter are united in him, is here left out of
consideration. The writer has only this one thing in his mind, that man
is inferior to God, who is רוּח, and to the angels who are רוּחות ([Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003); [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)) in this respect, that he is a
material being, and on this very account a finite and mortal being; as
Theodoret well and briefly observes: τῷ θνητῷ τῶν ἀγγέλων ἠλάττωται.
This is the מעט in which whatever is wanting to him to make him a divine
being is concentrated. But it is nothing more than מעט. The assertion in
[Psa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006) refers to the fact of the
nature of man being in the image of God, and especially to the spirit
breathed into him from God; [Psa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006),
to his godlike position as ruler in accordance with this his
participation in the divine nature: honore ac decore coronasti eum.
כּבוד is the manifestation of glory described from the side of its
weightiness and fulness; הוד (cf. הד, הידד) from the side of its far
resounding announcement of itself (vid., on [Job
39:20](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#020)); הדר from the side of its
brilliancy, majesty, and beauty. הוד והדר, [Psa
96:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#006), or also הדר כּבור הוד ה, [Psa
145:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#005), is the appellation of the
divine doxa, with the image of which man is adorned as with a regal
crown. The preceding fut. consec. also stamps תּעטּרהוּ and תּמשׁילהוּ
as historical retrospects. The next strophe unfolds the regal glory of
man: he is the lord of all things, the lord of all earthly creatures.

[Psalms 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 8:6</span></span>

(Heb.: 8:7-9) Man is a king, and not a king without territory; the world
around, with the works of creative wisdom which fill it, is his kingdom.
The words "put under his feet" sound like a paraphrase of the רדה in
[Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), [Gen
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028), כּל is unlimited, as in [Job
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#001); [Job
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#002); [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024). But the expansion of the
expression in [Psa 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008), [Psa
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#009) extends only to the earth, and is
limited even there to the different classes of creatures in the regions
of land, air, and water. The poet is enthusiastic in his survey of this
province of man's dominion. And his lofty poetic language corresponds to
this enthusiasm. The enumeration begins with the domestic animals and
passes on from these to the wild beasts-together the creatures that
dwell on terra firma. צנה (צנא [Num
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#024)) from צנה (צנא) Arab. dnâ (dn'),
as also Arab. dân, fut. o., proliferum esse is, in poetry, equivalent to
צאן, which is otherwise the usual name for small cattle. אלפים (in
Aramaic, as the name of the letter shows, a prose word) is in Hebrew
poetically equivalent to בּקר; the oxen which willingly accommodate
themselves to the service of man, especially of the husbandman, are so
called from אלף to yield to. Wild animals, which in prose are called
חיּת הארץ, (השּׂדה) here bear the poetical name בּהמות שׂדי, as in [Joe
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022), cf. [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020), [Sa1
17:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#044). שׂדי (in pause שׂדי) is the
primitive form of שׂדה, which is not declined, and has thereby obtained
a collective signification. From the land animals the description passes
on to the fowls of the air and the fishes of the water. צפּור is the
softer word, instead of עוף; and שׁמים is water. צפּור is the softer
word, instead of עוף; and שׁמים is used without the art. according to
poetical usage, whereas היּם without the art. would have sounded too
scanty and not sufficiently measured. In connection with ימּים the
article may be again omitted, just as with שׁמים. עבר is a collective
participle. If the following were intended: he (or: since he), viz.,
man, passes through the paths of the sea (Bttcher, Cassel, and even
Aben-Ezra and Kimchi), then it would not have been expressed in such a
monostich, and in a form so liable to lead one astray. The words may be
a comprehensive designation of that portion of the animal kingdom which
is found in the sea; and this also intended to include all from the
smallest worm to the gigantic leviathan: ὁππόσα ποντοπόρους
παρεπιστείβουσι κελεύθους (Apollinaris). If man thus rules over every
living thing that is round about him from the nearest to the most
remote, even that which is apparently the most untameable: then it is
clear that every lifeless created thing in his vicinity must serve him
as its king. The poet regards man in the light of the purpose for which
he was created.

[Psalms 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 8:9</span></span>

(Heb.: 8:10) 8:10. He has now demonstrated what he expressed in [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002), that the name of Jahve whose
glory is reflected by the heavens, is also glorious on earth. Thus,
then, he can as a conclusion repeat the thought with which he began, in
a wider and more comprehensive meaning, and weave his Psalm together, as
it were, into a wreath.

It is just this Psalm, of which one would have least expected it, that
is frequently quoted in the New Testament and applied to the Messiah.
Indeed Jesus' designation of Himself by ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, however far
it may refer back to the Old Testament Scriptures, leans no less upon
this Psalm than upon [Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013). The
use the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews ([Heb
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006)) makes of [Psa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005) of this Psalm shows us how the New
Testament application to the Messiah is effected. The psalmist regards
man as one who glorifies God and as a prince created of God. The
deformation of this position by sin he leaves unheeded. But both sides
of the mode of regarding it are warranted. On the one hand, we see that
which man has become by creation still in operation even in his present
state; on the other hand, we see it distorted and stunted. If we compare
what the Psalm says with this shady side of the reality, from which side
it is incongruous with the end of man's creation, then the song which
treats of the man of the present becomes a prophecy of the man of the
future. The Psalm undergoes this metamorphosis in the New Testament
consciousness, which looks more to the loss than to that which remains
of the original. In fact, the centre of the New Testament consciousness
is Jesus the Restorer of that which is lost. The dominion of the world
lost to fallen man, and only retained by him in a ruined condition, is
allotted to mankind, when redeemed by Him, in fuller and more perfect
reality. This dominion is not yet in the actual possession of mankind,
but in the person of Jesus it now sits enthroned at the right hand of
God. In Him the idea of humanity is transcendently realised, i.e.,
according to a very much higher standard than that laid down when the
world was founded. He has entered into the state-only a little (βραχύ
τι) beneath the angels - of created humanity for a little while (βραχύ
τι), in order to raise redeemed humanity above the angels. Everything
(כּל) is really put under Him with just as little limitation as is
expressed in this Psalm: not merely the animal kingdom, not merely the
world itself, but the universe with all the ruling powers in it, whether
they be in subjection or in hostility to God, yea even the power of
death ([Co1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027), cf. [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022)). Moreover, by redemption, more
than heretofore, the confession which comes from the mouth of little
children is become a bulwark founded of God, in order that against it
the resistance of the opponents of revelation may be broken. We have an
example of this in [Mat 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016), where
our Lord points the pharisees and scribes, who are enraged at the
Hosanna of the children, to [Psa 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003).
Redemption demands of man, before everything else, that he should become
as a little child, and reveals its mysteries to infants, which are
hidden from the wise and intelligent. Thus, therefore, it is μικροὶ καὶ
νήπιοι, whose tongue is loosed by the Spirit of God, who are to put to
shame the unbelieving; and all that this Psalm says of the man of the
present becomes in the light of the New Testament in its relation to the
history of redemption, a prophecy of the Son of man κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν, and of
the new humanity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 9](psa009)

</div>
