<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa037)  [Next](psa039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 38:0</span></span>

Prayer for the Changing of Merited Wrath into Rescuing Love

The Penitential Psalm, 38, is placed immediately after Ps 37 on account
of the similarity of its close to the ת strophe of that Psalm. It begins
like [Psa 6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001). If we regard David's
adultery as the occasion of it (cf. more especially [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)), then [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001); 38; 51; [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001) form a chronological series.
David is distressed both in mind and body, forsaken by his friends, and
regarded by his foes as one who is cast off for ever. The fire of divine
anger burns within him like a fever, and the divine withdrawal as it
were rests upon him like darkness. But he fights his way by prayer
through this fire and this darkness to the bright confidence of faith.
The Psalm, although it is the pouring forth of such elevated and
depressed feelings, is nevertheless symmetrically and skilfully laid
out. It consists of three main paragraphs, which divide into four ([Psa
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)), three ([Psa
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010)), and four ([Psa
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#016)) tetrastichs. The way in which
the names of God are brought in is well conceived. The first word of the
first group or paragraph is יהוה, the first word of the second אדני, and
in the third יהוה and אדני are used interchangeably twice. The Psalm, in
common with [Psa 70:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#001), bears the
inscription להזכּיר. The chronicler, in [Ch1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#004), refers to these Hazkir Psalms
together with the Hodu and Halleluja Psalms. In connection with the
presentation of meat-offerings, מנחות, a portion of the meat-offering
was cast into the altar fire, viz., a handful of the meal mixed with oil
and the whole of the incense. This portion was called אזכּרה, ἀνάμνησις,
and to offer it הזכּיר (a denominative), because the ascending smoke was
intended to bring the owner of the offering into remembrance with God.
In connection with the presentation of this memorial portion of the
mincha, the two Psalms are appointed to be used as prayers; hence the
inscription: at the presentation of the Azcara (the portion taken from
the meal-offering). The lxx adds here περὶ (τοῦ) σαββάτου; perhaps
equivalent to לשּׁבּת.

In this Psalm we find a repetition of a peculiarity of the penitential
Psalms, viz., that the praying one has to complain not only of
afflictions of body and soul, but also of outward enemies, who come
forward as his accusers and take occasion from his sin to prepare the
way for his ruin. This arises from the fact that the Old Testament
believer, whose perception of sin was not as yet so spiritual and deep
as that of the New Testament believer, almost always calls to mind some
sinful act that has become openly known. The foes, who would then
prepare for his ruin, are the instruments of the Satanic power of evil
(cf. [Psa 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021), ישׂטנוּני), which, as
becomes perceptible to the New Testament believer even without the
intervention of outward foes, desires the death of the sinning one,
whereas God wills that he should live.

[Psalms 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 38:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 38:2-9) David begins, as in [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001), with the prayer that his
punitive affliction may be changed into disciplinary. Bakius correctly
paraphrases. [Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002) : Corripe sane
per legem, castiga per crucem, millies promerui, negare non possum, sed
castiga, quaeso, me ex amore ut pater, non ex furore et fervore ut
judex; ne punias justitiae rigore, sed misericordiae dulcore (cf. on
[Psa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)). The negative is to be
repeated in [Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002), as in [Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005); [Psa
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019); [Psa
75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006). In the description, which give
the ground of the cry for pity, נחת, is not the Piel, as in [Psa
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#035), but the Niphal of the Kal נחת
immediately following (root נח). קצף is anger as a breaking forth,
fragor (cf. [Hos 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#007), lxx φρύγανον),
with ĕ instead of ı̆ in the first syllable, vowels which alternate in
this word; and חמה, as a glowing or burning. חצּים (in Homer, κῆλα),
God's wrath-arrows, i.e., lightnings of wrath, are His judgments of
wrath; and יד, as in [Psa 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004); [Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011), God's punishing hand, which
makes itself felt in dispensing punishment, hence תּנחת might be
attached as a mood of sequence. In [Psa
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004) wrath is called זעם as a boiling
up. Sin is the cause of this experiencing wrath, and the wrath is the
cause of the bodily derangement; sin as an exciting cause of the wrath
always manifests itself outwardly even on the body as a fatal power. In
[Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005) sin is compared to waters
that threaten to drown one, as in [Psa
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005) to a burden that presses one
down. ככבּדוּ ממּנּי, they are heavier than I, i.e., than my power of
endurance, too heavy for me. In [Psa
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006) the effects of the operation of
the divine hand (as punishing) are wounds, חבּוּרת (properly, suffused
variegated marks from a blow or wheals, [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006); from חבר, Arab. ḥbr, to be or
make striped, variegated), which הבאישׁוּ, send forth an offensive
smell, and נמקּוּ, suppurate. Sin, which causes this, is called אוּלת,
because, as it is at last manifest, it is always the destruction of
itself. With emphasis does מפּני אוּלתּי form the second half of the
verse. To take נעויתי out of [Psa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)
and put it to this, as Meier and Thenius propose, is to destroy this its
proper position. On the three מפּני, vid., Ewald, 217, l. Thus sick in
soul and body, he is obliged to bow and bend himself in the extreme.
נעוה is used of a convulsive drawing together of the body, [Isa
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003); שׁחח, of a bowed mien, [Psa
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014); הלּך, of a heavy, lagging gait.
With כּי in [Psa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008) the grounding of
the petition begins for the third time. His כּסלים, i.e., internal
muscles of the loins, which are usually the fattest parts, are full of
נקלה, that which is burnt, i.e., parched. It is therefore as though the
burning, starting from the central point of the bodily power, would
spread itself over the whole body: the wrath of God works commotion in
this latter as well as in the soul. Whilst all the energies of life thus
yield, there comes over him a partial, almost total lifelessness. פּוּג
is the proper word for the coldness and rigidity of a corpse; the Niphal
means to be brought into this condition, just as נדכּא means to be
crushed, or to be brought into a condition of crushing, i.e., of violent
dissolution. The מן of מנּהמת is intended to imply that the loud wail is
only the utterance of the pain that is raging in his heart, the outward
expression of his ceaseless, deep inward groaning.

[Psalms 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 38:9</span></span>

(Heb.: 38:10-15) Having thus bewailed his suffering before God, he goes
on in a somewhat calmer tone: it is the calm of weariness, but also of
the rescue which shows itself from afar. He has complained, but not as
if it were necessary for him first of all to make God acquainted with
his suffering; the Omniscient One is directly cognisant of (has directly
before Him, נגד, like לנגד in [Psa
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025)) every wish that his suffering
extorts from him, and even his softer sighing does not escape His
knowledge. The sufferer does not say this so much with the view of
comforting himself with this thought, as of exciting God's compassion.
Hence he even goes on to draw the piteous picture of his condition: his
heart is in a state of violent rotary motion, or only of violent,
quickly repeated contraction and expansion (Psychol. S. 252; tr. p.
297), that is to say, a state of violent palpitation (סחרחר, Pealal
according to Ges. 55, 3). Strength of which the heart is the centre
([Psa 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013)) has left him, and the
light of his eyes, even of these (by attraction for גּם־הוּא, since the
light of the eyes is not contrasted with anything else), is not with
him, but has become lost to him by weeping, watching, and fever. Those
who love him and are friendly towards him have placed themselves far
from his stroke (nega\`, the touch of God's hand of wrath), merely
looking on ([Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)), therefore, in
a position hostile ([Sa2 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#013)) rather
than friendly. מנּגד, far away, but within the range of vision, within
sight, [Gen 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#016); [Deu
32:52](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#052). The words וּקרובי מרחק עמדוּ,
which introduce a pentastich into a Psalm that is tetrastichic
throughout, have the appearance of being a gloss or various reading:
מנּגד = מרחק, [Kg2 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#007). His enemies,
however, endeavour to take advantage of his fall and helplessness, in
order to give him his final death-blow. וינקּשׁוּ (with the ק dageshed)

(Note: The various reading וינקּשׁוּ in Norzi rests upon a
misapprehended passage of Abulwald (Rikma, p. 166).)

describes what they have planned in consequence of the position he is
in. The substance of their words is הוּות, utter destruction (vid., [Psa
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010)); to this end it is מרמות, deceit
upon deceit, malice upon malice, that they unceasingly hatch with heart
and mouth. In the consciousness of his sin he is obliged to be silent,
and, renouncing all self-help, to abandon his cause to God.
Consciousness of guilt and resignation close his lips, so that he is not
able, nor does he wish, to refute the false charges of his enemies; he
has no תּוכחות, counter-evidence wherewith to vindicate himself. It is
not to be rendered: "just as one dumb opens not his mouth;" כ is only a
preposition, not a conjunction, and it is just here, in [Psa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014), [Psa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015), that the manifest proofs in
support of this are found.

(Note: The passages brought forward by Hupfeld in support of the use of
כ as a conjunction, viz., [Psa 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005);
[Psa 125:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001); [Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007); [Isa
61:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#011), are invalid; the passage that
seems most to favour it is [Oba 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016),
but in this instance the expression is elliptical, כּלא being equivalent
to כאשׁר לא, like ללא, [Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001), =
לאשׁר לא. It is only כּמו (Arab. kmâ) that can be used as a conjunction;
but כ (Arab. k) is always a preposition in ancient Hebrew just as in
Syriac and Arabic (vid., Fleischer in the Hallische Allgem. Lit.
Zeitschr. 1843, Bd. iv. S. 117ff.). It is not until the mediaeval
synagogal poetry (vid., Zunz, Synagogal-poesie des Mittelalters, S. 121,
381f.) that it is admissible to use it as a conjunction (e.g., כּמצא,
when he had found), just as it also occurs in Himjaritic, according to
Osiander's deciphering of the inscriptions. The verbal clause appended
to the word to which this כ, instar, is prefixed is for the most part an
attributive clause as above, but sometimes even a circumstantial clause
(Arab. ḥâl), as in [Psa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014); cf.
Sur. lxii. 5: "as the likeness of an ass carrying books.")

[Psalms 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 38:15</span></span>

(Heb.: 38:16-23) Become utterly useless in himself, he renounces all
self-help, for (כּי) he hopes in Jahve, who alone can help him. He waits
for His answer, for (כי) he says, etc. - he waits for an answer, for the
hearing of this his petition which is directed towards the glory of God,
that God would not suffer his foes to triumph over him, nor strengthen
them in their mercilessness and injustice. [Psa
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018) appears also to stand under the
government of the פּן;

(Note: The following are the constructions of פן when a clause of ore
than one member follows it: (1) fut. and perf., the latter with the tone
of the perf. consec., e.g., [Exo
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015)., or without it, e.g., [Psa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001) (which see); (2) fut. and fut. as
in [Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012), [Jer
51:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#046). This construction is
indispensable where it is intended to give special prominence to the
subject notion or a secondary notion of the clause, e.g., [Deu
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#006). In one instance פן is even
followed (3) by the perf. and fut. consec., viz., [Kg2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#010).)

but, since in this case one would look for a Waw relat. and a different
order of the words, [Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018) is to
be regarded as a subject clause: "who, when my foot totters, i.e., when
my affliction changes to entire downfall, would magnify themselves
against me." In [Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018), כּי
connects what follows with בּמוט רגלי by way of confirmation: he is נכון
לצלע, ready for falling ([Psa 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015)),
he will, if God does not graciously interpose, assuredly fall headlong.
The fourth כּי in [Psa 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#019) is
attached confirmatorily to [Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018):
his intense pain or sorrow is ever present to him, for he is obliged to
confess his guilt, and this feeling of guilt is just the very sting of
his pain. And whilst he in the consciousness of well-deserved punishment
is sick unto death, his foes are numerous and withal vigorous and full
of life. Instead of חיּים, probably חנּם, as in [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019); [Psa
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005), is to be read (Houbigant,
Hitzig, Kster, Hupfeld, Ewald, and Olshausen). But even the lxx read
חיים; and the reading which is so old, although it does not very well
suit עצמוּ (instead of which one would look for ועצוּמים), is still not
without meaning: he looks upon himself, according to [Psa
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009), more as one dead than living;
his foes, however, are חיּים, living, i.e., vigorous. The verb
frequently ash this pregnant meaning, and the adjective can also have
it. Just as the accentuation of the form סבּוּ varies elsewhere out of
pause, ורבּוּ here has the tone on the ultima, although it is not perf.
consec.

(Note: As perf. consec. the following have the accent on the ultima: -
וחתּוּ, [Isa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#005), [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009), and ורבּוּ, [Isa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016); perhaps also וחדּוּ, וקלּוּ,
[Hab 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008), and ורבּוּ (perf. hypoth.),
[Job 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#015). But there is no special
reason for the ultima-accentuation of רכּוּ, [Psa
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022); רבּוּ, [Psa
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005); דּלּוּ, [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014); קלּוּ, [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013); שׁחוּ, [Pro
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#019); [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006); חתּוּ, [Job
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#015); זכּוּ, צחוּ, [Lam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007).)

[Psa 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021) is an apposition of the
subject, which remains the same as in [Psa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020). Instead of רדופי (Ges. 61, rem.
2) the Ker is רדפי, rādephî (without any Makkeph following), or רדפי,
rādophî; cf. on this pronunciation, [Psa
86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002); [Psa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001), and with the Chethb רדופי, the
Chethb צרופה, [Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002), also מיורדי,
[Psa 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004). By the "following of that
which is good" David means more particularly that which is brought into
exercise in relation to his present foes.

(Note: In the Greek and Latin texts, likewise in all the Aethiopic and
several Arabic texts, and in the Syriac Psalterium Medilanense, the
following addition is found after [Psa
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021) : Ce aperripsan me ton agapeton
osi necron ebdelygmenon, Et projecerunt me dilectum tanquam mortuum
abominatum (so the Psalt. Veronense). Theodoret refers it to Absalom's
relation to David. The words ὡσεὶ νεκρὸν ἐβδελυγμένον are taken from
[Isa 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019).)

He closes in [Psa 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022) with sighs for
help. No lighting up of the darkness of wrath takes place. The fides
supplex is not changed into fides triumphans. But the closing words, "O
Lord, my salvation" (cf. [Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016)),
show where the repentance of Cain and that of David differ. True
repentance has faith within itself, it despairs of itself, but not of
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 39](psa039)

</div>
