<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa022)  [Next](psa024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 23:0</span></span>

Praise of the Good Shepherd

The arrangement, by which a Psalm that speaks of a great feast of mercy
prepared for mankind is followed by a Psalm that praises Jahve as the
Shepherd and Host of His own people, could not possibly be more sensible
and appropriate. If David is the author, and there is no reason for
doubting it, then this Psalm belongs to the time of the rebellion under
Absolom, and this supposition is confirmed on every hand. It is like an
amplification of [Psa 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008); and [Psa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007) is also echoed in it. But not only
does it contain points of contact with this pair of Psalms of the time
mentioned, but also with other Psalms belonging to the same period, as
[Psa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004), and more especially [Psa
63:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001), which is said to have been
composed when David had retreated with his faithful followers over
Kidron and the Mount of Olives into the plains of the wilderness of
Judah, whither Hushai sent him tidings, which counselled him to pass
over Jordan with all possible haste. It is characteristic of all these
Psalms, that in them David years after the house of God as after the
peculiar home of his heart, and, that all his wishes centre in the one
wish to be at home again. And does not this short, tender song, with its
depth of feeling and its May-like freshness, accord with David's want
and wanderings to and fro at that time?

It consists of two hexastichs with short closing lines, resembling (as
also in [Isa 16:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009)) the Adonic verse
of the strophe of Sappho, and a tetrastich made up of very short and
longer lines intermixed.

[Psalms 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 23:1</span></span>

The poet calls Jahve רעי, as He who uniformly and graciously provides
for and guides him and all who are His. Later prophecy announces the
visible appearing of this Shepherd, [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011), [Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023), and other passages. If this has
taken place, the רעי ה from the mouth of man finds its cordial response
in the words ἐγὼ εἰμὶ ὁ ποιμὴν ὁ καλός. He who has Jahve, the possessor
of all things, himself has all things, he lacks nothing; viz., כּ־טוב,
whatever is good in itself and would be good for him, [Psa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011); [Psa
84:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012). נאות דּשׁא are the pastures of
fresh and tender grass, where one lies at ease, and rest and enjoyment
are combined. נאה (נוה), according to its primary meaning, is a
resting-or dwelling-place, specifically an oasis, i.e., a verdant spot
in the desert. מי מנוּחת are waters, where the weary finds a most
pleasant resting-place (according to Hitzig, it is a plural brought in
by the plural of the governing word, but it is at any rate a superlative
plural), and can at the same time refresh himself. נהל is suited to this
as being a pastoral word used of gentle leading, and more especially of
guiding the herds to the watering-places, just as הרבּיץ is used of
making them to rest, especially at noon-tide, [Sol
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007); cf. ὁδηγεῖν, Rev 7:17. שׁובב נפשׁ
(elsewhere השׁיב) signifies to bring back the soul that is as it were
flown away, so that it comes to itself again, therefore to impart new
life, recreare. This He does to the soul, by causing it amidst the
dryness and heat of temptation and trouble, to taste the very essence of
life which refreshes and strengthens it. The Hiph. הנחה (Arabic: to put
on one side, as perhaps in [Job 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#023))
is, as in [Psa 143:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010) the intensive of
נחה (Ps 77:21). The poet glories that Jahve leads him carefully and
without risk or wandering in מעגּלי־צדק, straight paths and leading to
the right goal, and this למען שׁמו (for His Name's sake). He has
revealed Himself as the gracious One, and as such He will prove and
glorify Himself even in the need of him who submits to His guidance.

[Psalms 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 23:4</span></span>

Rod and staff are here not so much those of the pilgrim, which would be
a confusing transition to a different figure, but those of Jahve, the
Shepherd (שׁבט, as in [Mic 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014), and
in connection with it, cf. [Num 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#018),
משׁענת as the filling up of the picture), as the means of guidance and
defence. The one rod, which the shepherd holds up to guide the flock,
and upon which he leans and anxiously watches over the flock, has
assumed a double form in the conception of the idea. This rod and staff
in the hand of God comfort him, i.e., preserve to him the feeling of
security, and therefore a cheerful spirit. Even when he passes through a
valley dark and gloomy as the shadow of death, where surprises and
calamities of every kind threaten him, he hears no misfortune. The lxx
narrows the figure, rendering בגיא according to the Aramaic בּגוא, [Dan
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025), ἐν μέσῳ. The noun צלמות, which
occurs in this passage for the first time in the Old Testament
literature, is originally not a compound word; but being formed from a
verb צלם, Arab. ḏlm (root צל, Arab. ḏl), to overshadow, darken, after
the form עבדוּת, but pronounced צלמות (cf. חצרמות, Hadra-môt = the court
of death, בּצלאל in-God's-shadow), it signifies the shadow of death as
an epithet of the most fearful darkness, as of Hades, [Job
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021)., but also of a shaft of a mine,
[Job 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#003), and more especially of
darkness such as makes itself felt in a wild, uninhabited desert, [Jer
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006).

After the figure of the shepherd fades away in [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004), that of the host appears. His
enemies must look quietly on (נגד as in [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)), without being able to do
anything, and see how Jahve provides bountifully for His guest, anoints
him with sweet perfumes as at a joyous and magnificent banquet ([Psa
92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011)), and fills his cup to excess.
What is meant thereby, is not necessarily only blessings of a spiritual
kind. The king fleeing before Absolom and forsaken by the mass of his
people was, with his army, even outwardly in danger of being destroyed
by want; it is, therefore, even an abundance of daily bread streaming in
upon them, as in [Sa2 17:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027), that
is meant; but even this, spiritually regarded, as a gift from heaven,
and so that the satisfying, refreshing and quickening is only the
outside phase of simultaneous inward experiences.

(Note: In the mouth of the New Testament saint, especially on the dies
viridium, it is the table of the Lord's supper, as Apollinaris also
hints when he applied to it the epithet ῥιγεδανῶν βρίθουσαν, horrendorum
onustam.)

The future תּערך is followed, according to the customary return to the
perfect ground-form, by דּשּׁנתּ, which has, none the less, the
signification of a present. And in the closing assertion, כּוסי, my cup,
is metonymically equivalent to the contents of my cup. This is רויה, a
fulness satiating even to excess.

[Psalms 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 23:6</span></span>

Foes are now pursuing him, but prosperity and favour alone shall pursue
him, and therefore drive his present pursuers out of the field. אך,
originally affirmative, here restrictive, belongs only to the
subject-notion in its signification nil nisi ([Psa
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006), [Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012); [Psa
139:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#011)). The expression is remarkable
and without example elsewhere: as good spirits Jahve sends forth טּוב
and חסד to overtake David's enemies, and to protect him against them to
their shame, and that all his life long (accusative of continuance). We
have now no need, in connection with our reference of the Psalm to the
persecution under Absolom, either to persuade ourselves that ושׁבתּי is
equivalent to ושׁבתּי [Psa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004), or
that it is equivalent to וישׁבתּי. The infinitive is logically
inadmissible here, and unheard of with the vowel ā instead of i, which
would here (cf. on the other hand קחתּי) be confusing and arbitrary. Nor
can it be shown from [Jer 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#010) to be
probable that it is contracted from וישׁבתי, since in that passage שׁוב
signifies redeundo = rursus. The lxx, certainly, renders it by
καθίσαντες, as in [Sa1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#002) by καὶ
καθήσομαι; but (since so much uncertainty attaches to these translators
and their text) we cannot draw a safe inference as to the existing usage
of the language, which would, in connection with such a contraction, go
out of the province of one verb into that of another, which is not the
case with תּתּה = נתתּה in [Sa2 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#041).
On the contrary we have before us in the present passage a constructio
praegnans: "and I shall return (perf. consec.) in the house of Jahve,"
i.e., again, having returned, dwell in the house of Jahve. In itself
ושׁבתּי ב might also even mean et revertam ad (cf. [Psa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#017); [Hos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007)), like עלה ב, [Psa
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003), adscendere ad (in). But the
additional assertion of continuance, לארך ימים (as in [Psa
93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005); [Lam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#020), ארך, root רך, extension,
lengthening = length) favours the explanation, that בּ is to be
connected with the idea of וישׁבתי, which is involved in ושׁבתי as a
natural consequence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 24](psa024)

</div>
