<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa033)  [Next](psa035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 34:0</span></span>

Thanksgiving and Teaching of One Who Has Experienced Deliverance

In [Psa 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018) we heard the words,
"Behold, the eye of Jahve is directed toward them that fear Him," and in
[Psa 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016) we hear this same grand
thought, "the eyes of Jahve are directed towards the righteous." Ps 34
is one of the eight Psalms which are assigned, by their inscriptions, to
the time of David's persecution by Saul, and were composed upon that
weary way of suffering extending from Gibea of Saul to Ziklag. (The
following is an approximation to their chronological order: Ps 7, 59,
[Psa 56:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001), 34, [Psa
52:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001), [Psa
57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001), [Psa
142:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001), [Psa
54:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)). The inscription runs: Of
David, when he disguised his understanding (טעמּו with Dag., lest it
should be pronounced טעמו) before Abimelech, and he drove him away
(ויגרשׁהוּ with Chateph Pathach, as is always the case with verbs whose
second radical is ר, if the accent is on the third radical) and he
departed. David, being pressed by Saul, fled into the territory of the
Philistines; here he was recognised as the man who had proved such a
dangerous enemy to them years since and he was brought before Achish,
the king. [Psa 56:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001) is a prayer
which implores help in the trouble of this period (and its relation to
[Psa 24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001) resembles that of Ps 51
to [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)). David's life would
have been lost had not his desperate attempt to escape by playing the
part of a madman been successful. The king commanded him to depart, and
David betook himself to a place of concealment in his own country, viz.,
the cave of Adullam in the wilderness of Judah.

The correctness of the inscription has been disputed. Hupfeld maintains
that the writer has blindly taken it from [Sa1
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#014). According to Redslob, Hitzig,
Olshausen, and Stהhelin, he had reasons for so doing, although they are
invalid. The טעמוּ of the Psalm ([Psa
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009)) seemed to him to accord with
טעמּו, [Sa1 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#014); and in addition to
this, he combined תּתהלּל, gloraris, of the Psalm ([Psa
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003)) with ויּתהלל, insanivit, [Sa1
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#014). We come to a different
conclusion. The Psalm does not contain any express reference to that
incident in Philistia, hence we infer that the writer of the inscription
knew of this reference from tradition. His source of information is not
the Books of Samuel; for there the king is called אכישׁ, whereas he
calls him אבימלך, and this, as even Basil has perceived (vid., Euthymius
Zigadenus' introduction to this Psalm), is the title of the Philistine
kings, just as Pharaoh is title of the Egyptian, Agag of the Amalekite,
and Lucumo of the Etruscan kings. His source of information, as a
comparison of [Sa2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001) with [Psa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001) shows, is a different work, viz.,
the Annals of David, in which he has traced the Psalm before us and
other Psalms to their historical connection, and then indicated it by an
inscription in words taken from that source. The fact of the Psalm being
alphabetical says nothing against David as its author (vid., on Ps
9-10). It is not arranged for music; for although it begins after the
manner of a song of praise, it soon passes into the didactic tone. It
consists of verses of two lines, which follow one another according to
the order of the letters of the alphabet. The ו is wanting, just as the
נ is wanting in Ps 145; and after ת, as in Ps 25, which is the
counterpart to Ps 34, follows a second supernumerary פ.

[Psalms 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 34:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 34:2-4) The poet begins with the praise of Jahve, and calls upon
all the pious to unite with him in praising Him. The substantival clause
[Psa 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002), is intended to have just as
much the force of a cohortative as the verbal clause [Psa
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002). אברכה, like ויגרשׁהו, is to be
written with Chateph-Pathach in the middle syllable. In distinction from
עניּים, afflicti, ענוים signifies submissi, those who have learnt
endurance or patience in the school of affliction. The praise of the
psalmist will greatly help to strengthen and encourage such; for it
applies to the Deliverer of the oppressed. But in order that this praise
may sound forth with strength and fulness of tone, he courts the
assistance of companions in [Psa 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004).
To acknowledge the divine greatness with the utterance of praise is
expressed by גּדּל with an accusative in [Psa
69:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031); in this instance with ל: to
offer גּדלּה unto Him, cf. [Psa 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002).
Even רומם has this subjective meaning: with the heart and in word and
deed, to place the exalted Name of God as high as it really is in
itself. In accordance with the rule, that when in any word two of the
same letters follow one another and the first has a Sheb, this Sheb must
be an audible one, and in fact Chateph Pathach preceded by Gaja
(Metheg), we must write וּנרוממה.

[Psalms 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 34:4</span></span>

(Heb.: 34:5-7) The poet now gives the reason for this praise by setting
forth the deliverance he has experienced. He longed for God and took
pains to find Him (such is the meaning of דּרשׁ in distinction from
בּקּשׁ), and this striving, which took the form of prayer, did not
remain without some actual answer (ענה is used of the being heard and
the fulfilment as an answer to the petition of the praying one). The
perfects, as also in [Psa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006), [Psa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007), describe facts, one of which did
not take place without the other; whereas ויּענני would give them the
relation of antecedent and consequent. In [Psa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006), his own personal experience is
generalised into an experimental truth, expressed in the historical
form: they look unto Him and brighten up, i.e., whosoever looketh unto
Him (הבּיט אל of a look of intense yearning, eager for salvation, as in
[Num 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009); [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)) brightens up. It is
impracticable to make the ענוים from [Psa
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003) the subject; it is an act and the
experience that immediately accompanies it, that is expressed with an
universal subject and in gnomical perfects. The verb נהר, here as in
[Isa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005), has the signification to
shine, glitter (whence נהרה, light). Theodoret renders it: Ὁ μετὰ
πίστεως τῷ θεῷ προσιὼν φωτὸς ἀκτῖνας δέχεται νοεροῦ, the gracious
countenance of God is reflected on their faces; to the actus directus of
fides supplex succeeds the actus reflexus of fides triumphans. It never
comes to pass that their countenances must be covered with shame on
account of disappointed hope: this shall not and cannot be, as the
sympathetic force of אל implies. In all the three dialects חפר (חפר) has
the signification of being ashamed and sacred; according to Gesenius and
F׬rst (root פר) it proceeds from the primary signification of reddening,
blushing; in reality, however, since it is to be combined, not with
Arab. hmr, but with chmr (cf. Arab. kfr, כפר, Arab. gfr, gmr), it
proceeds from the primary signification of covering, hiding, veiling
(Arabic chafira, tachaffara, used of a woman, cf. chamara, to be
ashamed, to blush, to be modest, used of both sexes), so that
consequently the shame-covered countenance is contrasted with that which
has a bright, bold, and free look. In [Psa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007), this general truth is again
individualised. By זה עני (like זה סיני in [Psa
68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)) David points to himself. From
the great peril in which he was placed at the court of the Philistines,
from which God has rescued him, he turns his thoughts with gratitude and
praise to all the deliverances which lie in the past.

[Psalms 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 34:7</span></span>

(Heb.: 34:8-11) This praise is supported by a setting forth of the
gracious protection under which God's saints continually are. The מלאך
יהוה, is none other than He who was the medium of Jahve's intercourse
with the patriarchs, and who accompanied Israel to Canaan. This name is
not collective (Calvin, Hupfeld, Kamphausen, and others). He, the One,
encampeth round about them, in so far as He is the Captain of the host
of Jahve ([Jos 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014)), and consequently
is accompanied by a host of inferior ministering angels; or insofar as
He can, as being a spirit not limited by space, furnish protection that
covers them on every side. חנה (cf. [Zac
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008)) is perhaps an allusion to מחנים
in [Gen 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002)., that angel-camp which
joined itself to Jacob's camp, and surrounded it like a barricade or
carrago. On the fut. consec. ויחלּצם, et expedit eos, as a simple
expression of the sequence, or even only of a weak or loose internal
connection, vid., Ewald, 343, a. By reason of this protection by the
Angel of God arises ([Psa 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009)) the
summons to test the graciousness of God in their own experience. Tasting
(γεύσαστηαι, [Heb 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)., [Pe1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#003)) stands before seeing; for
spiritual experience leads to spiritual perception or knowledge, and not
vice versa. Nisi gustaveris, says Bernard, non videbis. David is
desirous that others also should experience what he has experienced in
order that they may come to know what he has come to know, viz., the
goodness of God.

(Note: On account of this [Psa 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009),
Γεύσασθε καὶ Ἴδετε κ. τ. λ., Ps 33 (34) was the Communion Psalm of the
early church, Constit. Apost. viii. 13, Cyril,. Catech. Myst. v 17.)

Hence, in [Psa 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010), the call to the
saints to fear Jahve (יראוּ instead of יראוּ, in order to preserve the
distinction between veremini and videbunt, as in [Jos
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014); [Sa1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#024)); for whoso fears Him, possesses
everything in Him. The young mature lions may sooner lack and suffer
hunger, because they have no prey, than that he should suffer any want
whatsoever, the goal of whose striving is fellowship with God. The verb
רוּשׁ (to lack, be poor, once by metaplasm ירשׁ, [Sa1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#007), root רשׁ, to be or to make loose,
lax), elsewhere used only of men, is here, like [Psa
104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021) בּקּשׁ מאל, transferred to the
lions, without כּפירים being intended to refer emblematically (as in
[Psa 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017); [Psa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005); [Psa
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012)) to his powerful foes at the
courts of Saul and of Achish.

[Psalms 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 34:11</span></span>

(Heb.: 34:12-15) The first main division of the Psalm is ended; the
second (much the same as in [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)) assumes more the tone of a
didactic poem; although even [Psa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006), [Psa
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009) have something of the didactic
style about them. The poet first of all gives a direction for fearing
God. We may compare [Psa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008); [Psa
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015) - how thoroughly Davidic is the
turn which the Psalm here takes! בּנים are not children in years or in
understanding; but it is a tender form of address of a master
experienced in the ways of God to each one and to all, as in [Pro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008), and frequently. In [Psa
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013) he throws out the question,
which he himself answers in [Psa
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014). This form of giving
impressiveness to a truth by setting it forth as a solution of some
question that has been propounded is a habit with David. [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001); [Psa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008), [Psa
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#010); [Psa
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#012). In the use made of this passage
from the Psalms in [Pe1 3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010) (=[Psa
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013) of the Psalm) this form of the
question is lost sight of. To חפץ חיּים, as being just as exclusive in
sense, corresponds אהב ימים, so that consequently לראות is a definition
of the purpose. ימים signifies days in the mass, just as חיּים means
long-enduring life. We see from [Jam
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)., where [Psa
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013) also, in its form, calls to mind
the Psalm before us, why the poet gives the pre-eminence to the avoiding
of sins of the tongue. In [Psa 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015),
from among what is good peace is made prominent, - peace, which not only
are we not to disturb, but which we are to seek, yea, pursue it like as
the hunter pursues the finest of the herds. Let us follow, says the
apostle Paul also, [Rom 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019) (cf.
[Heb 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)), after those things which
make for peace. שׁלום is a relationship, harmonious and free from
trouble, that is well-pleasing to the God of love. The idea of the bond
of fellowship is connected with the corresponding word eiree'nee,
according to its radical notion.

[Psalms 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 34:16</span></span>

(Heb.: 34:17-22) The poet now recommends the fear of God, to which he
has given a brief direction, by setting forth its reward in contrast
with the punishment of the ungodly. The prepositions אל and בּ, in [Psa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016) and [Psa
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#017), are a well considered
interchange of expression: the former, of gracious inclination ([Psa
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018)), the latter, of hostile
intention or determining, as in [Job
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#008); [Jer
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010); [Jer
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#011), after the phrase in [Lev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010). The evil doers are overwhelmed
by the power of destruction that proceeds from the countenance of Jahve,
which is opposed to them, until there is not the slightest trace of
their earthly existence left. The subjects to [Psa
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018) are not, according to [Psa
107:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#017), the עשׁי רע (evil doers),
since the indispensable characteristic of penitence is in this instance
wanting, but the צדיקים (the righteous). Probably the פ strophe stood
originally before the ע strophe, just as in Lam 2-4 the פ precedes the ע
(Hitzig). In connection with the present sequence of the thoughts, the
structure of [Psa 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018) is just like
[Psa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006) : Clamant et Dominus audit =
si qui (quicunque) clamant. What is meant is the cry out of the depth of
a soul that despairs of itself. Such crying meets with a hearing with
God, and in its realisation, an answer that bears its own credentials.
"The broken in heart" are those in whom the egotistical, i.e.,
self-loving life, which encircles its own personality, is broken at the
very root; "the crushed or contrite (דּכּאי, from דּכּא, with a
changeable ā, after the form אילות from איּל) in spirit" are those whom
grievous experiences, leading to penitence, of the false eminence to
which their proud self-consciousness has raised them, have subdued and
thoroughly humbled. To all such Jahve is nigh, He preserves them from
despair, He is ready to raise up in them a new life upon the ruins of
the old and to cover or conceal their infinitive deficiency; and, they,
on their part, being capable of receiving, and desirous of, salvation,
He makes them partakers of His salvation. It is true these afflictions
come upon the righteous, but Jahve rescues him out of them all, מכּלּם =
מּכּלּן (the same enallage generis as in [Rut
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019); [Rut
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011)). He is under the most special
providence, "He keepeth all his bones, not one of them (ne unum quidem)
is broken" - a pictorial exemplification of the thought that God does
not suffer the righteous to come to the extremity, that He does not
suffer him to be severed from His almighty protecting love, nor to
become the sport of the oppressors. Nevertheless we call to mind the
literal fulfilment which these words of the psalmist received in the
Crucified One; for the Old Testament prophecy, which is quoted in [Joh
19:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033), may be just as well referred
to our Psalm as to [Exo 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046). Not
only the Paschal lamb, but in a comparative sense even every affliction
of the righteous, is a type. Not only is the essence of the symbolism of
the worship of the sanctuary realised in Jesus Christ, not only is the
history of Israel and of David repeated in Him, not only does human
suffering attain in connection with Him its utmost intensity, but all
the promises given to the righteous are fulfilled in Him κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν;
because He is the righteous One in the most absolute sense, the Holy One
of God in a sense altogether unique ([Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011); [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005), [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009); [Act
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014); [Act
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014)). - The righteous is always
preserved from extreme peril, whereas evil (רעה) slays (מותת stronger
than המית) the ungodly: evil, which he loved and cherished, becomes the
executioner's power, beneath which he falls. And they that hate the
righteous must pay the penalty. Of the meanings to incur guilt, to feel
one's self guilty, and to undergo punishment as being guilty, אשׁם
(vid., on [Sa1 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#013)) has the last in
this instance.

[Psalms 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 34:22</span></span>

(Heb.: 34:23) The order of the alphabet having been gone through, there
now follows a second פ exactly like [Psa
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#022). Just as the first פ, [Psa
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016), is פּנה, so here in [Psa
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#017) it is פּני; and in like manner
the two supernumerary Phe's correspond to one another - the Elohimic in
the former Psalm, and the Jehovic in this latter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 35](psa035)

</div>
