<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa077)  [Next](psa079) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 78](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 78:0</span></span>

The Warning-Mirror of History from Moses to David

In the last verse of Ps 77 Israel appears as a flock which is led by
Moses and Aaron; in the last verse of Psalms 78 as a flock which is led
by David, of a pure heart, with judicious hands. Both Psalms also meet
in thoughts and expressions, just as the לאסף of both leads one to
expect. Psalms 78 is called Maskı̂l, a meditation. The word would also be
appropriate here in the signification "a didactic poem." For the history
of Israel is recapitulated here from the leading forth out of Egypt
through the time of the Judges down to David, and that with the
practical application for the present age that they should cleave
faithfully to Jahve, more faithfully than the rebellious generation of
the fathers. After the manner of the Psalms of Asaph the Ephraimites are
made specially prominent out of the whole body of the people, their
disobedience as well as the rejection of Shiloh and the election of
David, by which it was for ever at an end with the supremacy of Ephraim
and also of his brother-tribe of Benjamin.

The old Asaphic origin of the Psalm has been contested: - (1) Because
[Psa 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009) may be referred to the
apostasy of Ephraim and of the other tribes, that is to say, to the
division of the kingdom. But this reference is capriciously imagined to
be read in [Psa 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009). (2) Because the
Psalm betrays a malice, indeed a national hatred against Ephraim, such
as is only explicable after the apostasy of the ten tribes. But the
alienation and jealousy between Ephraim and Judah is older than the
rupture of the kingdom. The northern tribes, in consequence of their
position, which was more exposed to contact with the heathen world, had
already assumed a different character from that of Judah living in
patriarchal seclusion. They could boast of a more excited, more martial
history, one richer in exploit; in the time of the Judges especially,
there is scarcely any mention of Judah. Hence Judah was little thought
of by them, especially by powerful Ephraim, which regarded itself as the
foremost tribe of all the tribes. From the beginning of Saul's
persecution of David, however, when the stricter principle of the south
came first of all into decisive conflict for the mastery with the more
lax principle of the Ephraimites, until the rebellion of Jeroboam
against Solomon, there runs through the history of Israel a series of
acts which reveal a deep reft between Judah and the other tribes, more
especially Benjamin and Ephraim. Though, therefore, it were true that a
tone hostile to Ephraim is expressed in the Psalm, this would not be any
evidence against its old Asaphic origin, since the psalmist rests upon
facts, and, without basing the preference of Judah upon merit, he
everywhere contemplates the sin of Ephraim, without any Judaean
boasting, in a connection with the sin of the whole nation, which
involves all in the responsibility. Nor is [Psa
78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069) against Asaph the contemporary
of David; for Asaph may certainly have seen the building of the Temple
of Solomon as it towered upwards to the skies, and Caspari in his Essay
on the Holy One of Israel (Luther. Zeitschrift, 1844, 3) has shown that
even the divine name קדושׁ ישׂראל does not militate against him. We have
seen in connection with [Psa 76:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)
how deeply imbued Isaiah's language is with that of the Psalms of Asaph.
It cannot surprise us of Asaph is Isaiah's predecessor in the use of the
name "the Holy One of Isreal." The fact, however, that the writer of the
Psalm takes the words and colours of his narration from all five books
of the Pentateuch, with the exception of Leviticus, is not opposed to
our view of the origin of the Pentateuch, but favourable to it. The
author of the Book of Job, with whom in [Psa
78:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#064) he verbally coincides, is
regarded by us as younger; and the points of contact with other Psalms
inscribed "by David," "by the sons of Korah," and "by Asaph," do not
admit of being employed for ascertaining his time, since the poet is by
no means an unindependent imitator.

The manner of representation which characterizes the Psalm becomes
epical in its extension, but is at the same time concise after the
sententious style. The separate historical statements have a gnome-like
finish, and a gem-like elegance. The whole falls into two principal
parts, vv. 1-37, vv. 38-72; the second part passes over from the
God-tempting unthankfulness of the Israel of the desert to that of the
Israel of Canaan. Every three strophes form one group.

[Psalms 78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 78:1</span></span>

The poet begins very similarly to the poet of Ps 49. He comes forward
among the people as a preacher, and demands for his tra a willing,
attentive hearing. תּורה is the word for every human doctrine or
instruction, especially for the prophetic discourse which sets forth and
propagates the substance of the divine teaching. Asaph is a prophet,
hence [Psa 78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002) is quoted in [Mat
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#034). as ῥηθὲν διὰ τοῦ προφήτου.

(Note: The reading διὰ Ἠσαΐ́ου τοῦ προφήτου is, although erroneous,
nevertheless ancient; since even the Clementine Homilies introduce this
passage as the language of Isaiah.)

He here recounts to the people their history מנּי־קדם, from that
Egyptaeo-Sinaitic age of yore to which Israel's national independence
and specific position in relation to the rest of the world goes back. It
is not, however, with the external aspect of the history that he has to
do, but with its internal teachings. משׁל is an allegory or parable,
παραβολή, more particularly the apophthegm as the characteristic species
of poetry belonging to the Chokma, and then in general a discourse of an
elevated style, full of figures, thoughtful, pithy, and rounded. חידה is
that which is entangled, knotted, involved, perlexe dictum. The poet,
however, does not mean to say that he will literally discourse gnomic
sentences and propound riddles, but that he will set forth the history
of the fathers after the manner of a parable and riddle, so that it may
become as a parable, i.e., a didactic history, and its events as marks
of interrogation and nota-bene's to the present age. The lxx renders
thus: ἀνοίξω ἐν παραβολαῖς τὸ στόμα μου, φθέγξομαι προβλήματα ἀπ ̓
ἀρχῆς. Instead of this the Gospel by Matthew has: ἀνοίξω ἐν παραβολαῖς
τὸ στόμα μου, ἐρεύξομαι κεκρυμμένα ἀπὸ καταβολῆς (κόσμου), and
recognises in this language of the Psalm a prophecy of Christ; because
it is moulded so appropriately for the mouth of Him who is the Fulfiller
not only of the Law and of Prophecy, but also of the vocation of the
prophet. It is the object-clause to נכחד, and not a relative clause
belonging to the "riddles out of the age of yore," that follows in [Psa
78:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003) with אשׁר, for that which has
been heard only becomes riddles by the appropriation and turn the poet
gives to it. [Psa 78:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003) begins a new
period (cf. [Psa 69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027); [Jer
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001), and frequently): What we have
heard, and in consequence thereof known, and what our fathers have told
us (word for word, like [Psa 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001);
[Jdg 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#013)), that will we not hide from
their children (cf. [Job 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#018)). The
accentuation is perfectly correct. The Rebı̂a by מבניהם has a greater
distinctive force than the Rebı̂a by אחרון (לדור); it is therefore to be
rendered: telling to the later generation (which is just what is
intended by the offspring of the fathers) the glorious deeds of Jahve,
etc. The fut. consec. ויּקם joins on to אשׁר עשׂה. Glorious deeds,
proofs of power, miracles hath He wrought, and in connection therewith
set up an admonition in Jacob, and laid down an order in Israel, which
He commanded our fathers, viz., to propagate by tradition the
remembrance of those mighty deeds ([Exo
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#008), [Exo
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014); [Deu
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009), and other passages). להודיעם has
the same object as והודעתּם in [Deu
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009); [Jos
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#022). The matter in question is not
the giving of the Law in general, as the purpose of which, the keeping
of the laws, ought then to have been mentioned before anything else, but
a precept, the purpose of which was the further proclamation of the
magnalia Dei, and indirectly the promotion of trust in god and fidelity
to the Law; cf. [Psa 81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005)., where the
special precept concerning the celebration of the Feast of the Passover
is described as a עדוּת laid down in Joseph. The following generation,
the children, which shall be born in the course of the ages, were to
know concerning His deeds, and also themselves to rise up (יקוּמוּ, not:
come into being, like the יבאוּ of the older model-passage Ps 22:32) and
to tell them further to their children, in order that these might place
their confidence in god (שׂים כּסל, like שׁית מחסה in [Psa
73:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028)), and might not forget the
mighty deeds of God ([Psa 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)), and
might keep His commandments, being warned by the disobedience of the
fathers. The generation of the latter is called סורר וּמרה, just as the
degenerate son that is to be stoned is called in [Deu
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018). הכין לבּו, to direct one's
heart, i.e., to give it the right direction or tendency, to put it into
the right state, is to be understood after [Psa
78:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037), [Ch2
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#033), Sir. 2:17.

[Psa 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009)

[Psa 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009), which comes in now in the
midst of this description, is awkward and unintelligible. The
supposition that "the sons of Ephraim" is an appellation for the whole
of Israel is refuted by [Psa 78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067).
The rejection of Ephraim and the election of Judah is the point into
which the historical retrospect runs out; how then can "the sons of
Ephraim" denote Israel as a whole? And yet what is here said of the
Ephraimites also holds good of the Israelites in general, as [Psa
78:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#057) shows. The fact, however, that
the Ephraimites are made specially conspicuous out of the "generation"
of all Israel, is intelligible from the special interest which the
Psalms of Asaph take in the tribes of Joseph, and here particularly from
the purpose of practically preparing the way for the rejection of Shiloh
and Ephraim related further on. In [Psa
78:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010) and [Psa
78:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011) the Ephraimites are also still
spoken of; and it is not until [Psa
78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012), with the words "in sight of
their fathers," that we come back again to the nation at large. The
Ephraimites are called נושׁקי רומי־קשׁת in the sense of נושׁקי קשׁת רומי
קשׁת; the two participial construct forms do not stand in subordination
but in co-ordination, as in [Jer 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009);
[Deu 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019); [Sa2
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#019), just as in other instances also
two substantives, of which one is the explanation of the other, are
combined by means of the construct, [Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017), cf. [Kg2
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013) Ker. It is therefore: those who
prepare the bow, i.e., those arming themselves therewith (נשׁק as in
[Ch1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002); [Ch2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#017)), those who cast the vow, i.e.,
those shooting arrows from the bow ([Jer
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#029)), cf. Bttcher, 728. What is
predicated of them, viz., "they turned round" (הפך as in [Jdg
20:39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#039), [Jdg
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#041)), stands in contrast with this
their ability to bear arms and to defend themselves, as a disappointed
expectation. Is what is meant thereby, that the powerful warlike tribe
of Ephraim grew weary in the work of the conquest of Canaan (Judg. 1),
and did not render the services which might have been expected from it?
Since the historical retrospect does not enter into details until [Psa
78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012) onwards, this especial
historical reference would come too early here; the statement
consequently must be understood more generally and, according to [Psa
78:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#057), figuratively: Ephraim proved
itself unstable and faint-hearted in defending and in conducting the
cause of God, it gave it up, it abandoned it. They did not act as the
covenant of God required of them, they refused to walk (ללכת, cf. ללכת,
[Ecc 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007)) within the limit and track
of His Tra, and forgot the deeds of God of which they had been
eye-witnesses under Moses and under Joshua, their comrades of the same
family.

[Psalms 78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 78:12</span></span>

It is now related how wonderfully God led the fathers of these
Ephraimites, who behaved themselves so badly as the leading tribe of
Israel, in the desert; how they again and again ever indulged sinful
murmuring, and still He continued to give proofs of His power and of His
loving-kindness. The (according to [Num
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022)) very ancient Zoan (Tanis),
ancient Egyptian Zane, Coptic G'ane, on the east bank of the Tanitic arm
of the Nile, so called therefrom - according to the researches to which
the Turin Papyrus No. 112 has led, identical with Avaris (vid., on [Isa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011))

(Note: The identity of Avaris and Tanis is in the meanwhile again become
doubtful. Tanis was the Hyksos city, but Pelusium = Avaris the Hyksos
fortress; vid., Petermann's Mittheilungen, 1866, S. 296-298.)

\- was the seat of the Hyksos dynasties that ruled in the eastern Delta,
where after their overthrow Rameses II, the Pharaoh of the bondage, in
order to propitiate the enraged mass of the Semitic population of Lower
Egypt, embraced the worship of Baal instituted by King Apophis. The
colossal sitting figure of Rameses II in the pillared court of the Royal
Museum in Berlin, says Brugsch (Aus dem Orient ii. 45), is the figure
which Rameses himself dedicated to the temple of Baal in Tanis and set
up before its entrance. This mighty colossus is a contemporary of Moses,
who certainly once looked upon this monument, when, as Ps 78 says, he
"wrought wonders in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan." The
psalmist, moreover, keeps very close to the Tra in his reproduction of
the history of the Exodus, and in fact so close that he must have had it
before him in the entirety of its several parts, the Deuteronomic,
Elohimistic, and Jehovistic. Concerning the rule by which it is
appointed ‛ā'sa phéle, vid., on [Psa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005). The primary passage to [Psa
78:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#013) (cf. נוזלים [Psa
78:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#016)) is [Exo
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008). נד is a pile, i.e., a piled up
heap or mass, as in [Psa 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#007). And
[Psa 78:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014) is the abbreviation of [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021). In [Psa
78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015). the writer condenses into one
the two instances of the giving of water from the rock, in the first
year of the Exodus (Ex. 17) and in the fortieth year (Num. 20). The Piel
יבקּע and the plural צרים correspond to this compression. רבּה is not an
adjective (after the analogy of תּהום רבּה), but an adverb as in [Psa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003); for the giving to drink needs a
qualificative, but תהמות does not need any enhancement. ויּוצא has ı̂
instead of ē as in [Psa 105:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#043).

The fact that the subject is continued in [Psa
78:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017) with ויּוסיפוּ without mention
having been made of any sinning on the part of the generation of the
desert, is explicable from the consideration that the remembrance of
that murmuring is closely connected with the giving of water from the
rock to which the names Massah u-Merı̂bah and Merı̂bath-Kadesh (cf. [Num
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013) with [Num
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#014); [Deu
32:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#051)) point back: they went on (עוד)
winning against Him, in spite of the miracles they experienced. למרות is
syncopated from להמרות as in [Isa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008).
The poet in [Psa 78:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018) condenses the
account of the manifestations of discontent which preceded the giving of
the quails and manna (Ex. 16), and the second giving of quails (Num.
11), as he has done the two cases of the giving of water from the rock
in [Psa 78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015). They tempted God by
unbelievingly and defiantly demanding (לשׁאל, postulando, Ew. 280, d)
instead of trustfully hoping and praying. בּלבבם points to the evil
fountain of the heart, and לנפשׁם describes their longing as a sensual
eagerness, a lusting after it. Instead of allowing the miracles hitherto
wrought to work faith in them, they made the miracles themselves the
starting-point of fresh doubts. The poet here clothes what we read in
[Exo 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003); [Num
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004)., [Psa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#005), in a poetic dress. In לעמּו the
unbelief reaches it climax, it sounds like self-irony. On the
co-ordinating construction "therefore Jahve heard it and was wroth," cf.
[Isa 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004); [Isa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001); [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002); [Rom
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017). The allusion is to the
wrath-burning at Taberah (Tab'eera), [Num
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001), which preceded the giving of
the quails in the second year of the Exodus. For it is obvious that [Psa
78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021) and [Num
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001) coincide, ויתעבר ואשׁ here being
suggested by the ותבער־בם אשׁ eht yb d of that passage, and אף עלה being
the opposite of ותשׁקע האשׁ in [Psa
78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002). A conflagration broke out at
that time in the camp, at the same time, however, with the breaking out
of God's anger. The nexus between the anger and the fire is here an
outward one, whereas in [Num 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001) it
is an internal one. The ground upon which the wrathful decree is based,
which is only hinted at there, is here more minutely given in [Psa
78:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022) : they believed not in Elohim
(vid., [Num 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011)), i.e., did not rest
with believing confidence in Him, and trusted not in His salvation,
viz., that which they had experienced in the redemption out of Egypt
([Exo 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013); [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)), and which was thereby
guaranteed for time to come. Now, however, when Taberah is here followed
first by the giving of the manna, [Psa
78:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023), then by the giving of the
quails, [Psa 78:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026), the course of
the events is deranged, since the giving of the manna had preceded that
burning, and it was only the giving of the quails that followed it. This
putting together of the two givings out of order was rendered necessary
by the preceding condensation (in [Psa
78:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018)) of the clamorous desire for
a more abundant supply of food before each of these events.
Notwithstanding Israel's unbelief, He still remained faithful: He caused
manna to rain down out of the opened gates of heaven (cf. "the windows
of heaven," [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011); [Kg2
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#002); [Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010)), that is to say, in richest
abundance. The manna is called corn (as in [Psa
105:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#040), after [Exo
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004), it is called bread) of heaven,
because it descended in the form of grains of corn, and supplied the
place of bread-corn during the forty years. לחם אבּירים the lxx
correctly renders ἄρτον ἀγγέλων (אבּירים = גּבּרי כח, [Psa
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020)). The manna is called "bread of
angels" (Wisd. 16:20) as being bread from heaven ([Psa
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024), [Psa
105:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#040)), the dwelling-place of angels,
as being mann es-semâ, heaven's gift, its Arabic name, - a name which
also belongs to the vegetable manna which flows out of the Tamarix
mannifera in consequence of the puncture of the Coccus manniparus, and
is even at the present day invaluable to the inhabitants of the desert
of Sinai. אישׁ is the antithesis to אבירים; for if it signified "every
one," אכלוּ would have been said (Hitzig). צידהּ as in [Exo
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#039); לשׂבע as in [Exo
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003), cf. [Psa
78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008).

[Psalms 78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 78:26</span></span>

Passing over to the giving of the quails, the poet is thinking chiefly
of the first occasion mentioned in Ex. 16, which directly preceded the
giving of the manna. But the description follows the second: יסּע (He
caused to depart, set out) after [Num
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031). "East" and "south" belong
together: it was a south-east wind from the Aelanitic Gulf. "To rain
down" is a figurative expression for a plentiful giving of dispensing
from above. "Its camp, its tents," are those of Israel, [Num
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031), cf. [Exo
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013). The תּעוה, occurring twice,
[Psa 78:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#029) (of the object of strong
desire, as in [Psa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)), points to
Kibroth-hattaavah, the scene of this carnal lusting; הביא is the
transitive of the בּוא in [Pro 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#012).
In [Psa 78:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030) even in the
construction the poet closely follows [Num
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033) (cf. also זרוּ with לזרא,
aversion, loathing, [Num 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#020)). The
Waw unites what takes place simultaneously; a construction which
presents the advantage of being able to give special prominence to the
subject. The wrath of God consisted in the breaking out of a sickness
which was the result of immoderate indulgence, and to which even the
best-nourished and most youthfully vigorous fell a prey. When the poet
goes on in [Psa 78:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032) to say that in
spite of these visitations (בּכל־זאת) they went on sinning, he has
chiefly before his mind the outbreak of "fat" rebelliousness after the
return of the spies, cf. [Psa 78:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032)
with [Num 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011). And [Psa
78:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033) refers to the judgment of death
in the wilderness threatened at that time to all who had come out of
Egypt from twenty years old and upward ([Num
14:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#028)). Their life devoted to death
vanished from that time onwards בּהבל, in breath-like instability, and
בּבּהלה, in undurable precipitancy; the mode of expression in [Psa
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011); [Job
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#001) suggests to the poet an
expressive play of words. When now a special judgment suddenly and
violently thinned the generation that otherwise was dying off, as in
[Num 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#006)., then they inquired after
Him, they again sought His favour, those who were still preserved in the
midst of this dying again remembered the God who had proved Himself to
be a "Rock" ([Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018), [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037)) and to be a "Redeemer" ([Gen
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)) to them. And what next? [Psa
78:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#036)

(Note: According to the reckoning of the Masora this [Psa
78:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#036) is the middle verse of the 2527
verses of the Psalter (Buxtorf, Tiberias, 1620, p. 133).)

tell us what effect they gave to this disposition to return to God. They
appeased Him with their mouth, is meant to say: they sought to win Him
over to themselves by fair speeches, inasmuch as they thus
anthropopathically conceived of God, and with their tongue they played
the hypocrite to Him; their heart, however, was not sincere towards Him
(עם like את in [Psa 78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)), i.e., not
directed straight towards Him, and they proved themselves not stedfast
(πιστοί, or properly βέβαιοι) in their covenant-relationship to Him.

[Psalms 78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 78:38</span></span>

The second part of the Psalm now begins. God, notwithstanding, in His
compassion restrains His anger; but Israel's God-tempting conduct was
continued, even after the journey through the desert, in Canaan, and the
miracles of judgment amidst which the deliverance out of Egypt had been
effected were forgotten. With והוּא in [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)

(Note: According to B. Kiddushin 30a, this [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038) is the middle one of the 5896
פסוקין, στίχοι, of the Psalter. According to B. Maccoth 22b, [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038), and previously [Deu
28:58-59](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#058); [Deu
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#008) \[9\], were recited when the
forty strokes of the lash save one, which according to [Co2
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024) Paul received five times, were
being counted out to the culprit.)

begins an adversative clause, which is of universal import as far as
ישׁהית, and then becomes historical. [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038) expands what lies in רחוּם: He
expiates iniquity and, by letting mercy instead of right take its
course, arrests the destruction of the sinner. With והרבּה (Ges. ֗֗142,
2) this universal truth is supported out of the history of Israel. As
this history shows, He has many a time called back His anger, i.e.,
checked it in its course, and not stirred up all His blowing anger (cf.
[Isa 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013)), i.e., His anger in all
its fulness and intensity. We see that [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038) refers to His conduct towards
Israel, then [Psa 78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039) follows with
the ground of the determination, and that in the form of an inference
drawn from such conduct towards Israel. He moderated His anger against
Israel, and consequently took human frailty and perishableness into
consideration. The fact that man is flesh (which not merely affirms his
physical fragility, but also his moral weakness, [Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003), cf. [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)), and that, after a short life,
he falls a prey to death, determines God to be long-suffering and kind;
it was in fact sensuous desire and loathing by which Israel was beguiled
time after time. The exclamation "how oft!" [Psa
78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040), calls attention to the
praiseworthiness of this undeserved forbearance.

But with [Psa 78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041) the record of sins
begins anew. There is nothing by which any reference of this [Psa
78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041) to the last example of
insubordination recorded in the Pentateuch, [Num
35:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001) (Hitzig), is indicated. The
poet comes back one more to the provocations of God by the Israel of the
wilderness in order to expose the impious ingratitude which revealed
itself in this conduct. התוה is the causative of תּוה = Syriac tewā',
תּהא, to repent, to be grieved, lxx παρώξυναν. The miracles of the tie
of redemption are now brought before the mind in detail, ad exaggerandum
crimen tentationis Deu cum summa ingratitudine conjunctum (Venema). The
time of redemption is called יום, as in [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004) the hexahemeron. שׂים אות (synon.
עשׂה, נתן) is used as in [Exo 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#002). We
have already met with מנּי־צר in [Psa
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011). The first of the plagues of
Egypt ([Exo 7:14-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#014)), the turning of
the waters into blood, forms the beginning in [Psa
78:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#044). From this the poet takes a leap
over to the fourth plague, the ערב (lxx κυνόμυια), a grievous and
destructive species of fly ([Exo
8:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020)), and combines with it the
frogs, the second plague ([Exo
8:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001)). צפרדּע is the lesser Egyptian
frog, Rana Mosaica, which is even now called Arab. ḍfd‛, ḍofda. Next in
[Psa 78:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#046) he comes to the eighth
plague, the locusts, חסיל (a more select name of the migratory locusts
than ארבּה), Ex 10:1-20; the third plague, the gnats and midges, כּנּים,
is left unmentioned in addition to the fourth, which is of a similar
kind. For the chastisement by means of destructive living things is now
closed, and in [Psa 78:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#047) follows the
smiting with hail, the seventh plague, Ex 9:13-35. חנמל (with pausal ,
not ā, cf. in [Eze 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#002) the similarly
formed החשׁמלה) in the signification hoar-frost (πάχνη, lxx, Vulgate,
Saadia, and Abulwald), or locusts (Targum כּזוּבא = חגב), or ants (J. D.
Michaelis), does not harmonize with the history; also the hoar-frost is
called כּפוּר, the ant נּמלה (collective in Arabic neml). Although only
conjecturing from the context, we understand it, with Parchon and
Kimchi, of hailstones or hail. With thick lumpy pieces of ice He smote
down vines and sycamore-trees (Fayum was called in ancient Egyptian "the
district of the sycamore"). הרג proceeds from the Biblical conception
that the plant has a life of its own. The description of this plague is
continued in [Psa 78:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048). Two MSS
present לדּבר instead of לבּרד; but even supposing that רשׁפים might
signify the fever-burnings of the pestilence (vid., on [Hab
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#005)), the mention of the pestilence
follows in [Psa 78:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050), and the
devastation which, according to [Exo
9:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019), the hail caused among the
cattle of the Egyptians is in its right place here. Moreover it is
expressly said in [Exo 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#024) that there
was conglomerate fire among the hail; רשׁפים are therefore flaming,
blazing lightnings.

[Psalms 78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 78:49</span></span>

When these plagues rose to the highest pitch, Israel became free, and
removed, being led by its God, into the Land of Promise; but it
continued still to behave there just as it had done in the desert. The
poet in [Psa 78:49-51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049) brings the fifth
Egyptian plague, the pestilence ([Exo
9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)), and the tenth and last, the
smiting of the first-born (מכּת בּכרות), [Exo
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#001), together. [Psa
78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049) sounds like [Job
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023) (cf. below [Psa
78:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#064)). מלאכי רעים are not wicked
angels, against which view Hengstenberg refers to the scriptural thesis
of Jacobus Ode in his work De Angelis, Deum ad puniendos malos homines
mittere bonos angelos et ad castigandos pios usurpare malos, but angels
that bring misfortune. The mode of construction belongs to the chapter
of the genitival subordination of the adjective to the substantive, like
אשׁת רע, [Pro 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024), cf. [Sa1
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007); [Num
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#018), [Num
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#024); [Kg1
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#015); [Jer
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002), and the Arabic msjdu 'l-jâm‛,
the mosque of the assembling one, i.e., the assembling (congregational)
mosque, therefore: angels (not of the wicked ones = wicked angels, which
it might signify elsewhere, but) of the evil ones = evil,
misfortune-bringing angels (Ew. ֗287, a). The poet thus paraphrases the
המּשׁחית that is collectively conceived in [Exo
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013), [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023); [Heb
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#028). In [Psa
78:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050) the anger is conceived of as a
stream of fire, in [Psa 78:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050) death as
an executioner, and in 50c the pestilence as a foe. ראשׁית אונים ([Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003); [Deu
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017)) is that which had sprung for
the first time from manly vigour (plur. intensivus). Egypt is called חם
as in Ps 105 and [Psa 111:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001)
according to [Gen 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006), and is also
called by themselves in ancient Egyptian Kemi, Coptic Chmi, Kme (vid.,
Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, ch. 33). When now these plagues which
softened their Pharaoh went forth upon the Egyptians, God procured for
His people a free departure, He guided flock-like (כּעדר like בּעדר,
[Jer 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#024), with Dag. implicitum),
i.e., as a shepherd, the flock of His people (the favourite figure of
the Psalms of Asaph) through the desert, - He led them safely, removing
all terrors out of the way and drowning their enemies in the Red Sea, to
His holy territory, to the mountain which (זה) His right hand had
acquired, or according to the accents (cf. supra, p. 104): to the
mountain there (זה), which, etc. It is not Zion that is meant, but, as
in the primary passage [Exo 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016)., in
accordance with the parallelism (although this is not imperative) and
the usage of the language, which according to [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009); [Isa
57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013), is incontrovertible, the whole
of the Holy Land with its mountains and valleys (cf. [Deu
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011)). בּחבל נחלה is the poetical
equivalent to בּנחלה, [Num 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#002); [Num
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#002), and frequently. The Beth is Beth
essentiae (here in the same syntactical position as in [Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010); [Eze
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#041), and also [Job
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024) surely): He made them (the
heathen, viz., as in [Jos 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#004) their
territories) fall to them (viz., as the expression implies, by lot,
בגורל) as a line of inheritance, i.e., (as in [Psa
105:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#011)) as a portion measured out as
an inheritance. It is only in [Psa
78:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056) (and not so early as [Psa
78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041)) that the narration passes over
to the apostate conduct of the children of the generation of the desert,
that is to say, of the Israel of Canaan. Instead of עדוריו from עדוּת,
the word here is עדוריו from עדה (a derivative of עוּד, not יעד). Since
the apostasy did not gain ground until after the death of Joshua and
Eleazar, it is the Israel of the period of the Judges that we are to
think of here. קשׁת רמיּה, [Psa 78:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#057),
is not: a bow of slackness, but: a bow of deceit; for the point of
comparison, according to [Hos 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#016), is
its missing the mark: a bow that discharges its arrow in a wrong
direction, that makes no sure shot. The verb רמה signifies not only to
allow to hang down slack (cogn. רפה), but also, according to a similar
conception to spe dejicere, to disappoint, deny. In the very act of
turning towards God, or at least being inclined towards Him by His
tokens of power and loving-kindness, they turned ([Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)) like a vow that misses the mark
and disappoints both aim and expectation. The expression in [Psa
78:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#058) is like [Deu
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016), [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021). שׁמע refers to their prayer to
the Ba(a4lim ([Jdg 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011)). The word
התעבּר, which occurs three times in this Psalm, is a word belonging to
Deuteronomy ([Deu 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026)). [Psa
78:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#059) is purposely worded exactly like
[Psa 78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021). The divine purpose of love
spurned by the children just as by the fathers, was obliged in this
case, as in the former, to pass over into angry provocation.

[Psalms 78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">psa 78:60</span></span>

The rejection of Shiloh and of the people worshipping there, but later
on, when the God of Israel is again overwhelmed by compassion, the
election of Judah, and of Mount Zion, and of David, the king after His
own heart. In the time of the Judges the Tabernacle was set up in Shiloh
([Jos 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)); there, consequently, was
the central sanctuary of the whole people, - in the time of Eli and
Samuel, as follows from [Sa1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001), it
had become a fixed temple building. When this building was destroyed is
not known; according to [Jdg 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#030).,
cf. [Jer 7:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012), it was probably not
until the Assyrian period. The rejection of Shiloh, however, preceded
the destruction, and practically took place simultaneously with the
removal of the central sanctuary to Zion; and was, moreover, even
previously decided by the fact that the Ark of the covenant, when given
up again by the Philistines, was not brought back to Shiloh, but set
down in Kirjath Jearm ([Sa1 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002)). The
attributive clause שׁכּן בּאדם uses שׁכּן as השׁכּין is used in [Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001). The pointing is correct, for the
words to not suffice to signify "where He dwelleth among men" (Hitzig);
consequently שׁכּן is the causative of the Kal, [Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016); [Jos
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019). In [Psa
78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061) the Ark of the covenant is
called the might and glory of God (ארון עזּו, [Psa
132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008), cf. כבוד, [Sa1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#021).), as being the place of their
presence in Israel and the medium of their revelation. Nevertheless, in
the battle with the Philistines between Eben-ezer and Aphek, Jahve gave
the Ark, which they had fetched out of Shiloh, into the hands of the foe
in order to visit on the high-priesthood of the sons of Ithamar the
desecration of His ordinances, and there fell in that battle 30,000
footmen, and among them the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the
priests (1 Sam. 4). The fire in [Psa
78:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#063) is the fire of war, as in [Num
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028), and frequently. The incident
mentioned in [Sa1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#019) is reasonably
(vid., Keil) left out of consideration. By לא הוּלּלוּ (lxx erroneously,
οὐκ ἐπένθησαν = הוללוּ = הילילוּ) are meant the marriage-songs (cf.
Talmudic הלּוּלא, the nuptial tent, and בּית הלוּלים the
marriage-house). "Its widows (of the people, in fact, of the slain) weep
not" (word for word as in [Job 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#015))
is meant of the celebration of the customary ceremony of mourning ([Gen
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002)): they survive their husbands
(which, with the exception of such a case as that recorded in [Sa1
14:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#019), is presupposed), but without
being able to show them the last signs of honour, because the terrors of
the war ([Jer 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#008)) prevent them.

With [Psa 78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065) the song takes a new
turn. After the punitive judgment has sifted and purified Israel, God
receives His people to Himself afresh, but in such a manner that He
transfers the precedence of Ephraim to the tribe of Judah. He awakes as
it were from a long sleep ([Psa 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024),
cf. [Psa 73:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020)); for He seemed to
sleep whilst Israel had become a servant to the heathen; He aroused
Himself, like a hero exulting by reason of wine, i.e., like a hero whose
courage is heightened by the strengthening and exhilarating influence of
wine (Hengstenberg). התרונן is not the Hithpal. of רוּן in the Arabic
signification, which is alien to the Hebrew, to conquer, a meaning which
we do not need here, and which is also not adapted to the reflexive form
(Hitzig, without any precedent, renders thus: who allows himself to be
conquered by wine), but Hithpo. of רנן: to shout most heartily, after
the analogy of the reflexives התאונן, התנודד, התרועע. The most recent
defeat of the enemy which the poet has before his mind is that of the
Philistines. The form of expression in [Psa
78:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066) is moulded after [Sa1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006). God smote the Philistines most
literally in posteriora (lxx, Vulgate, and Luther). Nevertheless [Psa
78:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066) embraces all the victories under
Samuel, Saul, and David, from [Sa1
5:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#001) and onwards. Now, when they
were able to bring the Ark, which had been brought down to the battle
against the Philistines, to a settled resting-place again, God no longer
chose Shiloh of Ephraim, but Judah and the mountain of Zion, which He
had loved ([Psa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005)), of
Benjamitish-Judaean ([Jos 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063); [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008), [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021)) - but according to the promise
([Deu 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)) and according to the
distribution of the country (vid., on [Psa
68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028)) Benjamitish - Jerusalem.

(Note: According to B. Menachoth 53b, Jedidiah (Solomon, [Sa2
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)) built the Temple in the
province of Jedidiah (of Benjamin, [Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)).)

There God built His Temple כּמו־רמים. Hitzig proposes instead of this to
read כּמרומים; but if נעימים, [Psa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006), signifies amaena, then רמים may
signify excelsa (cf. [Isa 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#002)
הדוּרים, [Jer 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006) חררים) and be
poetically equivalent to מרומים: lasting as the heights of heaven, firm
as the earth, which He hath founded for ever. Since the eternal duration
of heaven and of the earth is quite consistent with a radical change in
the manner of its duration, and that not less in the sense of the Old
Testament than of the New (vid., e.g., [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017)), so the לעולם applies not to
the stone building, but rather to the place where Jahve reveals Himself,
and to the promise that He will have such a dwelling-place in Israel,
and in fact in Judah. Regarded spiritually, i.e., essentially, apart
from the accidental mode of appearing, the Temple upon Zion is as
eternal as the kingship upon Zion with which the Psalm closes. The
election of David gives its impress to the history of salvation even on
into eternity. It is genuinely Asaphic that it is so designedly
portrayed how the shepherd of the flock of Jesse (Isai) became the
shepherd of the flock of Jahve, who was not to pasture old and young in
Israel with the same care and tenderness as the ewe-lambs after which he
went (עלות as in [Gen 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#013), and רעה
ב, cf. [Sa1 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011); [Sa1
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034), like משׁל בּ and the like). The
poet is also able already to glory that he has fulfilled this vocation
with a pure heart and with an intelligent mastery. And with this he
closes.

From the decease of David lyric and prophecy are retrospectively and
prospectively turned towards David.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 79](psa079)

</div>
