<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa089)  [Next](psa091) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 90](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 90:0</span></span>

Taking Refuge in the loving-kindness of the Eternal One under the
Wrathful Judgment of Death

The Fourth Book of the Psalms, corresponding to the ספר במדבר of the
Pentateuch, begins with a Prayer of Moses the man of God, which comes
out of the midst of the dying off of the older generation during the
march through the wilderness. To the name, which could not be allowed to
remain so bald, because next to Abraham he is the greatest man known to
the Old Testament history of redemption, is added the title of honour
אישׁ האלהים (as in [Deu 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#001); [Jos
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006)), an ancient name of the prophets
which expresses the close relationship of fellowship with God, just as
"servant of Jahve" expresses the relationship of service, in accordance
with the special office and in relation to the history of redemption,
into which Jahve has taken the man and into which he himself has
entered. There is scarcely any written memorial of antiquity which so
brilliantly justifies the testimony of tradition concerning its origin
as does this Psalm, which may have been preserved in some one or other
of the older works, perhaps the "Book of Jashar" ([Jos
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#013); [Sa2
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#018)), until the time of the final
redaction of the Psalter. Not alone with respect to its contents, but
also with reference to the form of its language, it is perfectly
suitable to Moses. Even Hitzig can bring nothing of importance against
this view, for the objection that the author in v. 1 glances back upon
past generations, whilst Israel was only born in the time of Moses, is
removed by the consideration that the existence of Israel reaches back
into the patriarchal times; and there is as little truth in the
assertion that the Piel שׂבּענוּ in [Psa
90:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014) instead of the Hiphil brings the
Psalm down into very late times, as in the idea that the Hiph. והאבדתּ
in [Psa 143:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#012) instead of the Piel
carries this [Psa 143:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#001) back into
very early times. These trifling points dwindle down to nothing in
comparison with the fact that Psalms 90 bears within itself distinct
traces of the same origin as the song האזינו (Deut. 32), the blessing of
Moses (Deut. 33), the discourses in Deuteronomy, and in general the
directly Mosaic portions of the Pentateuch. The Book of the Covenant,
together with the Decalogue ([Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)) and Deuteronomy (with the
exception of its supplement), are regarded by us, on very good grounds,
as the largest originally Mosaic constituent parts of the Pentateuch.
The Book of Deuteronomy is תּורת משׁה in a pre-eminent sense.

[Psalms 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 90:1</span></span>

The poet begins with the confession that the Lord has proved Himself to
His own, in all periods of human history, as that which He was before
the world was and will be for evermore. God is designedly appealed to by
the name אדני, which frequently occurs in the mouth of Moses in the
middle books of the Pentateuch, and also in the Song at the Sea, [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017) and in [Deu
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024). He is so named here as the Lord
ruling over human history with an exaltation ever the same. Human
history runs on in דּר ודר, so that one period (περίοδος) with the men
living contemporaneous with it goes and another comes; the expression is
deuteronomic ([Deu 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007)). Such a
course of generations lies behind the poet; and in them all the Lord has
been מעון to His church, out of the heart of which the poet discourses.
This expression too is Deuteronomic ([Deu
33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027)). מעון signifies a habitation,
dwelling-place (vid., on [Psa 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)),
more especially God's heavenly and earthly dwelling-place, then the
dwelling-place which God Himself is to His saints, inasmuch as He takes
up to Himself, conceals and protects, those who flee to Him from the
wicked one and from evil, and turn in to Him ([Psa
71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003); [Psa
91:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#009)). In order to express fuisti היית
was indispensable; but just as fuisti comes from fuo, φύω, היה (הוה)
signifies not a closed, shut up being, but a being that discloses
itself, consequently it is fuisti in the sense of te exhibuisti. This
historical self-manifestation of god is based upon the fact that He is
אל, i.e., might absolutely, or the absolutely Mighty One; and He was
this, as [Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002) says, even before
the beginning of the history of the present world, and will be in the
distant ages of the future as of the past. The foundation of this
world's history is the creation. The combination ארץ ותבל shows that
this is intended to be taken as the object. ותּחולל (with Metheg beside
the e4 of the final syllable, which is deprived of its accent, vid., on
[Psa 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020)) is the language of address
(Rashi): that which is created is in a certain sense born from God
(ילּד), and He brings it forth out of Himself; and this is here
expressed by חולל (as in [Deu 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018),
cf. [Isa 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002)), creation being
compared to travail which takes place amidst pains (Psychology, S. 114;
tr. p. 137). If, after the example of the lxx and Targum, one reads as
passive ותּחולל (Bttcher, Olshausen, Hitzig) from the Pulal חולל, [Pro
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#024), - and this commends itself,
since the pre-existence of God can be better dated back beyond facts
than beyond the acts of God Himself, - then the conception remains
essentially the same, since the Eternal and Absolute One is still to be
thought of as מחולל. The fact that the mountains are mentioned first of
all, harmonizes with [Deu 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#015). The
modus consecutivus is intended to say: before the mountains were brought
forth and Thou wast in labour therewith.... The forming of the mountains
consequently coincides with the creation of the earth, which is here as
a body or mass called ארץ, and as a continent with the relief of
mountains and lowlands is called תבל (cf. תבל ארץ, [Pro
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#031); [Job
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#012)). To the double clause with טרם
seq. praet. (cf. on the other hand seq. fut. [Deu
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021)) is appended וּמעולם as a second
definition of time: before the creation of the world, and from eternity
to eternity. The Lord was God before the world was - that is the first
assertion of [Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002); His divine
existence reaches out of the unlimited past into the unlimited future -
this is the second. אל is not vocative, which it sometimes, though
rarely, is in the Psalms; it is a predicate, as e.g., in [Deu
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024).

This is also to be seen from [Psa
90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003), [Psa
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004), when [Psa
90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003) now more definitely affirms the
omnipotence of God, and [Psa 90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004) the
supra-temporality of God or the omnipresence of God in time. The lxx
misses the meaning when it brings over אל from [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002), and reads אל־תּשׁב. The shorter
future form תּשׁב for תּשׁיב stands poetically instead of the longer, as
e.g., in [Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006); [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009); cf. the same thing in the inf.
constr. in [Deu 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#012), and both
instances together in [Deu 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008). The
poet intentionally calls the generation that is dying away אנושׁ, which
denotes man from the side of his frailty or perishableness; and the new
generation בּני־אדם, with which is combined the idea of entrance upon
life. It is clear that השׁיב עד־דּכּא is intended to be understood
according to [Gen 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019); but it is a
question whether דּכּא is conceived of as an adjective (with mutable
aa), as in [Psa 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019), [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015) : Thou puttest men back into the
condition of crushed ones (cf. on the construction [Num
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#024)), or whether as a neutral
feminine from דּך (= דּכּה): Thou changest them into that which is
crushed = dust, or whether as an abstract substantive like דּכּה, or
according to another reading (cf. [Psa
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)) דּכּא, in [Deu
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002) : to crushing. This last is the
simplest way of taking it, but it comes to one and the same thing with
the second, since דּכּא signifies crushing in the neuter sense. A fut.
consec. follows. The fact that God causes one generation to die off has
as its consequence that He calls another into being (cf. the Arabic
epithet of God el-mu‛ı̂d = המשׁיב, the Resuscitator). Hofmann and Hitzig
take תּשׁב as imperfect on account of the following ותּאמר: Thou didst
decree mortality for men; but the fut. consec. frequently only expresses
the sequence of the thoughts or the connection of the matter, e.g.,
after a future that refers to that which is constantly taking place,
[Job 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#010). God causes men to die
without letting them die out; for - so it continues in [Psa
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004) - a thousand years is to Him a
very short period, not to be at all taken into account. What now is the
connection between that which confirms and that which is confirmed here?
It is not so much [Psa 90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003) that is
confirmed as [Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002), to which the
former serves for explanation, viz., this, that God as the Almighty
(אל), in the midst of this change of generations, which is His work,
remains Himself eternally the same. This ever the same, absolute
existence has its ground herein, that time, although God fills it up
with His working, is no limitation to Him. A thousand years, which would
make any man who might live through them weary of life, are to Him like
a vanishing point. The proposition, as [Pe2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008) shows, is also true when reversed:
"One day is with the Lord as a thousand years." He is however exalted
above all time, inasmuch as the longest period appears to Him very
short, and in the shortest period the greatest work can be executed by
Him. The standpoint of the first comparison, "as yesterday," is taken
towards the end of the thousand of years. A whole millennium appears to
God, when He glances over it, just as the yesterday does to us when
(כּי) it is passing by (יעבר), and we, standing on the border of the
opening day, look back upon the day that is gone. The second comparison
is an advance upon the first, and an advance also in form, from the fact
that the Caph similitudinis is wanting: a thousand years are to God a
watch in the night. אשׁמוּרה is a night-watch, of which the Israelites
reckoned three, viz., the first, the middle, and the morning watch
(vid., Winer's Realwrterbuch s. v. Nachtwache). It is certainly not
without design that the poet says אשׁמוּרה בלּילה instead of אשׁמרת
הלּילה. The night-time is the time for sleep; a watch in the night is
one that is slept away, or at any rate passed in a sort of half-sleep. A
day that is past, as we stand on the end of it, still produces upon us
the impression of a course of time by reason of the events which we can
recall; but a night passed in sleep, and now even a fragment of the
night, is devoid of all trace to us, and is therefore as it were
timeless. Thus is it to God with a thousand years: they do not last long
to Him; they do not affect Him; at the close of them, as at the
beginning, He is the Absolute One (אל). Time is as nothing to Him, the
Eternal One. The changes of time are to Him no barrier restraining the
realization of His counsel - a truth which has a terrible and a
consolatory side. The poet dwells upon the fear which it produces.

[Psalms 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 90:5</span></span>

[Psa 90:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005) tell us how great is the
distance between men and this eternal selfsameness of God. The suffix of
זרמתּם, referred to the thousand years, produces a synallage (since שׁנה
is feminine), which is to be avoided whenever it is possible to do so;
the reference to בני־אדם, as being the principal object pointed to in
what has gone before, is the more natural, to say the very least. In
connection with both ways of applying it, זרם does not signify: to cause
to rattle down like sudden heavy showers of rain; for the figure that
God makes years, or that He makes men (Hitzig: the germs of their coming
into being), to rain down from above, is fanciful and strange. זרם may
also mean to sweep or wash away as with heavy rains, abripere instar
nimbi, as the old expositors take it. So too Luther at one time: Du
reyssest sie dahyn (Thou carriest them away), for which he substituted
later: Du lessest sie dahin faren wie einen Strom (Thou causest them to
pass away as a river); but זרם always signifies rain pouring down from
above. As a sudden and heavy shower of rain, becoming a flood, washes
everything away, so God's omnipotence sweeps men away. There is now no
transition to another alien figure when the poet continues: שׁנה יהיוּ.
What is meant is the sleep of death, [Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006), שׁנת עולם, [Jer
51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039), [Jer
51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057), cf. ישׁן [Psa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004). He whom a flood carries away is
actually brought into a state of unconsciousness, he goes entirely to
sleep, i.e., he dies.

From this point the poet certainly does pass on to another figure. The
one generation is carried away as by a flood in the night season, and in
the morning another grows up. Men are the subject of יחלף, as of יהיוּ.
The collective singular alternates with the plural, just as in [Psa
90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003) the collective אנושׁ alternates
with בני־אדם. The two members of [Psa
90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005) stand in contrast. The poet
describes the succession of the generations. One generation perishes as
it were in a flood, and another grows up, and this also passes on to the
same fate. The meaning in both verses of the חלף, which has been for the
most part, after the lxx, Vulgate, and Luther, erroneously taken to be
praeterire = interire, is determined in accordance with this idea. The
general signification of this verb, which corresponds to the Arabic
chlf, is "to follow or move after, to go into the place of another, and
in general, of passing over from one place or state into another."
Accordingly the Hiphil signifies to put into a new condition, [Psa
102:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027), to set a new thing on the
place of an old one, [Isa 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009) \[10\],
to gain new strength, to take fresh courage, [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031); [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001); and of plants: to send forth new
shoots, [Job 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007); consequently the
Kal, which frequently furnishes the perfect for the future Hiphil (Ew.
127, b, and Hitzig on this passage), of plants signifies: to gain new
shoots, not: to sprout (Targum, Syriac), but to sprout again or afresh,
regerminare; cf. Arab. chilf, an aftergrowth, new wood. Perishing
humanity renews its youth in ever new generations. [Psa
90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006) again takes up this thought: in
the morning it grows up and shoots afresh, viz., the grass to which men
are likened (a figure appropriated by Isa. 40), in the evening it is cut
down and it dries up. Others translate מולל to wither (root מל, properly
to be long and lax, to allow to hang down long, cf. אמלל, אמל with Arab.
'ml, to hope, i.e., to look forth into the distance); but (1) this Pilel
of מוּל or Poēl of מלל is not favourable to this intransitive way of
taking it; (2) the reflexive in [Psa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008) proves that מלל signifies to cut
off in the front or above, after which perhaps even [Psa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002), [Job
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#002); [Job
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#016), by comparison with [Job
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024), are to be explained. In the
last passage it runs: as the top of the stalk they are cut off (fut.
Niph. of מלל). Such a cut or plucked ear of corn is called in [Deu
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#025) מלילה, a Deuteronomic
hapaxlegomenon which favours our way of taking the ימולל (with a most
general subject = ימולל). Thus, too, ויבשׁ is better attached to what
precedes: the cut grass becomes parched hay. Just such an alternation of
morning springing froth and evening drying up is the alternation of the
generations of men.

The poet substantiates this in [Psa
90:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007). from the experience of those
amongst whom he comprehended himself in the לנוּ of [Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001), Hengstenberg takes [Psa
90:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007) to be a statement of the cause of
the transitoriness set forth: its cause is the wrath of God; but the
poet does not begin כי באפך but כי כלינו. The chief emphasis therefore
lies upon the perishing, and כי is not argumentative but explicative. If
the subject of כלינוּ were men in general (Olshausen), then it would be
elucidating idem per idem. But, according to [Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001), those who speak here are those
whose refuge the Eternal One is. The poet therefore speaks in the name
of the church, and confirms the lot of men from that which his people
have experienced even down to the present time. Israel is able out of
its own experience to corroborate what all men pass through; it has to
pass through the very same experience as a special decree of God's wrath
on account of its sins. Therefore in [Psa
90:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007) we stand altogether upon
historical ground. The testimony of the inscription is here verified in
the contents of the Psalm. The older generation that came out of Egypt
fell a prey to the sentence of punishment, that they should gradually
die off during the forty years' journey through the desert; and even
Moses and Aaron, Joshua and Caleb only excepted, were included in this
punishment on special grounds, [Num
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#026)., [Deu
1:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#034). This it is over which Moses
here laments. God's wrath is here called אף and חמה; just as the Book of
Deuteronomy (in distinction from the other books of the Pentateuch) is
fond of combining these two synonyms ([Deu
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#019); [Deu
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022), [Deu
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#027), cf. [Gen
27:44](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#044).). The breaking forth of the
infinitely great opposition of the holy nature of God against sin has
swept away the church in the person of its members, even down to the
present moment; נבהל as in [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029), cf. בּחלה, [Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016). It is the consequence of their
sins. עון signifies sin as the perversion of the right standing and
conduct; עלוּם, that which is veiled in distinction from manifest sins,
is the sum-total of hidden moral, and that sinful, conduct. There is no
necessity to regard עלמנוּ as a defective plural; עלמים signifies youth
(from a radically distinct word, עלם); secret sins would therefore be
called עלמות according to [Psa 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013).
God sets transgressions before Him when, because the measure is full and
forgiveness is inadmissible, He makes them an object of punishment. שׁתּ
(Ker, as in [Psa 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#007) : שׁתּה, cf. [Psa
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#004) ואתּ, [Psa
74:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006) ועתּ) has the accent upon the
ultima before an initial guttural. The parallel to לנגדּך is למאור
פּניך. עור is light, and מאור is either a body of light, as the sun and
moon, or, as in this passage, the circle of light which the light forms.
The countenance of God (פני ה) is God's nature in its inclination
towards the world, and מאור פני ה is the doxa of His nature that is
turned towards the world, which penetrates everything that is conformed
to God as a gracious light ([Num
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#025)), and makes manifest to the
bottom everything that is opposed to God and consumes it as a wrathful
fire.

[Psalms 90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 90:9</span></span>

After the transitoriness of men has now been confirmed in [Psa
90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006). out of the special experience of
Israel, the fact that this particular experience has its ground in a
divine decree of wrath is more definitely confirmed from the facts of
this experience, which, as [Psa 90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011).
complain, unfortunately have done so little to urge them on to the fear
of God, which is the condition and the beginning of wisdom. In [Psa
90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009) we distinctly hear the Israel of
the desert speaking. That was a generation that fell a prey to the wrath
of God (דּור עברתו, [Jer 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)). עברה
is wrath that passes over, breaks through the bounds of subjectivity.
All their days (cf. [Psa 103:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#015)) are
passed away (פּנה, to turn one's self, to turn, e.g., [Deu
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#024)) in such wrath, i.e., thoroughly
pervaded by it. They have spent their years like a sound (כּמו־הגה),
which has hardly gone forth before it has passed away, leaving no trace
behind it; the noun signifies a gentle dull sound, whether a murmur
([Job 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#002)) or a groan ([Eze
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010)). With בּהם in [Psa
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010) the sum is stated: there are
comprehended therein seventy years; they include, run up to so many.
Hitzig renders: the days wherein (בהם) our years consist are seventy
years; but שׁנותינו side by side with ימי must be regarded as its more
minute genitival definition, and the accentuation cannot be objected to.
Beside the plural שׁנים the poetic plural שׁנות appears here, and it
also occurs in [Deu 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007) (and nowhere
else in the Pentateuch). That of which the sum is to be stated stands
first of all as a casus absol. Luther's rendering: Siebenzig Jar, wens
hoch kompt so sinds achtzig (seventy years, or at the furthest eighty
years), as Symmachus also meant by his ἐν παραδόξῳ (in Chrysostom), is
confirmed by the Talmudic הגיע לגבורות, "to attain to extreme old age"
(B. Moכd katan, 28a), and rightly approved of by Hitzig and Olshausen.
גבוּרת signifies in [Psa 71:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#016) full
strength, here full measure. Seventy, or at most eighty years, were the
average sum of the extreme term of life to which the generation dying
out in the wilderness attained. ורהבּם the lxx renders τὸ πλεῖον αὐτῶν,
but רהבּם is not equivalent to רבּם. The verb רהב signifies to behave
violently, e.g., of importunate entreaty, [Pro
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#003), of insolent treatment, [Isa
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#005), whence רהב (here רהב), violence,
impetuosity, and more especially a boastful vaunting appearance or
coming forward, [Job 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#013); [Isa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007). The poet means to say that
everything of which our life is proud (riches, outward appearance,
luxury, beauty, etc.), when regarded in the right light, is after all
only עמל, inasmuch as it causes us trouble and toil, and און, because
without any true intrinsic merit and worth. To this second predicate is
appended the confirmatory clause. חישׁ is infin. adverb. from חוּשׁ,
הישׁ, [Deu 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035) : speedily, swiftly
(Symmachus, the Quinta, and Jerome). The verb גּוּז signifies transire
in all the Semitic dialects; and following this signification, which is
applied transitively in [Num 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031),
the Jewish expositors and Schultens correctly render: nam transit
velocissime. Following upon the perfect גּז, the modus consecutivus
ונּעפה maintains its retrospective signification. The strengthening of
this mood by means of the intentional ah is more usual with the 1st
pers. sing., e.g., [Gen 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#006), than
with the 1st pers. plur., as here and in [Gen
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#011); Ew. 232, g. The poet glances
back from the end of life to the course of life. And life, with all of
which it had been proud, appears as an empty burden; for it passed
swiftly by and we fled away, we were borne away with rapid flight upon
the wings of the past.

Such experience as this ought to urge one on to the fear of God; but how
rarely does this happen! and yet the fear of God is the condition
(stipulation) and the beginning of wisdom. The verb ידע in [Psa
90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011), just as it in general denotes
not merely notional but practically living and efficient knowledge, is
here used of a knowledge which makes that which is known conduce to
salvation. The meaning of וּכיראתך is determined in accordance with
this. The suffix is here either gen. subj.: according to Thy fearfulness
(יראה as in [Eze 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018)), or gen. obj.:
according to the fear that is due to Thee, which in itself is at once
(cf. [Psa 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008); [Exo
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#020); [Deu
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025)) more natural, and here
designates the knowledge which is so rarely found, as that which is
determined by the fear of God, as a truly religious knowledge. Such
knowledge Moses supplicates for himself and for Israel: to number our
days teach us rightly to understand. [Sa1
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#017), where כּן ידע signifies "he
does not know it to be otherwise, he is well aware of it," shows how כּן
is meant. Hitzig, contrary to the accentuation, draws it to למנות ימינו;
but "to number our days" is in itself equivalent to "hourly to
contemplate the fleeting character and brevity of our lifetime;" and כּן
הודע prays for a true qualification for this, and one that accords with
experience. The future that follows is well adapted to the call, as
frequently aim and result. But הביא is not to be taken, with Ewald and
Hitzig, in the signification of bringing as an offering, a meaning this
verb cannot have of itself alone (why should it not have been ונקריב?).
Bttcher also erroneously renders it after the analogy of [Pro
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#010) : "that we may bring wisdom into
the heart," which ought to be בּלב. הביא, deriving its meaning from
agriculture, signifies "to carry off, obtain, gain, prop. to bring in,"
viz., into the barn, [Sa2 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#010), Hagg.
[Psa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006); the produce of the field,
and in a general way gain or profit, is hence called תּבוּאה. A wise
heart is the fruit which one reaps or garners in from such numbering of
the days, the gain which one carries off from so constantly reminding
one's self of the end. לבב חכמה is a poetically intensified expression
for לב חכם, just as לב מרפּא in [Pro
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030) signifies a calm easy heart.

[Psalms 90:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 90:13</span></span>

The prayer for a salutary knowledge, or discernment, of the appointment
of divine wrath is now followed by the prayer for the return of favour,
and the wish that God would carry out His work of salvation and bless
Israel's undertakings to that end. We here recognise the well-known
language of prayer of Moses in [Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012), according to which שׁוּבה is
not intended as a prayer for God's return to Israel, but for the turning
away of His anger; and the sigh עד־מתי that is blended with its asks how
long this being angry, which threatens to blot Israel out, is still to
last. והנּהם is explained according to this same parallel passage: May
God feel remorse or sorrow (which in this case coincide) concerning His
servants, i.e., concerning the affliction appointed to them. The naming
of the church by עבדיך (as in [Deu
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#027), cf. [Exo
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013) of the patriarchs) reminds one
of [Deu 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036) : concerning His
servants He shall feel compassion (Hithpa. instead of the Niphal). The
prayer for the turning of wrath is followed in [Psa
90:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014) by the prayer for the turning
towards them of favour. In בּבּקר there lies the thought that it has
been night hitherto in Israel. "Morning" is therefore the beginning of a
new season of favour. In שׂבּענוּ (to which הסדּך is a second accusative
of the object) is implied the thought that Israel whilst under wrath has
been hungering after favour; cf. the adjective שׂבע in the same tropical
signification in [Deu 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#023). The
supplicatory imperatives are followed by two moods expressive of
intention: then will we, or: in order that we may rejoice and be glad;
for futures like these set forth the intention of attaining something as
a result or aim of what has been expressed just before: Ew. 325, a.
בּכל־ימינוּ is not governed by the verbs of rejoicing ([Psa
118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)), in which case it would have
been בּחיּינוּ, but is an adverbial definition of time ([Psa
145:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#002); [Psa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008)): within the term of life
allotted to us. We see from [Psa 90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015)
that the season of affliction has already lasted for a long time. The
duration of the forty years of wrath, which in the midst of their course
seemed to them as an eternity, is made the measure of the reviving again
that is earnestly sought. The plural ימות instead of ימי is common only
to our Psalm and [Deu 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007); it is not
known elsewhere to Biblical Hebrew. And the poetical שׁנות instead of
שׁני, which also occurs elsewhere, appears for the first time in [Deu
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007). The meaning of ענּיתנוּ, in
which ימות hcihw is specialized after the manner of a genitive, is
explained from [Deu 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)., according to
which the forty years' wandering in the wilderness was designed to
humble (ענּות) and to prove Israel through suffering. At the close of
these forty years Israel stands on the threshold of the Promise Land. To
Israel all final hopes were closely united with the taking possession of
this land. We learn from Gen. 49 that it is the horizon of Jacob's
prophetic benediction. This Psalm too, in [Psa
90:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#016), terminates in the prayer for
the attainment of this goal. The psalmist has begun in [Psa
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001) his adoration with the majestic
divine name אדני; in [Psa 90:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013) he
began his prayer with the gracious divine name יהוה; and now, where he
mentions God for the third time, he gives to Him the twofold name, so
full of faith, אדני אלהינוּ. אל used once alternates with the thrice
repeated על: salvation is not Israel's own work, but the work of Jahve;
it therefore comes from above, it comes and meets Israel. It is worthy
of remark that the noun פּעל occurs only in Deuteronomy in the whole
Tra, and that here also of the gracious rule of Jahve, [Psa
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004), cf. [Psa
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#011). The church calls the work of
the Lord מעשׂה ידינוּ in so far as He executes it through them. This
expression מעשׂה ידים as a designation of human undertakings runs
through the whole of the Book of Deuteronomy: [Deu
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007); [Deu
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#028); [Deu
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#007); [Deu
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029); [Deu
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#015); [Deu
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019); [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015); [Deu
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012); [Deu
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009). In the work of the Lord the
bright side of His glory unveils itself, hence it is called הדר; this
too is a word not alien at least to the language of Deuteronomy, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017). Therein is made manifest נעם ה,
His graciousness and condescension - an expression which David has
borrowed from Moses in [Psa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004). יראה
and יהי are optatives. כּוננה is an urgent request, imperat. obsecrantis
as the old expositors say. With Waw the same thought is expressed over
again (cf. [Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001), וּלכוּ, yea
come) - a simple, childlike anadiplosis which vividly reminds us of the
Book of Deuteronomy, which revolves in thoughts that are ever the same,
and by that very means speaks deeply to the heart. Thus the Deuteronomic
impression of this Psalm accompanies us from beginning to end, from מעון
to מעשׂה ידים. Nor will it now be merely accidental that the fondness
for comparisons, which is a peculiarity of the Book of Deuteronomy ([Deu
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031), [Deu
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#044); [Deu
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#005); [Deu
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029), [Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049), cf. [Deu
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013), [Deu
28:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#044); [Deu
29:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017)), is found again in this
Psalm.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 91](psa091)

</div>
