<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa146)  [Next](psa148) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 147](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 147:0</span></span>

Hallelujah to the Sustainer of All Things, the Restorer of Jerusalem

It is the tone of the restoration-period of Ezra and Nehemiah that meets
us sounding forth out of this and the two following Psalms, even more
distinctly and recognisably than out of the nearly related preceding
Psalm (cf. [Psa 147:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#006) with [Psa
146:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#009)). In Psalms 147 thanksgiving is
rendered to God for the restoration of Jerusalem, which is now once more
a city with walls and gates; in [Psa
148:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001) for the restoration of the
national independence; and in [Psa
149:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001) for the restoration of the
capacity of joyously and triumphantly defending themselves to the people
so long rendered defenceless and so ignominiously enslaved.

In the seventh year of Artachshasta (Artaxerxes I Longimanus) Ezra the
priest entered Jerusalem, after a journey of five months, with about two
thousand exiles, mostly out of the families of the Levites (458 b.c.).
In the twentieth year of this same clement king, that is to say,
thirteen years later (445 b.c.), came Nehemiah, his cup-bearer, in the
capacity of a Tirshâtha (vid., Isaiah, p. 4). Whilst Ezra did everything
for introducing the Mosaic Law again into the mind and commonwealth of
the nation, Nehemiah furthered the building of the city, and more
particularly of the walls and gates. We hear from his own mouth, in [Neh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001) of the Book that is extracted from
his memoirs, how indefatigably and cautiously he laboured to accomplish
this work. [Neh 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027) is closely
connected with these notes of Nehemiah's own hand. After having been
again in the meanwhile in Susa, and there neutralized the slanderous
reports that had reached the court of Persia, he appointed, at his
second stay in Jerusalem, a feast in dedication of the walls. The Levite
musicians, who had settled down fore the most part round about
Jerusalem, were summoned to appear in Jerusalem. Then the priests and
Levites were purified; and they purified the people, the gates, and the
walls, the bones of the dead (as we must with Herzfeld picture this to
ourselves) being taken out of all the tombs within the city and buried
before the city; and then came that sprinkling, according to the Law,
with the sacred lye of the red heifer, which is said (Para iii. 5) to
have been introduced again by Ezra for the first time after the Exile.
Next the princes of Judah, the priests, and Levite musicians were placed
in the west of the city in two great choirs (תּודת)

(Note: The word has been so understood by Menahem, Juda ben Koreish, and
Abulwald; whereas Herzfeld is thinking of hecatombs for a
thank-offering, which might have formed the beginning of both festive
processions.))

and processions (תּחלכת). The one festal choir, which was led by the one
half of the princes, and among the priests of which Ezra went on in
front, marched round the right half of the city, and the other round the
left, whilst the people looked down from the walls and towers. The two
processions met on the east side of the city and drew up in the Temple,
where the festive sacrifices were offered amidst music and shouts of
joy.

The supposition that [Psa 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001) were
all sung at this dedication of the walls under Nehemiah (Hengstenberg)
cannot be supported; but as regards Psalms 147, the composition of which
in the time of Nehemiah is acknowledged by the most diverse parties
(Keil, Ewald, Dillmann, Zunz), the reference to the Feast of the
Dedication of the walls is very probable. The Psalm falls into two
parts, [Psa 147:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001), [Psa
147:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012), which exhibit a progression
both in respect of the building of the walls ([Psa
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002), [Psa
147:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013)), and in respect of the
circumstances of the weather, from which the poet takes occasion to sing
the praise of God ([Psa 147:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008), [Psa
147:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#016)). It is a double Psalm, the
first part of which seems to have been composed, as Hitzig suggests, on
the appearing of the November rain, and the second in the midst of the
rainy part of the winter, when the mild spring breezes and a thaw were
already in prospect.

[Psalms 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 147:1</span></span>

The Hallelujah, as in [Psa 135:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#003), is
based upon the fact, that to sing of our God, or to celebrate our God in
song (זמּר with an accusative of the object, as in Ps 30:13, and
frequently), is a discharge of duty that reacts healthfully and
beneficially upon ourselves: "comely is a hymn of praise" (taken from
[Psa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)), both in respect of the
worthiness of God to be praised, and of the gratitude that is due to
Him. Instead of זמּר or לזמּר, [Psa
92:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#002), the expression is זמּרה, a form
of the infin. Piel, which at least can still be proved to be possible by
ליסּרה in [Lev 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#018). The two כּי are
co-ordinate, and כּי־נעים no more refers to God here than in [Psa
135:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#003), as Hitzig supposes when he
alters [Psa 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001) so that it reads:
"Praise ye Jah because He is good, play unto our God because He is
lovely." [Psa 92:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#002) shows that כּי־טוב
can refer to God; but נעים said of God is contrary to the custom and
spirit of the Old Testament, whereas טוב and נעים are also in [Psa
133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001) neuter predicates of a subject
that is set forth in the infinitive form. In [Psa
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002) the praise begins, and at the
same time the confirmation of the delightful duty. Jahve is the builder
up of Jerusalem, He brings together (כּנּס as in Ezekiel, the later wozd
for אסף and קבּץ) the outcasts of Israel (as in [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); [Isa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008)); the building of Jerusalem is
therefore intended of the rebuilding up, and to the dispersion of Israel
corresponds the holy city laid in ruins. Jahve healeth the heart-broken,
as He has shown in the case of the exiles, and bindeth up their pains
([Psa 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)), i.e., smarting wounds;
רפא, which is here followed by חבּשׁ, also takes to itself a dative
object in other instances, both in an active and ([Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)) an impersonal application; but
for שׁבוּרי לב the older language says נשׁבּרי לב, [Psa
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019), [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). The connection of the thoughts,
which the poet now brings to the stars, becomes clear from the primary
passage, [Isa 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026), cf. [Isa
40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027). To be acquainted with human woe
and to relieve it is an easy and small matter to Him who allots a number
to the stars, that are to man innumerable ([Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)), i.e., who has called them into
being by His creative power in whatever number He has pleased, and yet a
number known to Him (מנה, the part. praes., which occurs frequently in
descriptions of the Creator), and calls to them all names, i.e., names
them all by names which are the expression of their true nature, which
is well known to Him, the Creator. What Isaiah says ([Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)) with the words, "because of the
greatness of might, and as being strong in power," and ([Isa
40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028)) "His understanding is
unsearchable," is here asserted in [Psa
147:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#005) (cf. [Psa
145:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#003)): great is our Lord, and capable
of much (as in [Job 37:23](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#023), שׂגּיא
כּח), and to His understanding there is no number, i.e., in its depth
and fulness it cannot be defined by any number. What a comfort for the
church as it traverses its ways, that are often so labyrinthine and
entangled! Its Lord is the Omniscient as well as the Almighty One. Its
history, like the universe, is a work of God's infinitely profound and
rich understanding. It is a mirror of gracious love and righteous anger.
The patient sufferers (ענוים) He strengthens (מעודד as in [Psa
146:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#009)); malevolent sinners (רשׁעים),
on the other hand, He casts down to the earth (עדי־ארץ, cf. [Isa
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#005)), casting deep down to the ground
those who exalt themselves to the skies.

[Psalms 147:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 147:7</span></span>

With [Psa 147:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007) the song takes a new
flight. ענה ל signifies to strike up or sing in honour of any one, [Num
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027); [Isa
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002). The object of the action is
conceived of in בּתּודה as the medium of it (cf. e.g., [Job
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#004)). The participles in [Psa
147:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008). are attributive clauses that
are attached in a free manner to לאלהינוּ. הכין signifies to prepare,
procure, as e.g., in [Job 38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041) - a
passage which the psalmist has had in his mind in connection with [Psa
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009). מצמיח, as being the causative
of a verb. crescendi, is construed with a double accusative: "making
mountains (whither human agriculture does not reach) to bring forth
grass;" and the advance to the thought that God gives to the cattle the
bread that they need is occasioned by the "He causeth grass to grow for
the cattle" of the model passage [Psa
104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014), just as the only hinting אשׁר
יקראוּ, which is said of the young of the raven (which are forsaken and
cast off by their mothers very early), is explained from ילדיו אל־אל
ישׁוּעוּ in Job loc. cit. The verb קרא brev ehT .tic .col boJ ni ,
κράζειν (cf. κρώζειν), is still more expressive for the cry of the
raven, κόραξ, Sanscrit kârava, than that שׁוּע; κοράττειν and
κορακεύεσθαι signify directly to implore incessantly, without taking any
refusal. Towards Him, the gracious Sustainer of all beings, are the
ravens croaking for their food pointed (cf. [Luk
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#024), "Consider the ravens"), just
like the earth that thirsts for rain. He is the all-conditioning One.
Man, who is able to know that which the irrational creature
unconsciously acknowledges, is in the feeling of his dependence to trust
in Him and not in himself. In all those things to which the
God-estranged self-confidence of man so readily clings, God has no
delight (יחפּץ, pausal form like יחבּשׁ) and no pleasure, neither in the
strength of the horse, whose rider imagines himself invincible, and, if
he is obliged to flee, that he cannot be overtaken, nor in the legs of a
man, upon which he imagines himself so firm that he cannot be thrown
down, and which, when he is pursued, will presumptively carry him far
enough away into safety. שׁוק, Arab. sâq, is the leg from the knee to
the foot, from Arab. sâqa, root sq, to drive, urge forward, more
particularly to urge on to a gallop (like curs, according to Pott, from
the root car, to go). What is meant here is, not that the strength of
the horse and muscular power are of no avail when God wills to destroy a
man ([Psa 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#016)., [Amo
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#014).), but only that God has no
pleasure in the warrior's horse and in athletic strength. Those who fear
Him, i.e., with a knowledge of the impotency of all power possessed by
the creature in itself, and in humble trust feel themselves dependent
upon His omnipotence - these are they in whom He takes pleasure (רצה
with the accusative), those who, renouncing all carnal defiance and
self-confident self-working, hope in His mercy.

[Psalms 147:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 147:12</span></span>

In the lxx this strophe is a Psalm (Lauda Jerusalem) of itself. The call
goes forth to the church again on the soil of the land of promise
assembled round about Jerusalem. The holy city has again risen out of
its ruins; it now once more has gates which can stand open in the broad
daylight, and can be closed and bolted when the darkness comes on for
the security of the municipality that is only just growing into power
([Neh 7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#001)). The blessing of God
again rests upon the children of the sacred metropolis. Its territory,
which has experienced all the sufferings of war, and formerly resounded
with the tumult of arms and cries of woe and destruction, God has now,
from being an arena of conflict, made into peace (the accusative of the
effect, and therefore different from [Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017)); and since the land can now
again be cultivated in peace, the ancient promise (Ps 81:17) is
fulfilled, that God would feed His people, if they would only obey Him,
with the fat of wheat. The God of Israel is the almighty Governor of
nature. It is He who sends His fiat (אמרתו after the manner of the
ויּאמר of the history of creation, cf. [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)) earthwards (ארץ, the accusative
of the direction). The word is His messenger (vid., on [Psa
107:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#020)), עד־מהרה, i.e., it runs as
swiftly as possible, viz., in order to execute the errand on which it is
sent. He it is who sends down snow-flakes like flocks of wool, so that
the fields are covered with snow as with a white-woollen warming
covering.

(Note: Bochart in his Hierozoicon on this passage compares an
observation of Eustathius on Dionysius Periegetes: τὴν χιόνα ἐριῶδες
ὕδωρ ἀστείως οἱ παλαιοὶ ἐκάλουν.)

He scatters hoar-frost (כּפור from כּפר, to cover over with the fine
frozen dew or mist as though they were powdered with ashes that the wind
had blown about. Another time He casts His ice

(Note: lxx (Italic, Vulgate) κρύσταλλον, i.e., ice, from the root κρυ,
to freeze, to congeal (Jerome glaciem). Quid est crystallum? asks
Augustine, and replies: Nix est glacie durata per multos annos ita ut a
sole vel igne acile dissolvi non possit.)

(קרחו from קרח; or according to another reading, קרחו from קרח) down
like morsels, fragments, כפתּים, viz., as hail-stones, or as sleet. The
question: before His cold - who can stand? is formed as in [Nah
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#006), cf. [Psa
130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003). It further comes to pass that
God sends forth His word and causes them (snow, hoar-frost, and ice) to
melt away: He makes His thawing wind blow, waters flow; i.e., as soon as
the one comes about, the other also takes place forthwith. This God now,
who rules all things by His word and moulds all things according to His
will, is the God of the revelation pertaining to the history of
salvation, which is come to Israel, and as the bearer of which Israel
takes the place of honour among the nations, [Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)., 32-34. Since the poet says מגּיד
and not הגּיד, he is thinking not only of the Tra, but also of prophecy
as the continuous self-attestation of God, the Lawgiver. The Ker דּבריו,
occasioned by the plurals of the parallel member of the verse, gives an
unlimited indistinct idea. We must keep to דברו, with the lxx, Aquila,
Theodotion, the Quinta, Sexta, and Jerome. The word, which is the medium
of God's cosmical rule, is gone forth as a word of salvation to Israel,
and, unfolding itself in statutes and judgments, has raised Israel to a
legal state founded upon a positive divine law or judgment such as no
Gentile nation possesses. The Hallelujah does not exult over the fact
that these other nations are not acquainted with any such positive
divine law, but (cf. [Deu 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)., Baruch
4:4) over the fact that Israel is put into possession of such a law. It
is frequently attested elsewhere that this possession of Israel is only
meant to be a means of making salvation a common property of the world
at large.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 148](psa148)

</div>
