<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa106)  [Next](psa108) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 107](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 107:0</span></span>

An Admonition to Fellow-Countrymen to Render Thanks on account of Having
Got the Better of Calamities

With this Psalm begins the Fifth Book, the Book אלה הדברים of the
Psalter. With Ps 106 closed the Fourth Book, or the Book במדבר, the
first Psalm of which, Ps 90, bewailed the manifestation of God's wrath
in the case of the generation of the desert, and in the presence of the
prevailing death took refuge in God the eternal and unchangeable One. Ps
106, which closes the book has בּמּדבּר ([Psa
106:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#014), [Psa
107:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#026)) as its favourite word, and
makes confession of the sins of Israel on the way to Canaan. Now, just
as at the beginning of the Book of Deuteronomy Israel stands on the
threshold of the Land of Promise, after the two tribes and a half have
already established themselves on the other side of the Jordan, so at
the beginning of this Fifth Book of the Psalter we see Israel restored
to the soil of its fatherland. There it is the Israel redeemed out of
Egypt, here it is the Israel redeemed out of the lands of the Exile.
There the lawgiver once more admonishes Israel to yield the obedience of
love to the Law of Jahve, here the psalmist calls upon Israel to show
gratitude towards Him, who has redeemed it from exile and distress and
death.

We must not therefore be surprised if Ps 106 and Ps 107 are closely
connected, in spite of the fact that the boundary of the two Books lies
between them. "Ps. 107 stands in close relationship to Ps 106. The
similarity of the beginning at once points back to this Psalm. Thanks
are here given in [Psa 107:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#003) for what
was there desired in v. 47. The praise of the Lord which was promised in
[Psa 106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047) in the case of redemption
being vouchsafed, is here presented to Him after redemption vouchsafed."
This observation of Hengstenberg is fully confirmed. The [Psa
104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001) really to a certain extent from
a tetralogy. Ps 104 derives its material from the history of the
creation, Ps 105 from the history of Israel in Egypt, in the desert, and
in the Land of Promise down to the Exile, and Psalms 107 from the time
of the restoration. Nevertheless the connection of Ps 104 with [Psa
105:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001) is by far not so close as that
of these three Psalms among themselves. These three anonymous Psalms
form a trilogy in the strictest sense; they are a tripartite whole from
the hand of one author. The observation is an old one. The Harpffe
Davids mit Teutschen Saiten bespannet (Harp of David strung with German
Strings), a translation of the Psalms which appeared in Augsburg in the
year 1659, begins Ps 106 with the words: "For the third time already am
I now come, and I make bold to spread abroad, with grateful
acknowledgment, Thy great kindnesses." God's wondrous deeds of
loving-kindness and compassion towards Israel from the time of their
forefathers down to the redemption out of Egypt according to the
promise, and giving them possession of Canaan, are the theme of Ps 105.
The theme of Ps 106 is the sinful conduct of Israel from Egypt onwards
during the journey through the desert, and then in the Land of Promise,
by which they brought about the fulfilment of the threat of exile ([Psa
106:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#027)); but even there God's mercy
was not suffered to go unattested ([Psa
106:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#046)). The theme of Psalms 107,
finally, is the sacrifice of praise that is due to Him who redeemed them
out of exile and all kinds of destruction. We may compare [Psa
105:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#044), He gave them the lands (ארצות)
of the heathen; [Psa 106:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#027), (He
threatened) to cast forth their seed among the heathen and to scatter
them in the lands (בּארצות); and [Psa
107:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#003), out of the lands (מארצות) hath
He brought them together, out of east and west, out of north and south.
The designed similarity of the expression, the internal connection, and
the progression in accordance with a definite plan, are not to be
mistaken here. In other respects, too, these three Psalms are intimately
interwoven. In them Egypt is called "the land of Ham" ([Psa
105:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#023), [Psa
105:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#027); [Psa
106:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#022)), and Israel "the chosen ones
of Jahve" ([Psa 105:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#006), [Psa
105:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#043); [Psa
106:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005), cf. [Psa
23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)). They are fond of the
interrogative form of exclamation ([Psa
106:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#002); [Psa
107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043)). There is an approach in them
to the hypostatic conception of the Word (דּבר, [Psa
105:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#019); [Psa
106:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020)). Compare also ישׁימון [Psa
106:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#014); [Psa
107:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#004); and the Hithpa. התהלּל [Psa
105:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#003); [Psa
106:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005), השׁתּבּח, [Psa
106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047), התבּלּע [Psa
107:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#027). In all three the poet shows
himself to be especially familiar with [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001), and also with the Book of Job.
Psalms 107 is the fullest in reminiscences taken from both these Books,
and in this Psalm the movement of the poet is more free without
recapitulating history that has been committed to writing. Everything
therefore favours the assertion that Ps 105, Ps 106, and Ps 107 are a
"trefoil" (trifolium) - two Hodu-Psalms, and a Hallalujah-Psalm in the
middle.

Ps. 107 consists of six groups with an introit, [Psa
107:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001), and an epiphonem, [Psa
107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043). The poet unrolls before the
dispersion of Israel that has again attained to the possession of its
native land the pictures of divine deliverances in which human history,
and more especially the history of the exiles, is so rich. The epiphonem
at the same time stamps the hymn as a consolatory Psalm; for those who
were gathered again out of the lands of the heathen nevertheless still
looked for the final redemption under the now milder, now more despotic
sceptre of the secular power.

[Psalms 107:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 107:1</span></span>

The introit, with the call upon them to grateful praise, is addressed to
the returned exiles. The Psalm carries the marks of its deutero-Isaianic
character on the very front of it, viz.: "the redeemed of Jahve," taken
from [Isa 62:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#012), cf. [Psa
63:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#004); [Psa
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#009).; קבּץ as in [Isa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008), and frequently; "from the north
and from the sea," as in [Isa 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#012) :
"the sea" (ים) here (as perhaps there also), side by side with east,
west, and north, is the south, or rather (since ים is an established
usus loquendi for the west) the south-west, viz., the southern portion
of the Mediterranean washing the shores of Egypt. With this the poet
associates the thought of the exiles of Egypt, as with וּממּערב the
exiles of the islands, i.e., of Asia Minor and Europe; he is therefore
writing at a period in which the Jewish state newly founded by the
release of the Babylonian exiles had induced the scattered
fellow-countrymen in all countries to return home. Calling upon the
redeemed ones to give thanks to God the Redeemer in order that the work
of the restoration of Israel may be gloriously perfected amidst the
thanksgiving of the redeemed ones, he forthwith formulates the
thanksgiving by putting the language of thanksgiving of the ancient
liturgy ([Jer 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#011)) into their mouth.
The nation, now again established upon the soil of the fatherland, has,
until it had acquired this again, seen destruction in every form in a
strange land, and can tell of the most manifold divine deliverances. The
call to sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving is expanded accordingly
into several pictures portraying the dangers of the strange land, which
are not so much allegorical, personifying the Exile, as rather
exemplificative.

[Psalms 107:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 107:4</span></span>

It has actually come to pass, the first strophe tells us, that they
wandered in a strange land through deserts and wastes, and seemed likely
to have to succumb to death from hunger. According to [Psa
107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040) and [Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019), it appears that [Psa
107:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#004) ought to be read לא־דרך
(Olshausen, Baur, and Thenius); but the line is thereby lengthened
inelegantly. The two words, joined by Munach, stand in the construct
state, like פּרא אדם, [Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012) : a
waste of a way = ἔρημος ὁδός, [Act
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026) (Ewald, Hitzig), which is better
suited to the poetical style than that דּרך, as in משׁנה־כּסףp, and the
like, should be an accusative of nearer definition (Hengstenberg). In
connection with עיר מושׁב the poet, who is fond of this combination
([Psa 107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007), [Psa
107:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036), cf. בּית־מושׁב, [Lev
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029)), means any city whatever which
might afford the homeless ones a habitable, hospitable reception. With
the perfects, which describe what has been experienced, alternates in
[Psa 107:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#005) the imperfect, which shifts
to the way in which anything comes about: their soul in them enveloped
itself (vid., [Psa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#003)), i.e., was
nigh upon extinction. With the fut. consec. then follows in [Psa
107:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#006) the fact which gave the turn to
the change in their misfortune. Their cry for help, as the imperfect
יצּילם implies, was accompanied by their deliverance, the fact of which
is expressed by the following fut. consec. ויּדריכם. Those who have
experienced such things are to confess to the Lord, with thanksgiving,
His loving-kindness and His wonderful works to the children of men. It
is not to be rendered: His wonders (supply אשׁר עשׂה) towards the
children of men (Luther, Olshausen, and others). The two ל coincide:
their thankful confession of the divine loving-kindness and wondrous
acts is not to be addressed alone to Jahve Himself, but also to men, in
order that out of what they have experienced a wholesome fruit may
spring forth for the multitude. נפשׁ שׁוקקה (part. Polel, the ē of which
is retained as a pre-tonic vowel in pause, cf. [Psa
68:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#026) and on [Job
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#027), Ew. 188, b) is, as in [Isa
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009), the thirsting soul (from שׁוּק,
Arab. sâq, to urge forward, of the impulse and drawing of the emotions,
in Hebrew to desire ardently). The preterites are here an expression of
that which has been experienced, and therefore of that which has become
a fact of experience. In superabundant measure does God uphold the
languishing soul that is in imminent danger of languishing away.

[Psalms 107:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 107:10</span></span>

Others suffered imprisonment and bonds; but through Him who had decreed
this as punishment for them, they also again reached the light of
freedom. Just as in the first strophe, here, too, as far as יודוּ in
[Psa 107:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#015), is all a compound
subject; and in view of this the poet begins with participles. "Darkness
and the shadow of death" (vid., [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)) is an Isaianic expression, [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) (where ישׁבי is construed with ב),
[Psa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007) (where ישׁבי is construed as
here, cf. [Gen 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#020); [Zac
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011)), just as "bound in torture and
iron" takes its rise from [Job 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008).
The old expositors call it a hendiadys for "torturing iron" (after [Psa
105:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#018)); but it is more correct to
take the one as the general term and the other as the particular: bound
in all sorts of affliction from which they could not break away, and
more particularly in iron bonds (בּרזל, like the Arabic firzil, an iron
fetter, vid., on [Psa 105:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#018)). In [Psa
107:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#011), which calls to mind [Isa
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019), and with respect to [Psa
107:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#012), [Isa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008), the double play upon the sound of
the words is unmistakeable. By עצה is meant the plan in accordance with
which God governs, more particularly His final purpose, which lies at
the basis of His leadings of Israel. Not only had they nullified this
purpose of mercy by defiant resistance (המרה) against God's commandments
(אמרי, Arabic awâmir, âmireh) on their part, but they had even
blasphemed it; נאץ, [Deu 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019), and
frequently, or נאץ (prop. to pierce, then to treat roughly), is an old
Mosaic designation of blasphemy, [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020); [Num
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011), [Num
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#023); [Num
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#030). Therefore God thoroughly
humbled them by afflictive labour, and caused them to stumble (כּשׁל).
But when they were driven to it, and prayed importunately to Him, He
helped them out of their straits. The refrain varies according to
recognised custom. Twice the expression is ויצעקו, twice ויזעקו; once
יצילם, then twice יושׁיעם, and last of all יוציאם, which follows here in
[Psa 107:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#014) as an alliteration. The
summary condensation of the deliverance experienced ([Psa
107:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#016)) is moulded after [Isa
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#002). The Exile, too, may be regarded
as such like a large jail (vid., e.g., [Isa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007), [Isa
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#022)); but the descriptions of the
poet are not pictures, but examples.

[Psalms 107:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 107:17</span></span>

Others were brought to the brink of the grave by severe sickness; but
when they draw nigh in earnest prayer to Him who appointed that they
should suffer thus on account of their sins, He became their Saviour.
אויל (cf. e.g., [Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003)), like נבל
(vid., [Psa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)), is also an ethical
notion, and not confined to the idea of defective intellect merely. It
is one who insanely lives only for the passing hour, and ruins health,
calling, family, and in short himself and everything belonging to him.
Those who were thus minded, the poet begins by saying, were obliged to
suffer by reason of (in consequence of) their wicked course of life. The
cause of their days of pain and sorrow is placed first by way of
emphasis; and because it has a meaning that is related to the past
יתענּוּ thereby comes all the more easily to express that which took
place simultaneously in the past. The Hithpa. in [Kg1
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#026) signifies to suffer willingly or
intentionally; here: to be obliged to submit to suffering against one's
will. Hengstenberg, for example, construes it differently: "Fools
because of their walk in transgression (more than 'because of their
transgression'), and those who because of their iniquities were
afflicted - all food," etc. But מן beside יתענּוּ has the assumption in
its favour of being an affirmation of the cause of the affliction. In
[Psa 107:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#018) the poet has the Book of
Job ([Job 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#020), [Job
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#022)) before his eye. And in
connection with [Psa 107:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#020),
ἀπέστειλεν τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ καὶ ἰάσατο αὐτοὺς (lxx), no passage of the
Old Testament is more vividly recalled to one's mind than [Psa
105:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#019), even more than [Psa
147:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#018); because here, as in [Psa
105:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#019), it treats of the intervention
of divine acts within the sphere of human history, and not of the
intervention of divine operations within the sphere of the natural
world. In the natural world and in history the word (דּבר) is God's
messenger ([Psa 105:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#019), cf. [Isa
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010).), and appears here as a
mediator of the divine healing. Here, as in [Job
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#023)., the fundamental fact of the
New Testament is announced, which Theodoret on this passage expresses in
words: Ὁ Θεὸς Λόγος ἐνανθρωπήσας καὶ ἀποσταλεὶς ὡς ἄνθρωπος τὰ παντοδαπὰ
τῶν ψυχῶν ἰάσατο τραύματα καὶ τοὺς διαφθαρέντας ἀνέῤῥωσε λογισμούς. The
lxx goes on to render it: καὶ ἐῤῥύσατο αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῶν διαφθορῶν αὐτῶν,
inasmuch as the translators derive שׁחיתותם from שׁחיתה ([Dan
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005)), and this, as שׁחת elsewhere
(vid., [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)), from שׁחת,
διαφθείρειν, which is approved by Hitzig. But [Lam
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020) is against this. From שׁחה is
formed a noun שׁחוּת (שׁחוּת) in the signification a hollow place ([Pro
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#010)), the collateral form of which,
שׁחית (שׁחית), is inflected like חנית, plur. חניתות with a retention of
the substantival termination. The "pits" are the deep afflictions into
which they were plunged, and out of which God caused them to escape. The
suffix of וירפאם avails also for ימלּט, as in [Gen
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#005); [Gen
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#031); [Psa
139:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001); [Isa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005).

[Psalms 107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 107:23</span></span>

Others have returned to tell of the perils of the sea. Without any
allegory (Hengstenberg) it speaks of those who by reason of their
calling traverse (which is expressed by ירד because the surface of the
sea lies below the dry land which slopes off towards the coast) the sea
in ships (read boŏnijoth without the article), and that not as
fishermen, but (as Luther has correctly understood the choice of the
word) in commercial enterprises. These have seen the works and wonders
of God in the eddying deep, i.e., they have seen with their own eyes
what God can do when in His anger He calls up the powers of nature, and
on the other hand when He compassionately orders them back into their
bounds. God's mandate (ויּאמר as in [Psa
105:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#031), [Psa
105:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#034)) brought it to pass that a
stormy wind arose (cf. עמד, [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)), and it drove its (the sea's)
waves on high, so that the seafarers at one time were tossed up to the
sky and then hurled down again into deep abysses, and their soul melted
בּרעה, in an evil, anxious mood, i.e., lost all its firmness. They
turned about in a circle (יחוגּוּ( elc from חגג = חוּג) and reeled after
the manner of a drunken man; all their wisdom swallowed itself up, i.e.,
consumed itself within itself, came of itself to nought, just as Ovid,
Trist. i. 1, says in connection with a similar description of a storm at
sea: ambiguis ars stupet ipsa malis. The poet here writes under the
influence of [Isa 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#003), [Isa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014). But at their importunate
supplication God led them forth out of their distresses ([Psa
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#017)). He turned the raging storm
into a gentle blowing (= דּממה דּקּה, [Kg1
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#012)). הקים construed with ל here has
the sense of transporting (carrying over) into another condition or
state, as Apollinaris renders: αὐτίκα δ ̓ εἰς αὔρην προτέρην μετέθηκε
θύελλαν. The suffix of גּלּיהם cannot refer to the מים רבּים in [Psa
107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023), which is so far removed;
"their waves" are those with which they had to battle. These to their
joy became calm (חשׁה) and were still (שׁתק as in [Jon
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#011)), and God guided them ἐπὶ λιμένα
θελήματος αὐτῶν (lxx). מחוז, a hapax-legomenon, from Arab. ḥâz (ḥwz), to
shut in on all sides and to draw to one's self (root Arab. ḥw, gyravit,
in gyrum egit), signifies a place enclosed round, therefore a haven, and
first of all perhaps a creek, to use a northern word, a fiord. The verb
שׁתק in relation to חשׁה is the stronger word, like יבשׁ in relation to
חרם in the history of the Flood. Those who have been thus marvellously
rescued are then called upon thankfully to praise God their Deliverer in
the place where the national church assembles, and where the chiefs of
the nation sit in council; therefore, as it seems, in the Temple and in
the Forum.

(Note: In exact editions like Norzi, Heidenheim, and Baer's, before [Psa
107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023), [Psa
107:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#024), [Psa
107:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025), [Psa
107:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#026), [Psa
107:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#027), [Psa
107:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#028), and [Psa
107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040) there stand reversed Nuns
(נונין הפוכין, in the language of the Masora נונין מנזרות), as before
[Num 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035) and between [Num
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#036) and [Num
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001) (nine in all). Their
signification is unknown.)

Now follow two more groups without the two beautiful and impressive
refrains with which the four preceding groups are interspersed. The
structure is less artistic, and the transitions here and there abrupt
and awkward. One might say that these two groups are inferior to the
rest, much as the speeches of Elihu are inferior to the rest of the Book
of Job. That they are, however, nevertheless from the hand of the very
same poet is at once seen from the continued dependence upon the Book of
Job and Isaiah. Hengstenberg sees in [Psa
107:33-42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033) "the song with which they
exalt the Lord in the assembly of the people and upon the seat of the
elders." but the materia laudis is altogether different from that which
is to be expected according to the preceding calls to praise. Nor is it
any the more clear to us that [Psa
107:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033). refer to the overthrow of
Babylon, and [Psa 107:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#035). to the happy
turn of affairs that took place simultaneously for Israel; [Psa
107:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#035) does not suit Canaan, and the
expressions in [Psa 107:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036). would be
understood in too low a sense. No, the poet goes on further to
illustrate the helpful government of God the just and gracious One,
inasmuch as he has experiences in his mind in connection therewith, of
which the dispersion of Israel in all places can sing and speak.

[Psalms 107:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 107:33</span></span>

Since in [Psa 107:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036) the historical
narration is still continued, a meaning relating to the contemporaneous
past is also retrospectively given to the two correlative ישׂם. It now
goes on to tell what those who have now returned have observed and
experienced in their own case. [Psa
107:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033) sounds like [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002); [Psa
107:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033) like [Isa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007); and [Psa
107:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#035) takes its rise from [Isa
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018). The juxtaposition of מוצאי and
צמּאון, since [Deu 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015), belongs to
the favourite antithetical alliterations, e.g., [Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003). מלחה, that which is salty (lxx
cf. Sir. 39:23: ἅλμη), is, as in [Job
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#006), the name for the uncultivated,
barren steppe. A land that has been laid waste for the punishment of its
inhabitants has very often been changed into flourishing fruitful fields
under the hands of a poor and grateful generation; and very often a land
that has hitherto lain uncultivated and to all appearance absolutely
unprofitable has developed an unexpected fertility. The exiles to whom
Jeremiah writes, [Psa 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#005) : Build ye
houses and settle down, and plant gardens and eat their fruit, may
frequently have experienced this divine blessing. Their industry and
their knowledge also did their part, but looked at in a right light, it
was not their own work but God's work that their settlement prospered,
and that they continually spread themselves wider and possessed a not
small, i.e., (cf. [Kg2 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#003)) a very
large, stock of cattle.

[Psalms 107:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">psa 107:39</span></span>

But is also came to pass that it went ill with them, inasmuch as their
flourishing prosperous condition drew down upon them the envy of the
powerful and tyrannical; nevertheless God put an end to tyranny, and
always brought His people again to honour and strength. Hitzig is of
opinion that [Psa 107:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039) goes back
into the time when things were different with those who, according to
[Psa 107:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036), had thriven. The modus
consecutivus is sometimes used thus retrospectively (vid., [Isa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#005)); here, however, the symmetry of
the continuation from [Psa 107:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036),
and the change which is expressed in [Psa
107:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039) in comparison with [Psa
107:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#038), require an actual consecution
in that which is narrated. They became few and came down, were reduced
(שׁחח, cf. [Pro 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#019) : to come to
ruin, or to be overthrown), a coarctatione malitiae et maeroris. עצר is
the restraint of despotic rule, רעה the evil they had to suffer under
such restraint, and רגון sorrow, which consumed their life. מעצר has
Tarcha and רעה Munach (instead of Mercha and Mugrash, vid.,
Accentuationssystem, xviii. 2). There is no reason for departing from
this interpunction and rendering: "through tyranny, evil, and sorrow."
What is stiff and awkward in the progress of the description arises from
the fact that [Psa 107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040) is borrowed
from [Job 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#021), [Job
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#024), and that the poet is not
willing to make any change in these sublime words. The version shows how
we think the relation of the clauses is to be apprehended. Whilst He
pours out His wrath upon tyrants in the contempt of men that comes upon
them, and makes them fugitives who lose themselves in the terrible
waste, He raises the needy and those hitherto despised and ill-treated
on high out of the depth of their affliction, and makes families like a
flock, i.e., makes their families so increase, that they come to have
the appearance of a merrily gamboling and numerous flock. Just as this
figure points back to [Job 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#011), so
[Psa 107:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042) is made up out of [Job
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#019); [Job
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016). The sight of this act of
recognition on the part of God of those who have been wrongfully
oppressed gives joy to the upright, and all roguery (עולה, vid., Ps
92:16) has its mouth closed, i.e., its boastful insolence is once for
all put to silence. In [Psa 107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043) the
poet makes the strains of his Psalm die away after the example of Hosea,
Hosea 14:10 \[9\], in the nota bene expressed after the manner of a
question: Who is wise - he will or let him keep this, i.e., bear it well
in mind. The transition to the justice together with a change of number
is rendered natural by the fact that מי חכם, as in Hos. loc. cit. (cf.
[Jer 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#011); [Est
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#006), and without Waw apod. [Jdg
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#003); [Pro
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#004), [Pro
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#016)), is equivalent to quisquis
sapeins est. חסדי ה (חסדי) are the manifestations of mercy or
loving-kindness in which God's ever-enduring mercy unfolds itself in
history. He who is wise has a good memory for and a clear understanding
of this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 108](psa108)

</div>
