<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa147)  [Next](psa149) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 148](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 148:0</span></span>

Hallelujah of All Heavenly and Earthly Beings

After the Psalmist in the foregoing Hallelujah has made the gracious
self-attestation of Jahve in the case of the people of revelation, in
connection with the general government of the almighty and
all-benevolent One in the world, the theme of his praise, he calls upon
all creatures in heaven and on earth, and more especially mankind of all
peoples and classes and races and ages, to join in concert in praise of
the Name of Jahve, and that on the ground of the might and honour which
He has bestowed upon His people, i.e., has bestowed upon them once more
now when they are gathered together again out of exile and Jerusalem has
risen again out of the ruins of its overthrow. The hymn of the three in
the fiery furnace, which has been interpolated in [Dan
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001) of the Book of Daniel in the lxx,
is for the most part an imitation of this Psalm. In the language of the
liturgy this Psalm has the special name of Laudes among the twenty
Psalmi alleluiatici, and all the three Psalms which close the Psalter
are called αἶνοι, Syriac shabchûh (praise ye Him).

In this Psalm the loftiest consciousness of faith is united with the
grandest contemplation of the world. The church appears here as the
choir-leader of the universe. It knows that its experiences have a
central and universal significance for the whole life of creation; that
the loving-kindness which has fallen to its lot is worthy to excite joy
among all beings in heaven and on earth. And it calls not only upon
everything in heaven and on earth that stands in fellowship of thought,
of word, and of freedom with it to praise God, but also the sun, moon,
and stars, water, earth, fire, and air, mountains, trees, and beasts,
yea even such natural phenomena as hail, snow, and mist. How is this to
be explained? The easiest way of explaining is to say that it is a
figure of speech (Hupfeld); but this explanation explains nothing. Does
the invitation in the exuberance of feeling, without any clearness of
conception, here overstep the boundary of that which is possible? Or
does the poet, when he calls upon these lifeless and unconscious things
to praise God, mean that we are to praise God on their behalf - ἀφορ ᾶν
εἰς ταῦτα, as Theodoret says, καὶ τοῦ Θεοῦ τὴν σοφίαν καταμανθάνειν καὶ
διὰ πάντων αὐτῷ πλέκειν τὴν ὑμνῳδίαν? Or does the "praise ye" in its
reference to these things of nature proceed on the assumption that they
praise God when they redound to the praise of God, and find its
justification in the fact that the human will enters into this matter of
fact which relates to things, and is devoid of any will, and seizes it
and drags it into the concert of angels and men? All these explanations
are unsatisfactory. The call to praise proceeds rather from the wish
that all creatures, by becoming after their own manner an echo and
reflection of the divine glory, may participate in the joy at the glory
which God has bestowed upon His people after their deep humiliation.
This wish, however, after all rests upon the great truth, that the way
through suffering to glory which the church is traversing, has not only
the glorifying of God in itself, but by means of this glorifying, the
glorifying of God in all creatures and by all creatures, too, as its
final aim, and that these, finally transformed (glorified) in the
likeness of transformed (glorified) humanity, will become the bright
mirror of the divine doxa and an embodied hymn of a thousand voices. The
calls also in [Isa 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023); [Isa
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#013), cf. [Psa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009), and the descriptions in [Isa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)., [Isa
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019); [Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012)., proceed from the view to which
Paul gives clear expression from the stand-point of the New Testament in
[Rom 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018).

[Psalms 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 148:1</span></span>

The call does not rise step by step from below upwards, but begins
forthwith from above in the highest and outermost spheres of creation.
The place whence, before all others, the praise is to resound is the
heavens; it is to resound in the heights, viz., the heights of heaven
([Job 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019); [Job
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#002); [Job
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#002)). The מן might, it is true, also
denote the birth or origin: ye of the heavens, i.e., ye celestial beings
(cf. [Psa 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027)), but the parallel
בּמּרומים renders the immediate construction with הללוּ more natural.
[Psa 148:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002) tell who are to praise
Jahve there: first of all, all His angels, the messengers of the Ruler
of the world - all His host, i.e., angels and stars, for צבאו (Chethמb)
or צבאיו (Kerמ as in [Psa 103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021)) is
the name of the heavenly host armed with light which God Tsebaoth
commands (vid., on [Gen 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)), - a name
including both stars (e.g., in [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019)) and angels (e.g., in [Jos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014)., [Kg1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019)); angels and stars are also
united in the Scriptures in other instances (e.g., [Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007)). When the psalmist calls upon
these beings of light to praise Jahve, he does not merely express his
delight in that which they do under any circumstances (Hengstenberg),
but comprehends the heavenly world with the earthly, the church above
with the church here below (vid., on [Psa
29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001); Ps 103), and gives a special
turn to the praise of the former, making it into an echo of the praise
of the latter, and blending both harmoniously together. The heavens of
heavens are, as in [Deu 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014); [Kg1
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027), Sir. 16:18, and frequently,
those which lie beyond the heavens of the earth which were created on
the fourth day, therefore they are the outermost and highest spheres.
The waters which are above the heavens are, according to Hupfeld, "a
product of the fancy, like the upper heavens and the whole of the
inhabitants of heaven." But if in general the other world is not a
notion to which there is no corresponding entity, this notion may also
have things for its substance which lie beyond our knowledge of nature.
The Scriptures, from the first page to the last, acknowledge the
existence of celestial waters, to which the rain-waters stand in the
relation as it were of a finger-post pointing upwards (see [Gen
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007)). All these beings belonging to
the superterrestrial world are to praise the Name of Jahve, for He, the
God of Israel, it is by whose fiat (צוּה, like אמר in [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009))

(Note: The interpolated parallel member, αὐτὸς εἶπε καὶ ἐγενήθησαν, here
in the lxx is taken over from that passage.))

the heavens and all their host are created ([Psa
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)). He has set them, which did not
previously exist, up (העמיד as e.g., in [Neh
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#007), the causative to עמד in [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009), cf. [Psa
119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091)), and that for ever and ever
([Psa 111:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#008)), i.e., in order for ever
to maintain the position in the whole of creation which He has assigned
to them. He hath given a law (חק) by which its distinctive
characteristic is stamped upon each of these heavenly beings, and a
fixed bound is set to the nature and activity of each in its mutual
relation to all, and not one transgresses (the individualizing singular)
this law given to it. Thus ולא יעבר is to be understood, according to
[Job 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005), cf. [Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022); [Job
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#010); [Psa
104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009). Hitzig makes the Creator
Himself the subject; but then the poet would have at least been obliged
to say חק־נתן למו, and moreover it may be clearly seen from [Jer
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036); [Jer
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#020), how the thought that God
inviolably keeps the orders of nature in check is expressed θεοπρεπῶς.
[Jer 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022), by way of example, shows
that the law itself is not, with Ewald, Maurer, and others, following
the lxx, Syriac, Italic, Jerome, and Kimchi, to be made the subject: a
law hath He given, and it passes not away (an imperishable one). In
combination with חק, עבר always signifies "to pass over, transgress."

[Psalms 148:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 148:7</span></span>

The call to the praise of Jahve is now turned, in the second group of
verses, to the earth and everything belonging to it in the widest
extent. Here too מן־הארץ, like מן־השּׁמים, [Psa
148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001), is intended of the place whence
the praise is to resound, and not according to [Psa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018) of earthly beings. The call is
addressed in the first instance to the sea-monsters or dragons ([Psa
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013)), i.e., as Pindar (Nem. iii.
23f.) expresses it, θῆρας ἐν πελάγεΐ ὑπερο'χους, and to the surging mass
of waters (תּהמות) above and within the earth. Then to four phenomena of
nature, coming down from heaven and ascending heavenwards, which are so
arranged in [Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008), after the
model of the chiasmus (crosswise position), that fire and smoke (קטור),
more especially of the mountains ([Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018)), hail and snow stand in
reciprocal relation; and to the storm-wind (רוּח סערה, an appositional
construction, as in [Psa 107:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025)),
which, beside a seeming freeness and untractableness, performs God's
word. What is said of this last applies also to the fire, etc.; all
these phenomena of nature are messengers and servants of God, [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004), cf. [Psa
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020). When the poet wishes that they
all may join in concert with the rest of the creatures to the praise of
God, he excepts the fact that they frequently become destructive powers
executing judicial punishment, and only has before his mind their (more
especially to the inhabitant of Palestine, to whom the opportunity of
seeing hail, snow, and ice was more rare than with us, imposing)
grandeur and their relatedness to the whole of creation, which is
destined to glorify God and to be itself glorified. He next passes over
to the mountains towering towards the skies and to all the heights of
earth; to the fruit-trees, and to the cedars, the kings among the trees
of the forest; to the wild beasts, which are called חחיּה because they
represent the most active and powerful life in the animal world, and to
all quadrupeds, which, more particularly the four-footed domestic
animals, are called בּהמה; to the creeping things (רמשׂ) which cleave to
the ground as they move along; and to the birds, which are named with
the descriptive epithet winged (צפּור כּנף as in [Deu
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#017), cf. [Gen
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#014); [Eze
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017), instead of עוף כּנף, [Gen
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021)). And just as the call in Ps 103
finds its centre of gravity, so to speak, at last in the soul of man, so
here it is addressed finally to humanity, and that, because mankind
lives in nations and is comprehended under the law of a state
commonwealth, in the first instance to its heads: the kings of the
earth, i.e., those who rule over the earth by countries, to the princes
and all who have the administration of justice and are possessed of
supreme power on the earth, then to men of both sexes and of every age.

All the beings mentioned from [Psa
148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001) onwards are to praise the Name
of Jahve; for His Name, He (the God of this Name) alone ([Isa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011); [Psa
72:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)) is נשׂגּב, so high that no name
reaches up to Him, not even from afar; His glory (His glorious
self-attestation) extends over earth and heaven (vid., [Psa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)). כּי, without our being able and
obliged to decide which, introduces the matter and the ground of the
praise; and the fact that the desire of the poet comprehends in יהללוּ
all the beings mentioned is seen from his saying "earth and heaven," as
he glances back from the nearer things mentioned to those mentioned
farther off (cf. [Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)). In [Psa
148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014) the statement of the object and
of the ground of the praise is continued. The motive from which the call
to all creatures to Hallelujah proceeds, viz., the new mercy which God
has shown towards His people, is also the final ground of the Hallelujah
which is to sound forth; for the church of God on earth is the
central-point of the universe, the aim of the history of the world, and
the glorifying of this church is the turning-point for the
transformation of the world. It is not to be rendered: He hath exalted
the horn of His people, any more than in [Psa
132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017) : I will make the horn of David
to shoot forth. The horn in both instances is one such as the person
named does not already possess, but which is given him (different from
[Psa 89:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#018), [Psa
89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025); [Psa
92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011), and frequently). The Israel of
the Exile had lost its horn, i.e., its comeliness and its defensive and
offensive power. God has now given it a horn again, and that a high one,
i.e., has helped Israel to attain again an independence among the
nations that commands respect. In Ps 132, where the horn is an object of
the promise, we might directly understand by it the Branch (Zemach).
Here, where the poet speaks out of his own present age, this is at least
not the meaning which he associates with the words. What now follows is
an apposition to ויּרם קרן לעמּו: He has raised up a horn for His people
- praise (we say: to the praise of; cf. the New Testament εἰς ἔπαινον)
to all His saints, the children of Israel, the people who stand near
Him. Others, as Hengstenberg, take תּהלּה as a second object, but we
cannot say הרים תּהלּה. Israel is called עם קרבו, the people of His near
= of His nearness or vicinity (Kster), as Jerusalem is called in [Ecc
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010) מקום קדושׁ instead of קדשׁ מקום
(Ew. 287, a, b). It might also be said, according to [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003), עם קרביו, the nation of those
who are near to Him (as the Targum renders it). In both instances עם is
the governing noun, as, too, surely גּבר is in גּבר עמיתי ni, [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007), which need not signify, by going
back to the abstract primary signification of עמית, a man of my near
fellowship, but can also signify a man of my neighbour, i.e., my nearest
man, according to Ew. loc. cit. (cf. above on [Psa
145:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#010)). As a rule, the principal form
of עם is pointed עם; and it is all the more unnecessary, with Olshausen
and Hupfeld, to take the construction as adjectival for עם קרוב לו. It
might, with Hitzig after Aben-Ezra, be more readily regarded as
appositional (to a people, His near, i.e., standing near to Him). We
have here an example of the genitival subordination, which is very
extensive in Hebrew, instead of an appositional co-ordination: populo
propinqui sui, in connection with which propinqui may be referred back
to propinquum = propinquitas, but also to propinquus (literally: a
people of the kind of one that is near to Him). Thus is Israel styled in
[Deu 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007). In the consciousness of the
dignity which lies in this name, the nation of the God of the history of
salvation comes forward in this Psalm as the leader (choragus) of all
creatures, and strikes up a Hallelujah that is to be followed by heaven
and earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 149](psa149)

</div>
