<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](rut001)  [Next](rut003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 2:0</span></span>

Ruth Gleans in the Field of Boaz - Ruth 2

Ruth went to the field to glean ears of corn, for the purpose of
procuring support for herself and her mother-in-law, and came by chance
to the field of Boaz, a relative of Naomi, who, when he heard that she
had come with Naomi from Moabitis, spoke kindly to her, and gave her
permission not only to glean ears in his field and even among the
sheaves, but to appease her hunger and thirst with the food and drink of
his reapers (vv. 1-16), so that in the evening she returned to her
mother-in-law with a plentiful gleaning, and told her of the gracious
reception she had met with from this man, and then learned from her that
Boaz was a relation of her own ([Rut
2:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#017)).

[Ruth 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 2:1</span></span>

The account of this occurrence commences with a statement which was
necessary in order to make it perfectly intelligible, namely that Boaz,
to whose field Ruth went to glean, was a relative of Naomi through her
deceased husband Elimelech. The Kethibh מידע is to be read מידּע, an
acquaintance (cf. [Psa 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012); [Psa
55:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#014)). The Keri מודע is the construct
state of מודע, lit. acquaintanceship, then an acquaintance or friend
([Pro 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#004)), for which מודעת occurs
afterwards in [Rut 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#002) with the same
meaning. That the acquaintance or friend of Naomi through her husband
was also a relation, is evident from the fact that he was "of the family
of Elimelech. " According to the rabbinical tradition, which is not well
established however, Boaz was a nephew of Elimelech. The ל before אישׁהּ
is used instead of the simple construct state, because the reference is
not to the relation, but to a relation of her husband; at the same time,
the word מודע has taken the form of the construct state notwithstanding
this ל (compare Ewald, 292, a., with 289, b.). חיל גּבּור generally
means the brave man of war ([Jdg 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#012);
[Jdg 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001), etc.); but here it
signifies a man of property. The name Boaz is not formed from עז בּו, in
whom is strength, but from a root, בּעז, which does not occur in Hebrew,
and signifies alacrity.

[Rut 2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#002)

Ruth wished to go to the field and glean at (among) the ears, i.e.,
whatever ears were left lying upon the harvest field (cf. [Rut
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#007)), אשׁר אחר, behind him in whose
eyes she should find favour. The Mosaic law ([Lev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009); [Lev
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#022), compared with [Deu
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)) did indeed expressly secure to
the poor the right to glean in the harvest fields, and prohibited the
owners from gleaning themselves; but hard-hearted farmers and reapers
threw obstacles in the way of the poor, and even forbade their gleaning
altogether. Hence Ruth proposed to glean after him who should generously
allow it. She carried out this intention with the consent of Naomi, and
chance led her to the portion of the field belonging to Boaz, a relation
of Elimelech, without her knowing the owner of the field, or being at
all aware of his connection with Elimelech. מקרה ויּקר, lit., "her
chance chanced to hit upon the field."

[Rut 2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#004)

When Boaz came from the town to the field, and had greeted his reapers
with the blessing of a genuine Israelites, "Jehovah be with you," and
had received from them a corresponding greeting in return, he said to
the overseer of the reapers, "Whose damsel is this?" to which he
replied, "It is the Moabitish damsel who came back with Naomi from the
fields of Moab, and she has said (asked), Pray, I will glean (i.e., pray
allow me to glean) and gather among the sheaves after the reapers, and
has come and stays (here) from morning till now; her sitting in the
house that is little." מאז, lit. a conjunction, here used as a
preposition, is stronger than מן, "from then," from the time of the
morning onwards (see Ewald, 222, c.). It is evident from this answer of
the servant who was placed over the reapers, (1) that Boaz did not
prohibit any poor person from gleaning in his field; (2) that Ruth asked
permission of the overseer of the reapers, and availed herself of this
permission with untiring zeal from the first thing in the morning, that
she might get the necessary support for her mother-in-law and herself;
and (3) that her history was well known to the overseer, and also to
Boaz, although Boaz saw her now for the first time.

[Ruth 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rut 2:8</span></span>

The good report which the overlooker gave of the modesty and diligence
of Ruth could only strengthen Boaz in his purpose, which he had probably
already formed from his affection as a relation towards Naomi, to make
the acquaintance of her daughter-in-law, and speak kindly to her. With
fatherly kindness, therefore, he said to her ([Rut
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008), [Rut
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#009)), "Dost thou hear, my daughter?
(i.e., 'thou hearest, dost thou not?' interrogatio blande affirmat;) go
not to reap in another field, and go not away from here, and keep so to
my maidens (i.e., remaining near them in the field). Thine eyes
(directed) upon the field which they reap, go behind them (i.e., behind
the maidens, who probably tired up the sheaves, whilst the men-servants
cut the corn). I have commanded the young men not to touch thee (to do
thee no harm); and if thou art thirsty (צמת, from צמה = צמא: see Ewald,
195, b.), go to the vessels, and drink of what the servants draw."

[Ruth 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rut 2:10</span></span>

Deeply affected by this generosity, Ruth fell upon her face, bowing down
to the ground (as in [Sa1 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#023); [Sa2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#002); cf. [Gen
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#007)), to thank him reverentially, and
said to Boaz, "Why have I found favour in thine eyes, that thou
regardest me, who am only a stranger?" הכּיר, to look at with sympathy
or care, to receive a person kindly (cf. [Rut
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#019)).

[Ruth 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rut 2:11</span></span>

Boaz replied, "Everything has been told me that thou hast done to (את,
prep. as in [Zac 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009); [Sa2
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#017)) thy mother-in-law since the
death of thy husband, that thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and
thy kindred, and hast come to a people that thou knewest not heretofore"
(hast therefore done what God commanded Abraham to do, [Gen
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)). "The Lord recompense thy work,
and let thy reward be perfect (recalling [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)) from the Lord the God of Israel,
to whom thou hast come to seek refuge under His wings!" For this
figurative expression, which is derived from [Deu
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011), compare [Psa
91:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#004); [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008); [Psa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002). In these words of Boaz we see
the genuine piety of a true Israelite.

[Ruth 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rut 2:13</span></span>

Ruth replied with true humility, "May I find favour in thine eyes; for
thou hast comforted me, and spoken to the heart of thy maiden (see [Jdg
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#003)), though I am not like one of thy
maidens," i.e., though I stand in no such near relation to thee, as to
have been able to earn thy favour. In this last clause she restricts the
expression "thy maiden." Carpzov has rightly pointed this out: "But what
am I saying when I call myself thy maiden? since I am not worthy to be
compared to the least of thy maidens." The word אמצא is to be taken in
an optative sense, as expressive of the wish that Boaz might continue
towards her the kindness he had already expressed. To take it as a
present, "I find favour" (Clericus and Bertheau), does not tally with
the modesty and humility shown by Ruth in the following words.

[Ruth 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rut 2:14</span></span>

This unassuming humility on the part of Ruth made Boaz all the more
favourably disposed towards her, so that at meal-time he called her to
eat along with his people (לה without Mappik, as in [Num
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#042); [Zac
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011); cf. Ewald, 94, b. 3). "Dip thy
morsel in the vinegar." Chomez, a sour beverage composed of vinegar
(wine vinegar or sour wine) mixed with oil; a very refreshing drink,
which is still a favourite beverage in the East (see Rosenmller, A. and
N. Morgenland, iv. p. 68, and my Bibl. Archologie, ii. p. 16). "And he
reached her parched corn." The subject is Boaz, who, judging from the
expression "come hither," either joined in the meal, or at any rate was
present at it. קלי are roasted grains of wheat (see at [Lev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014), and my Bibl. Arch. ii. p. 14),
which are still eaten by the reapers upon the harvest field, and also
handed to strangers.

(Note: Thus Robinson (Pal. ii. p. 394) gives the following description
of a harvest scene in the neighbourhood of Kubeibeh: "In one field
nearly two hundred reapers and gleaners were at work, the latter being
nearly as numerous as the former. A few were taking their refreshment,
and offered us some of their 'parched corn.' In the season of harvest,
the grains of wheat not yet fully dry and hard, are roasted in a pan or
on an iron plate, and constitute a very palatable article of food; this
is eaten along with bread, or instead of it.")

Boaz gave her an abundant supply of it, so that she was not only
satisfied, but left some, and was able to take it home to her mother
([Rut 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#018).)

[Ruth 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 2:15</span></span>

When she rose up to glean again after eating, Boaz commanded his people,
saying, "She may also glean between the shaves (which was not generally
allowed), and ye shall not shame her (do her any injury, [Jdg
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007)); and ye shall also draw out of
the bundles for her, and let them lie (the ears drawn out), that she may
glean them, and shall not scold her," sc., for picking up the ears that
have been drawn out. These directions of Boaz went far beyond the bounds
of generosity and compassion for the poor; and show that he felt a
peculiar interest in Ruth, with whose circumstances he was well
acquainted, and who had won his heart by her humility, her faithful
attachment to her mother-in-law, and her love to the God of Israel, - a
face important to notice in connection with the further course of the
history.

[Ruth 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rut 2:17</span></span>

Thus Ruth gleaned till the evening in the field; and when she knocked
out the ears, she had about an ephah (about 20-25 lbs.) of barley.

[Rut 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#018)

This she brought to her mother-in-law in the city, and "drew out (sc.,
from her pocket, as the Chaldee has correctly supplied) what she had
left from her sufficiency," i.e., of the parched corn which Boaz had
reached her ([Rut 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#014)).

[Rut 2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#019)

The mother inquired, "where hast thou gleaned to-day, and where
wroughtest thou?" and praised the benefactor, who, as she conjecture
from the quantity of barley collected and the food brought home, had
taken notice of Ruth: "blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee!"
When she heard the name of the man, Boaz, she saw that this relative of
her husband had been chosen by God to be a benefactor of herself and
Ruth, and exclaimed, "Blessed be he of the Lord, that he has not left
off (withdrawn) his favour towards the living and the dead!" On חסדּו
עזב see [Gen 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#027). This verb is
construed with a double accusative here; for את cannot be a preposition,
as in that case מאת would be used like מעם in Gen. l.c. "The living,"
etc., forms a second object: as regards (with regard to) the living and
the dead, in which Naomi thought of herself and Ruth, and of her husband
and sons, to whom God still showed himself gracious, even after their
death, through His care for their widows. In order to enlighten Ruth
still further upon the matter, she added, "The man (Boaz) is our
relative, and one of our redeemers." He "stands near to us," sc., by
relationship. גּאלנוּ, a defective form for גּאלינוּ, which is found in
several MSS and editions. On the significance of the gol, or redeemer,
see at [Lev 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#026), [Lev
25:48-49](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#048), and the introduction to Ruth
3.

[Rut 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#021)

Ruth proceeded to inform her of his kindness: כּי גּם, "also (know) that
he said to me, Keep with my people, till the harvest is all ended." The
masculine הנּערים, for which we should rather expect the feminine נערות
in accordance with [Rut 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008), [Rut
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#022), [Rut
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#023), is quite in place as the more
comprehensive gender, as a designation of the reapers generally, both
male and female; and the expression לי אשׁר in this connection in the
sense of my is more exact than the possessive pronoun: the people who
belong to my house, as distinguished from the people of other masters.

[Rut 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#022)

Naomi declared herself fully satisfied with this, because Ruth would be
thereby secured from insults, which she might receive when gleaning in
strange fields. "That they meet thee not," lit. "that they do not fall
upon thee." בּ פּגע signifies to fall upon a person, to smite and
ill-treat him.

[Rut 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#023)

After this Ruth kept with the maidens of Boaz during the whole of the
barley and wheat harvests gleaning ears of corn, and lived with her
mother-in-law, sc., when she returned in the evening from the field. In
this last remark there is a tacit allusion to the fact that a change
took place for Ruth when the harvest was over.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 3](rut003)

</div>
