<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](rut002)  [Next](rut004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 3:0</span></span>

Ruth Seeks for Marriage with Boaz - Ruth 3

After the harvest Naomi advised Ruth to visit Boaz on a certain night,
and ask him to marry her as redeemer ([Rut
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001)). Ruth followed this advice, and
Boaz promised to fulfil her request, provided the nearer redeemer who
was still living would not perform this duty ([Rut
3:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#006)), and sent her away in the
morning with a present of wheat, that she might not return empty to her
mother-in-law ([Rut 3:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#014)). To
understand the advice which Naomi gave to Ruth, and which Ruth carried
out, and in fact to form a correct idea of the further course of the
history generally, we must bear in mind the legal relations which came
into consideration here. According to the theocratical rights, Jehovah
was the actual owner of the land which He had given to His people for an
inheritance; and the Israelites themselves had merely the usufruct of
the land which they received by lot for their inheritance, so that the
existing possessor could not part with the family portion or sell it at
his will, but it was to remain for ever in his family. When any one
therefore was obliged to sell his inheritance on account of poverty, and
actually did sell it, it was the duty of the nearest relation to redeem
it as gol. But if it should not be redeemed, it came back, in the next
year of jubilee, to its original owner or his heirs without
compensation. Consequently no actual sale took place in our sense of the
word, but simply a sale of the yearly produce till the year of jubilee
(see [Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010), [Lev
25:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#013), [Lev
25:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#024)). There was also an old
customary right, which had received the sanction of God, with certain
limitations, through the Mosaic law-namely, the custom of Levirate
marriage, or the marriage of a brother-in-law, which we meet with as
early as Gen 38, viz., that if an Israelite who had been married died
without children, it was the duty of his brother to marry the widow,
that is to say, his sister-in-law, that he might establish his brother's
name in Israel, by begetting a son through his sister-in-law, who should
take the name of the deceased brother, that his name might not become
extinct in Israel. This son was then the legal heir of the landed
property of the deceased uncle (cf. [Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005).). These two institutions are not
connected together in the Mosaic law; nevertheless it was a very natural
thing to place the Levirate duty in connection with the right of
redemption. And this had become the traditional custom. Whereas the law
merely imposed the obligation of marrying the childless widow upon the
brother, and even allowed him to renounce the obligation if he would
take upon himself the disgrace connected with such a refusal (see [Deu
25:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#007)); according to [Rut
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#005) of this book it had become a
traditional custom to require the Levirate marriage of the redeemer of
the portion of the deceased relative, not only that the landed
possession might be permanently retained in the family, but also that
the family itself might not be suffered to die out.

In the case before us Elimelech had possessed a portion at Bethlehem,
which Naomi had sold from poverty ([Rut
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#003)); and Boaz, a relation of
Elimelech, was the redeemer of whom Naomi hoped that he would fulfil the
duty of a redeemer - namely, that he would not only ransom the purchased
field, but marry her daughter-in-law Ruth, the widow of the rightful
heir of the landed possession of Elimelech, and thus through this
marriage establish the name of her deceased husband or son (Elimelech or
Mahlon) upon his inheritance. Led on by this hope, she advised Ruth to
visit Boaz, who had shown himself so kind and well-disposed towards her,
during the night, and by a species of bold artifice, which she assumed
that he would not resist, to induce him as redeemer to grant to Ruth
this Levirate marriage. The reason why she adopted this plan for the
accomplishment of her wishes, and did not appeal to Boaz directly, or
ask him to perform this duty of affection to her deceased husband, was
probably that she was afraid lest she should fail to attain her end in
this way, partly because the duty of a Levirate marriage was not legally
binding upon the redeemer, and partly because Boaz was not so closely
related to her husband that she could justly require this of him, whilst
there was actually a nearer redeemer than he ([Rut
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#012)). According to our customs,
indeed, this act of Naomi and Ruth appears a very objectionable one from
a moral point of view, but it was not so when judged by the customs of
the people of Israel at that time. Boaz, who was an honourable man, and,
according to [Rut 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#010), no doubt
somewhat advanced in years, praised Ruth for having taken refuge with
him, and promised to fulfil her wishes when he had satisfied himself
that the nearer redeemer would renounce his right and duty ([Rut
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#010)). As he acknowledge by this
very declaration, that under certain circumstances it would be his duty
as redeemer to marry Ruth, he took no offence at the manner in which she
had approached him and proposed to become his wife. On the contrary, he
regarded it as a proof of feminine virtue and modesty, that she had not
gone after young men, but offered herself as a wife to an old man like
him. This conduct on the part of Boaz is a sufficient proof that women
might have confidence in him that he would do nothing unseemly. And he
justified such confidence. "The modest man," as Bertheau observes, "even
in the middle of the night did not hesitate for a moment what it was his
duty to do with regard to the young maiden (or rather woman) towards
whom he felt already so strongly attached; he made his own personal
inclinations subordinate to the traditional custom, and only when this
permitted him to marry Ruth was he ready to do so. And not knowing
whether she might not have to become the wife of the nearer gol, he was
careful for her and her reputation, in order that he might hand her over
unblemished to the man who had the undoubted right to claim her as his
wife."

[Ruth 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 3:1</span></span>

[Rut 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001)

As Naomi conjectured, from the favour which Boaz had shown to Ruth, that
he might not be disinclined to marry her as gol, she said to her
daughter-in-law, "My daughter, I must seek rest for thee, that it may be
well with thee." In the question אבקּשׁ הלא, the word הלא is here, as
usual, an expression of general admission or of undoubted certainty, in
the sense of "Is it not true, I seek for thee? it is my duty to seek for
thee." מנוח = מנוּחה ([Rut 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#009))
signifies the condition of a peaceful life, a peaceful and well-secured
condition, "a secure life under the guardian care of a husband"
(Rosenmller). "And now is not Boaz our relation, with whose maidens thou
wast? Behold, he is winnowing the barley floor (barley on the
threshing-floor) to-night," i.e., till late in the night, to avail
himself of the cool wind, which rises towards evening ([Gen
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)), for the purpose of cleansing the
corn. The threshing-floors of the Israelites were, and are still in
Palestine, made under the open heaven, and were nothing more than level
places in the field stamped quite hard.

(Note: "A level spot is selected for the threshing-floors, which are
then constructed near each other, of a circular form, perhaps fifty feet
in diameter, merely by beating down the earth hard." - Robinson, Pal.
ii. p. 277.)

[Rut 3:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003)

"Wash and anoint thyself (סכתּ, from סוּך = נסך), and put on thy clothes
(thy best clothes), and go down (from Bethlehem, which stood upon the
ridge of a hill) to the threshing-floor; let not thyself be noticed by
the man (Boaz) till he has finished eating and drinking. And when he
lies down, mark the place where he will sleep, and go (when he has
fallen asleep) and uncover the place of his feet, and lay thyself down;
and he will tell thee what thou shalt do."

[Rut 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#005)

Ruth promised to do this. The אלי, which the Masorites have added to the
text as Keri non scriptum, is quite unnecessary. From the account which
follows of the carrying out of the advice given to her, we learn that
Naomi had instructed Ruth to ask Boaz to marry her as her redeemer (cf.
[Rut 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009)).

[Ruth 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rut 3:6</span></span>

Ruth went accordingly to the threshing-floor and did as her
mother-in-law had commanded; i.e., she noticed where Boaz went to lie
down to sleep, and then, when he had eaten and drunken, and lay down
cheerfully, at the end of the heap of sheaves or corn, and, as we may
supply from the context, had fallen asleep, came to him quietly,
uncovered the place of his feet, i.e., lifted up the covering over his
feet, and lay down.

[Ruth 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rut 3:8</span></span>

About midnight the man was startled, namely, because on awaking he
observed that there was some one lying at his feet; and he "bent
himself" forward, or on one side, to feel who was lying there, "and
behold a woman was lying at his feet." מרגּלתיו is accus. loci.

[Ruth 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rut 3:9</span></span>

In answer to his inquiry, "Who art thou?" she said, "I am Ruth, thine
handmaid; spread thy wing over thine handmaid, for thou art a redeemer."
כּנפך is a dual according to the Masoretic pointing, as we cannot look
upon it as a pausal form on account of the position of the word, but it
is most probably to be regarded as a singular; and the figurative
expression is not taken from birds, which spread their wings over their
young, i.e., to protect them, but refers, according to [Deu
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001); [Deu
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#020), and [Eze
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008), to the wing, i.e., the corner of
the counterpane, referring to the fact that a man spreads this over his
wife as well as himself. Thus Ruth entreated Boaz to marry her because
he was a redeemer. On this reason for the request, see the remarks in
the introduction to the chapter.

[Ruth 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rut 3:10</span></span>

Boaz praised her conduct: "Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter (see
[Rut 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#020)); thou hast made thy later
love better than the earlier, that thou hast not gone after young men,
whether poor or rich. " Ruth's earlier or first love was the love she
had shown to her deceased husband and her mother-in-law (comp. [Rut
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#011), where Boaz praises this love);
the later love she had shown in the fact, that as a young widow she had
not sought to win the affections of young men, as young women generally
do, that she might have a youthful husband, but had turned trustfully to
the older man, that he might find a successor to her deceased husband,
through a marriage with him, in accordance with family custom (vid.,
[Rut 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#010)). "And now," added Boaz
([Rut 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#011)), "my daughter, fear not;
for all that thou sayest I will do to thee: for the whole gate of my
people (i.e., all my city, the whole population of Bethlehem, who go in
and out at the gate: see [Gen 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#024);
[Deu 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002)) knoweth that thou art a
virtuous woman." Consequently Boaz saw nothing wrong in the fact that
Ruth had come to him, but regarded her request that he would marry her
as redeemer as perfectly natural and right, and was ready to carry out
her wish as soon as the circumstances would legally allow it. He
promised her this (vv. 12, 13), saying, "And now truly I am a redeemer;
but there is a nearer redeemer than I. Stay here this night (or as it
reads at the end of v. 13, 'lie till the morning'), and in the morning,
if he will redeem thee, well, let him redeem; but if it does not please
him to redeem thee, I will redeem thee, as truly as Jehovah liveth." אם
כּי (Kethibh, v. 12), after a strong assurance, as after the formula
used in an oath, "God do so to me," etc., [Sa2
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#035); [Sa2
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#021) (Kethibh), and [Kg2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020), is to be explained from the use
of this particle in the sense of nisi, except that, = only: "only I am
redeemer," equivalent to, assuredly I am redeemer (cf. Ewald, 356, b.).
Consequently there is no reason whatever for removing the אם from the
text, as the Masorites have done (in the Keri).

(Note: What the ל maju sc., in ליני signifies, is uncertain. According
to the smaller Masora, it was only found among the eastern (i.e.,
Palestinian) Jews. Consequently Hiller (in his Arcanum Keri et Ctibh, p.
163) conjectures that they used it to point out a various reading, viz.,
that לנּי should be the reading here. But this is hardly correct.)

Ruth was to lie till morning, because she could not easily return to the
city in the dark at midnight; but, as is shown in [Rut
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#014), she did not stay till actual
daybreak, but "before one could know another, she rose up, and he said
(i.e., as Boaz had said), It must not be known that the woman came to
the threshing-floor." For this would have injured the reputation not
only of Ruth, but also of Boaz himself.

[Ruth 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 3:15</span></span>

He then said, "Bring the cloak that thou hast on, and lay hold of it"
(to hold it open), and measured for her six measures of barley into it
as a present, that she might not to back empty to her mother-in-law
([Rut 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#017)). מטפּחת, here and [Isa
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#022), is a broad upper garment,
pallium, possibly only a large shawl. "As the cloaks worn by the
ancients were so full, that one part was thrown upon the shoulder, and
another gathered up under the arm, Ruth, by holding a certain part,
could receive into her bosom the corn which Boaz gave her" (Schrder, De
vestit. mul. p. 264). Six (measures of) barley: the measure is not
given. According to the Targum and the Rabbins, it was six seahs = two
ephahs. This is certainly incorrect; for Ruth would not have been able
to carry that quantity of barley home. When Boaz had given her the
barley he measured out, and had sent here away, he also went into the
city. This is the correct rendering, as given by the Chaldee, to the
words העיר ויּבא; though Jerome referred the words to Ruth, but
certainly without any reason, as יבא cannot stand for תּבא. This reading
is no doubt found in some of the MSS, but it merely owes its origin to a
mistaken interpretation of the words.

[Ruth 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rut 3:16</span></span>

When Ruth returned home, her mother-in-law asked her, "Who art thou?"
i.e., as what person, in what circumstances dost thou come? The real
meaning is, What hast thou accomplished? Whereupon she related all that
the man had done (cf. [Rut 3:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#010)),
and that he had given her six measures of barley for her mother. The
Masorites have supplied אלי after אמר, as at [Rut
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#005), but without any necessity. The
mother-in-law drew from this the hope that Boaz would now certainly
carry out the matter to the desired end. "Sit still," i.e., remain
quietly at home (see [Gen 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#011)),
"till thou hearest how the affair turn out," namely, whether the nearer
redeemer mentioned by Boaz, or Boaz himself, would grant her the
Levirate marriage. The expression "fall," in this sense, is founded upon
the idea of the falling of the lot to the ground; it is different in
[Ezr 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#020). "For the man will not rest
unless he has carried the affair to an end this day." כּי־אם, except
that, as in [Lev 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#006), etc. (see
Ewald, 356, b).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 4](rut004)

</div>
