<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](jdg021)  [Next](rut001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 0:0</span></span>

The Book of Ruth

(Note: The book of Ruth does not indeed belong to the prophetical books
of history so far as its historical character is concerned, and even in
the Hebrew canon it is placed among the hagiographa; but as its contents
directly follow upon those of the book of Judges, it seemed advisable to
place the exposition immediately after that of Judges.)

Introduction

Content, Character, and Origin of the Book of Ruth

The book of Ruth (Ῥούθ) introduces us to the family life of the
ancestors of king David, and informs us, in a simple and attractive form
of historical narrative, and one in harmony with the tender and
affectionate contents, how Ruth the Moabitess, a daughter-in-law of the
Bethlehemite Elimelech, of the family of Judah, who had emigrated with
his wife and his two sons into the land of Moab on account of a famine,
left father and mother, fatherland and kindred, after the death of her
husband, and out of childlike affection to her Israelitish mother-in-law
Naomi, whose husband had also died in the land of Moab, and went with
her to Judah, to take refuge under the wings of the God of Israel (Ruth
1); and how, when there, as she was going in her poverty to glean some
ears of corn in the field of a wealthy man, she came apparently by
accident to the field of Boaz, a near relation of Elimelech, and became
acquainted with this honourable and benevolent man (Ruth 2); how she
then sought marriage with him by the wish of her mother-in-law (Ruth 3),
and was taken by him as a wife, according to the custom of Levirate
marriage, in all the ordinary legal forms, and bare a son in this
marriage, named Obed. This Obed was the grandfather of David (Ruth
4:1-17), with whose genealogy the book closes ([Rut
4:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018)).

In this conclusion the meaning and tendency of the whole narrative is
brought clearly to light. The genealogical proof of the descent of David
from Perez through Boaz and the Moabitess Ruth ([Rut
4:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018)) forms not only the end, but
he starting-point, of the history contained in the book. For even if we
should not attach so much importance to this genealogy as to say with
Auberlen that "the book of Ruth contains, as it were, the inner side,
the spiritually moral background of the genealogies which play so
significant a part even in the Israelitish antiquity;" so much is
unquestionably true, that the book contains a historical picture from
the family life of the ancestors of David, intended to show how the
ancestors of this great king walked uprightly before God and man in
piety and singleness of heart, an din modesty and purity of life. "Ruth,
the Moabitish great-great-grandmother of David, longed for the God and
people of Israel to them with all the power of love; and Boaz was an
upright Israelite, without guile, full of holy reverence for every
ordinance of God and man, and full of benevolent love and friendliness
towards the poor heathen woman. From such ancestors was the man
descended in whom all the nature of Israel was to find its royal
concentration and fullest expression" (Auberlen). But there is also a
Messianic trait in the fact that Ruth, a heathen woman, of a nation so
hostile to the Israelites as that of Moab was, should have been thought
worthy to be made the tribe-mother of the great and pious king David, on
account of her faithful love to the people of Israel, and her entire
confidence in Jehovah, the God of Israel. As Judah begat Perez from
Tamar and Canaanitish woman (Gen 38), and as Rahab was adopted into the
congregation of Israel ([Jos 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025)),
and according to ancient tradition was married to Salmon ([Mat
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005)), so the Moabitess Ruth was taken
by Boaz as his wife, and incorporated in the family of Judah, from which
Christ was to spring according to the flesh (see [Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003), [Mat
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005), where these three women are
distinctly mentioned by name in the genealogy of Jesus).

The incidents described in the book fall within the times of the judges
([Rut 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)), and most probably in the
time of Gideon (see at [Rut 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)); and
the book itself forms both a supplement to the book of Judges and an
introduction to the books of Samuel, which give no account of the
ancestors of David. So far as its contents are concerned it has its
proper place, in the Septuagint, the Vulgate, the Lutheran and other
versions, between the book of Judges and those of Samuel. In the Hebrew
Codex, on the contrary, it is placed among the hagiographa, and in the
Talmud (bab bathr.f. 14b) it is even placed at the head of them before
the Psalms; whilst in the Hebrew MSS it stands among the five megilloth:
Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther. The latter position
is connected with the liturgical use of the book in the synagogue, where
it was read at the feast of weeks; whilst its place among the
hagiographa is to be explained from the principle upon which the general
arrangement of the Old Testament canon was founded, - namely, that the
different books were divided into three classes according to the
relation in which their authors stood to God and to the theocracy, and
the books themselves in their contents and spirit to the divine
revelation (see Keil, Lehrbuch der Einleitung, 155).

The latter is therefore to be regarded as the original classification,
and not the one in the Septuagint rendering, where the original
arrangement has unquestionably been altered in the case of this and
other books, just because this principle has been overlooked.

(Note: Many critics of the present day, indeed, appeal to the testimony
of Josephus and the earlier fathers as favouring the opposite view,
viz., that the book of Ruth was originally placed at the close of the
book of Judges, to which it formed an appendix. Josephus (c. Ap. i. 8)
reckons, as is well known, only twenty-two books of the Old Testament;
and the only way by which this number can be obtained is by joining
together the books of Judges and Ruth, so as to form one book. Again,
Melito of Sardes, who lives in the second century, and took a journey
into Palestine for the purpose of obtaining correct information
concerning the sacred writings of the Jews (πόσα τὸν ἀριθμὸν καὶ ὁποῖα
τὴν τάξιν εἶεν), places Ruth after Judges in the list which has been
preserved by Eusebius (h. e. iv. 26), but does not give the number of
the books, as Bertheau erroneously maintains, nor observes that "Judges
and Ruth form one book under the name of Shofetim." This is first done
by Origen in his list as given by Eusebius (h. e. vi. 25), where he
states that the Hebrews had twenty-two ἐνδιαθήκους βίβλους, and then
adds in the case of Ruth, παρ' αὐτοῖς ἐν ἑνὶ Σωφετὶμ. Ruth occupies the
same place in the lists of the later Greek fathers, as in Rufinus
(Expos. in Symb. Apost.) and Jerome (in Prolog. Gal.), the latter of
whom makes this remark on the book of Judges, Et in eundem compingunt
Ruth, quia in diebus Judicum facta ejus narratur historia; and after
enumerating the twenty-two books of the Old Testament, adds, Quanquam
nonnulli Ruth et Kinoth inter Hagiographa scriptitent et hos libros in
suo putent numero supputandos, etc. But all these testimonies prove
nothing more than that the Hellenistic Jews, who made use of the Old
Testament in the Greek rendering of the lxx, regarded the book of Ruth
as an appendix of the book of Judges, and not that the book of Ruth ever
followed the book of Judges in the Hebrew canon, so as to form one book.
The reduction of the sacred writings of the Old Testament to twenty-two
is nothing more than the product of the cabbalistic and mystical numbers
wrought out by the Hellenistic or Alexandrian Jews. If this numbering
had been the original one, the Hebrew Jews would never have increased
the number to twenty-four, since the Hebrew alphabet never contained
twenty-four letters. Josephus, however, is not a witness with regard to
the orthodox opinions of the Hebrew Jews, but was an eclectic and a
Hellenist, who used the Old Testament in the Septuagint version and not
in the original text, and who arranged the books of the Old Testament in
the most singular manner. The fathers, too, with the exception of
Jerome, whenever they give any account of their inquiries among the Jews
with regard to the number and order of the books accepted by them as
canonical, never give them in either the order or number found in the
Hebrew canon, but simply according to the Septuagint version, which was
the only one that the Christians understood. This is obvious in the case
of Melito, from the fact that he reckons Βασιλειῶν τέσσαρα and
Παραλειπομένων δύο, and places Daniel between the twelve minor prophets
and Ezekiel. We find the same in Origen, although he gives the Hebrew
names to the different books, and states in connection with the four
books of Kings and the two books of Paralipomena, that the Hebrews named
and numbered them differently. Lastly, it is true that Jerome arranges
the writings of the Old Testament in his Prol. Gal. according to the
three classes of the Hebrew canon; but he endeavours to bring the Hebrew
mode of division and enumeration as much as possible into harmony with
the Septuagint numbering and order as generally adopted in the Christian
Church, and to conceal all existing differences. You may see this very
clearly from his remarks as to the number of these books, and especially
from the words, Porro quinque litterae duplices apud Hebraeos sunt,
Caph, Mem, Nun, Pe, Sade ... Unde et quinque a plerisque libri duplices
existimantur, Samuel, Melachim, Dibre Hajamim, Esdras, Jeremias cum
Kintoh, i.e., Lamentationibus suis. For the plerique who adopt two books
of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, are not Hebrew but Hellenistic Jews,
as the Hebrew Jews did not divide these writings in their canon into two
books each, but this mode of dividing them was first introduced into the
Hebrew Bibles by Dan. Bomberg from the Septuagint or Vulgate. The
further remark of this father, quanquam nonnulli Ruth et Kinoth inter
hagiographa scriptitent, etc., is also to be estimated in the same way,
and the word nonnulli to be attributed to the conciliatory efforts of
Jerome. And lastly, his remark concerning the connection between the
book of Ruth and that of Judges is not to be regarded as any evidence of
the position which this book occupied in the Hebrew canon, but simply as
a proof of the place assigned it by the Hellenistic Jews.)

The book of Ruth is not a mere (say a third) appendix to the book of
Judges, but a small independent work, which does indeed resemble the two
appendices of the book of Judges, so far as the incidents recorded in it
fall within the period of the Judges, and are not depicted in the spirit
of the prophetic view of history; but, on the other hand, it has a
thoroughly distinctive character both in form and contents, and has
nothing in common with the book of Judges either in style or language:
on the contrary, it differs essentially both in substance and design fro
the substance and design of this book and of its two appendices, for the
simple reason that at the close of the history ([Rut
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#017)), where Obed, the son of Boaz and
Ruth, is described as the grandfather of David, and still more clearly
in the genealogy of Perez, which is brought down to David ([Rut
4:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018)), the book passes beyond the
times of the JudGes. In this simple fact the author very plainly shows
that his intention was not to give a picture of the family life of pious
Israelites in the time of the judges from a civil and a religious point
of view, but rather to give a biographical sketch of the pious ancestors
of David the king.

The origin of the book of Ruth is involved in obscurity. From its
contents, and more especially from the object so apparent in the close
of the book, it may be inferred with certainty that it was not written
earlier than the time of David's rule over Israel, and indeed not before
the culminating point of the reign of this great king. There would
therefore be an interval of 150 to 180 years between the events
themselves and the writing of the book, during which time the custom
mentioned in [Rut 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007), of taking off
the shoe in acts of trade and barter, which formerly existed in Israel,
may have fallen entirely into disuse, so that the author might think it
necessary to explain the custom for the information of his
contemporaries. We have not sufficient ground for fixing a later date,
say the time of the captivity; and there is no force in the arguments
that have been adduced in support of this (see my Lehrb. der Einl.
137).The discovery that words and phrases such as מרגּלות ([Rut
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#007), [Rut
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#014)), כּנפים פּרשׂ ([Rut
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009)), מקרה, chance ([Rut
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#003)), either do not occur at all or
only very rarely in the earlier writings, simply because the thing
itself to which they refer is not mentioned, does not in the least
degree prove that these words were not formed till a later age. The
supposed Chaldaisms, however, - namely the forms תּעבוּרי and תּדבּקין
([Rut 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008), [Rut
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#021)), יקצרוּן ([Rut
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#009)), שׂמתּ, ירדתּי, שׁכבתּי ([Rut
3:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003)), מרא for מרה ([Rut
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#020)), or the use of להן, and of the
ἁπ. λεγ. עגן ([Rut 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#013)), etc., - we
only meet with in the speeches of the persons acting, and never where
the author himself is narrating; and consequently they furnish no proofs
of the later origin of the book, but may be simply and fully explained
from the fact, that the author received these forms and words from the
language used in common conversation in the time of the judges, and has
faithfully recorded them. We are rather warranted in drawing the
conclusion from this, that he did not derive the contents of his work
from oral tradition, but made use of written documents, with regard to
the origin and nature of which, however, nothing certain can be
determined.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 1](rut001)

</div>
