<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1000)  [Next](sa1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

I. History of the People of Israel Under the Prophet Samuel - 1 Samuel
1-7

The call of Samuel to be the prophet and judge of Israel formed a
turning-point in the history of the Old Testament kingdom of God. As the
prophet of Jehovah, Samuel was to lead the people of Israel out of the
times of the judges into those of the kings, and lay the foundation for
a prosperous development of the monarchy. Consecrated like Samson as a
Nazarite from his mother's womb, Samuel accomplished the deliverance of
Israel out of the power of the Philistines, which had been only
commenced by Samson; and that not by the physical might of his arm, but
by the spiritual power of his word and prayer, with which he led Israel
back from the worship of dead idols to the Lord its God. And whilst as
one of the judges, among whom he classes himself in [Sa1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#011), he brought the office of judge
to a close, and introduced the monarchy; as a prophet, he laid the
foundation of the prophetic office, inasmuch as he was the fist to
naturalize it, so to speak, in Israel, and develope it into a power that
continued henceforth to exert the strongest influence, side by side with
the priesthood and monarchy, upon the development of the covenant nation
and kingdom of God. For even if there were prophets before the time of
Samuel, who revealed the will of the Lord at times to the nation, they
only appeared sporadically, without exerting any lasting influence upon
the national life; whereas, from the time of Samuel onwards, the
prophets sustained and fostered the spiritual life of the congregation,
and were the instruments through whom the Lord made known His purposes
to the nation and its rulers. To exhibit in its origin and growth the
new order of things which Samuel introduced, or rather the deliverance
which the Lord sent to His people through this servant of His, the
prophetic historian goes back to the time of Samuel's birth, and makes
us acquainted not only with the religious condition of the nation, but
also with the political oppression under which it was suffering at the
close of the period of the judges, and during the high-priesthood of
Eli. At the time when the pious parents of Samuel were going year by
year to the house of God at Shiloh to worship and offer sacrifice before
the Lord, the house of God was being profaned by the abominable conduct
of Eli's sons (1 Samuel 1-2). When Samuel was called to be the prophet
of Jehovah, Israel lost the ark of the covenant, the soul of its
sanctuary, in the war with the Philistines (1 Samuel 3-4). And it was
not till after the nation had been rendered willing to put away its
strange gods and worship Jehovah alone, through the influence of
Samuel's exertions as prophet, that the faithful covenant God gave it,
in answer to Samuel's intercession, a complete victory over the
Philistines (1 Samuel 7). In accordance with these three prominent
features, the history of the judicial life of Samuel may be divided into
three sections, viz.: 1 Samuel 1-2; 3-6; 7.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 1:1</span></span>

Samuel's pedigree. - [Sa1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001). His
father was a man of Ramathaim-Zophim, on the mountains of Ephraim, and
named Elkanah. Ramathaim-Zophim, which is only mentioned here, is the
same place, according to [Sa1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003)
(comp. with [Sa1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019) and [Sa1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011)), which is afterwards called
briefly ha-Ramah, i.e., the height. For since Elkanah of
Ramathaim-Zophim went year by year out of his city to Shiloh, to worship
and sacrifice there, and after he had done this, returned to his house
to Ramah ([Sa1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019); [Sa1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011)), there can be no doubt that he
was not only a native of Ramathaim-Zophim, but still had his home there;
so that Ramah, where his house was situated, is only an abbreviated name
for Ramathaim-Zophim.

(Note: The argument lately adduced by Valentiner in favour of the
difference between these two names, viz., that "examples are not wanting
of a person being described according to his original descent, although
his dwelling-place had been already changed," and the instance which he
cites, viz., [Jdg 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#016), show that he
has overlooked the fact, that in the very passage which he quotes the
temporary dwelling-place is actually mentioned along with the native
town. In the case before us, on the contrary Ramathaim-Zophim is
designated, by the use of the expression "from his city," in [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003), as the place where Elkanah lived,
and where "his house" ([Sa1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019)) was
still standing.)

This Ramah (which is invariably written with the article, ha-Ramah),
where Samuel was not only born ([Sa1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019).), but lived, laboured, died
([Sa1 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#017); [Sa1
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#034); [Sa1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013); [Sa1
19:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#018), [Sa1
19:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#022)), and was buried ([Sa1
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001); [Sa1
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003)), is not a different place, as
has been frequently assumed,

(Note: For the different views which have been held upon this point, see
the article "Ramah," by Pressel, in Herzog's Cyclopaedia.)

from the Ramah in Benjamin ([Jos
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025)), and is not to be sought for in
Ramleh near Joppa (v. Schubert, etc.), nor in Soba on the north-west of
Jerusalem (Robinson, Pal. ii. p. 329), nor three-quarters of an hour to
the north of Hebron (Wolcott, v. de Velde), nor anywhere else in the
tribe of Ephraim, but is identical with Ramah of Benjamin, and was
situated upon the site of the present village of er-Rm, two hours to the
north-west of Jerusalem, upon a conical mountain to the east of the
Nablus road (see at [Jos 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025)). This
supposition is neither at variance with the account in 1 Samuel 9-10
(see the commentary upon these chapters), nor with the statement that
Ramathaim-Zophim was upon the mountains of Ephraim, since the mountains
of Ephraim extended into the tribe-territory of Benjamin, as is
indisputably evident from [Jdg 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#005),
where Deborah the prophetess is said to have dwelt between Ramah and
Bethel in the mountains of Ephraim. The name Ramathaim-Zophim, i.e.,
"the two heights (of the) Zophites" appear to have been given to the
town to distinguish it from other Ramah's, and to have been derived from
the Levitical family of Zuph or Zophai (see [Ch1
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#026), [Ch1
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#035)), which emigrated thither from
the tribe of Ephraim, and from which Elkanah was descended. The full
name, therefore, is given here, in the account of the descent of
Samuel's father; whereas in the further history of Samuel, where there
was no longer the same reason for giving it, the simple name Ramah is
invariably used.

(Note: The fuller and more exact name, however, appears to have been
still retained, and the use of it to have been revived after the
captivity, in the Ῥαμαθέμ of 1 Macc. 11:34, for which the Codd. have
Ῥαθαμεΐ́ν and Ῥαμαθαΐ́μ, and Josephus Ῥαμαθά, and in the Arimathaea of the
gospel history ([Mat 27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)). "For the
opinion that this Ramathaim is a different place from the city of
Samuel, and is to be sought for in the neighbourhood of Lydda, which
Robinson advocates (Pal. iii. p. 41ff.), is a hasty conclusion, drawn
from the association of Ramathaim with Lydda in 1 Macc. 11:34, - the
very same conclusion which led the author of the Onomasticon to transfer
the city of Samuel to the neighbourhood of Lydda" (Grimm on 1 Macc.
11:34).

The connection between Zophim and Zuph is confirmed by the fact that
Elkanah's ancestor, Zuph, is called Zophai in [Ch1
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#026), and Zuph or Ziph in [Ch1
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#035). Zophim therefore signifies the
descendants of Zuph or Zophai, from which the name "land of Zuph," in
[Sa1 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#005), was also derived (see the
commentary on this passage). The tracing back of Elkanah's family
through four generations to Zuph agrees with the family registers in 1
Chron 6, where the ancestors of Elkanah are mentioned twice, - first of
all in the genealogy of the Kohathites ([Ch1
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#026)), and then in that of Heman, the
leader of the singers, a grandson of Samuel ([Ch1
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#033)), - except that the name Elihu,
Tohu, and Zuph, are given as Eliab, Nahath, and Zophai in the first
instance, and Eliel, Toah, and Ziph (according to the Chethibh) in the
second, - various readings, such as often occur in the different
genealogies, and are to be explained partly from the use of different
forms for the same name, and partly from their synonymous meanings. Tohu
and Toah, which occur in Arabic, with the meaning to press or sink in,
are related in meaning to nachath or nuach, to sink or settle down.

From these genealogies in the Chronicles, we learn that Samuel was
descended from Kohath, the son of Levi, and therefore was a Levite. It
is no valid objection to the correctness of this view, that his
Levitical descent is never mentioned, or that Elkanah is called an
Ephrathite. The former of these can very easily be explained from the
fact, that Samuel's work as a reformer, which is described in this book,
did not rest upon his Levitical descent, but simply upon the call which
he had received from God, as the prophetic office was not confined to
any particular class, like that of priest, but was founded exclusively
upon the divine calling and endowment with the Spirit of God. And the
difficulty which Ngelsbach expresses in Herzog's Cycl., viz., that "as
it was stated of those two Levites ([Jdg
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007); [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001)), that they lived in Bethlehem
and Ephraim, but only after they had been expressly described as
Levites, we should have expected to find the same in the case of
Samuel's father," is removed by the simple fact, that in the case of
both those Levites it was of great importance, so far as the accounts
which are given of them are concerned, that their Levitical standing
should be distinctly mentioned, as is clearly shown by [Jdg
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#010), [Jdg
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#013), and [Jdg
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#018); whereas in the case of Samuel,
as we have already observed, his Levitical descent had no bearing upon
the call which he received from the Lord. The word Ephrathite does not
belong, so far as the grammatical construction is concerned, either to
Zuph or Elkanah, but to "a certain man," the subject of the principal
clause, and signifies an Ephraimite, as in [Jdg
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005) and [Kg1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026), and not an inhabitant of
Ephratah, i.e., a Bethlehemite, as in [Sa1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012) and [Rut
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#002); for in both these passages the
word is more precisely defined by the addition of the expression "of
Bethlehem-Judah," whereas in this verse the explanation is to be found
in the expression "of Mount Ephraim." Elkanah the Levite is called an
Ephraimite, because, so far as his civil standing was concerned, he
belonged to the tribe of Ephraim, just as the Levite in [Jdg
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007) is described as belonging to the
family of Judah. The Levites were reckoned as belonging to those tribes
in the midst of which they lived, so that there were Judaean Levites,
Ephraimitish Levites, and so on (see Hengstenberg, Diss. vol. ii. p.
50). It by no means follows, however, from the application of this term
to Elkanah, that Ramathaim-Zophim formed part of the tribe-territory of
Ephraim, but simply that Elkanah's family was incorporated in this
tribe, and did not remove till afterwards to Ramah in the tribe of
Benjamin. On the division of the land, dwelling-places were allotted to
the Levites of the family of Kohath, in the tribes of Ephraim, Dan, and
Manasseh ([Jos 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#005), [Jos
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#021).). Still less is there anything
at variance with the Levitical descent of Samuel, as Thenius maintains,
in the fact that he was dedicated to the Lord by his mother's vow, for
he was not dedicated to the service of Jehovah generally through this
view, but was set apart to a lifelong service at the house of God as a
Nazarite ([Sa1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011), [Sa1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#022)); whereas other Levites were not
required to serve till their twenty-fifth year, and even then had not to
perform an uninterrupted service at the sanctuary. On the other hand,
the Levitical descent of Samuel receives a very strong confirmation from
his father's name. All the Elkanahs that we meet with in the Old
Testament, with the exception of the one mentioned in [Ch2
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#007), whose genealogy is unknown, can
be proved to have been Levites; and most of them belong to the family of
Korah, from which Samuel was also descended (see Simonis, Onomast. p.
493). This is no doubt connected in some way with the meaning of the
name Elkanah, the man whom God has bought or acquired; since such a name
was peculiarly suitable to the Levites, whom the Lord had set apart for
service at the sanctuary, in the place of the first-born of Israel, whom
He had sanctified to himself when He smote the first-born of Egypt ([Num
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013)., [Num
3:44](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#044).; see Hengstenberg, ut sup.).

[Sa1 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#002)

Elkanah had two wives, Hannah (grace or gracefulness) and Peninnah
(coral), the latter of whom was blessed with children, whereas the first
was childless. He went with his wives year by year (ימימה מיּמים, as in
[Exo 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#010); [Jdg
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#040)), according to the instructions
of the law ([Exo 34:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#023); [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016)), to the tabernacle at Shiloh
([Jos 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)), to worship and sacrifice
to the Lord of hosts. "Jehovah Zebaoth" is an abbreviation of "Jehovah
Elohe Zebaoth," or הצּבאות אלהי יהוה; and the connection of Zebaoth with
Jehovah is not to be regarded as the construct state, nor is Zebaoth to
be taken as a genitive dependent upon Jehovah. This is not only
confirmed by the occurrence of such expressions as "Elohim Zebaoth"
([Psa 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006); [Psa
80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005), [Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008),[Psa
80:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#015), 20; [Psa
84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009)) and "Adonai Zebaoth" ([Isa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016)), but also by the circumstance
that Jehovah, as a proper name, cannot be construed with a genitive. The
combination "Jehovah Zebaoth" is rather to be taken as an ellipsis,
where the general term Elohe (God of), which is implied in the word
Jehovah, is to be supplied in thought (see Hengstenberg, Christol. i. p.
375, English translation); for frequently as this expression occurs,
especially in the case of the prophets, Zebaoth is never used alone in
the Old Testament as one of the names of God. It is in the Septuagint
that the word is first met with occasionally as a proper name (Σαβαώθ),
viz., throughout the whole of the first book of Samuel, very frequently
in Isaiah, and also in [Zac 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002). In
other passages, the word is translated either κύριος, or θεὸς τῶν
δυνάμεων, or παντοκράτωρ; whilst the other Greek versions use the more
definite phrase κύριος στρατιῶν instead.

This expression, which was not used as a divine name until the age of
Samuel, had its roots in [Gen 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001),
although the title itself was unknown in the Mosaic period, and during
the times of the judges. It represented Jehovah as ruler over the
heavenly hosts (i.e., the angels, according to [Gen
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002), and the stars, according to [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)), who are called the "armies" of
Jehovah in [Psa 103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021); [Psa
148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002); but we are not to understand it
as implying that the stars were supposed to be inhabited by angels, as
Gesenius (Thes. s. v.) maintains, since there is not the slightest trace
of any such notion in the whole of the Old Testament. It is simply
applied to Jehovah as the God of the universe, who governs all the
powers of heaven, both visible and invisible, as He rules in heaven and
on earth. It cannot even be proved that the epithet Lord, or God of
Zebaoth, refers chiefly and generally to the sun, moon, and stars, on
account of their being so peculiarly adapted, through their visible
splendour, to keep alive the consciousness of the omnipotence and glory
of God (Hengstenberg on [Psa 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#010)).
For even though the expression צבאם (their host), in [Gen
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001), refers to the heavens only, since
it is only to the heavens (vid., [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)), and never to the earth, that a
"host" is ascribed, and in this particular passage it is probably only
the stars that are to be thought of, the creation of which had already
been mentioned in [Gen 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014).; yet we
find the idea of an army of angels introduced in the history of Jacob
([Gen 32:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002)), where Jacob calls the
angels of God who appeared to him the "camp of God," and also in the
blessing of Moses ([Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)), where
the "ten thousands of saints" (Kodesh) are not stars, but angels, or
heavenly spirits; whereas the fighting of the stars against Sisera in
the song of Deborah probably refers to a natural phenomenon, by which
God had thrown the enemy into confusion, and smitten them before the
Israelites (see at [Jdg 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020)). We must
also bear in mind, that whilst on the one hand the tribes of Israel, as
they came out of Egypt, are called Zebaoth Jehovah, "the hosts of
Jehovah" ([Exo 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004); [Exo
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041)), on the other hand the angel of
the Lord, when appearing in front of Jericho in the form of a warrior,
made himself known to Joshua as "the prince of the army of Jehovah,"
i.e., of the angelic hosts. And it is in this appearance of the heavenly
leader of the people of God to the earthly leader of the hosts of
Israel, as the prince of the angelic hosts, not only promising him the
conquest of Jericho, but through the miraculous overthrow of the walls
of this strong bulwark of the Canaanitish power, actually giving him at
the same time a practical proof that the prince of the angelic hosts was
fighting for Israel, that we have the material basis upon which the
divine epithet "Jehovah God of hosts" was founded, even though it was
not introduced immediately, but only at a later period, when the Lord
began to form His people Israel into a kingdom, by which all the
kingdoms of the heathen were to be overcome. It is certainly not without
significance that this title is given to God for the first time in these
books, which contain an account of the founding of the kingdom, and (as
Auberlen has observed) that it was by Samuel's mother, the pious Hannah,
when dedicating her son to the Lord, and prophesying of the king and
anointed of the Lord in her song of praise ([Sa1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010)), that this name was employed for
the first time, and that God was addressed in prayer as "Jehovah of
hosts" ([Sa1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011)). Consequently, if
this name of God goes hand in hand with the prophetic announcement and
the actual establishment of the monarchy in Israel, its origin cannot be
attributed to any antagonism to Sabaeism, or to the hostility of pious
Israelites to the worship of the stars, which was gaining increasing
ground in the age of David, as Hengstenberg (on [Psa
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#010)) and Strauss (on [Zep
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009)) maintain; to say nothing of the
fact, that there is no historical foundation for such an assumption at
all. It is a much more natural supposition, that when the invisible
sovereignty of Jehovah received a visible manifestation in the
establishment of the earthly monarchy, the sovereignty of Jehovah, if it
did possess and was to possess any reality at all, necessarily claimed
to be recognised in its all-embracing power and glory, and that in the
title "God of (the heavenly hosts" the fitting expression was formed for
the universal government of the God-king of Israel, - a title which not
only serves as a bulwark against any eclipsing of the invisible
sovereignty of God by the earthly monarchy in Israel, but overthrew the
vain delusion of the heathen, that the God of Israel was simply the
national deity of that particular nation.

(Note: This name of God was therefore held up before the people of the
Lord even in their war-songs and paeans of victory, but still more by
the prophets, as a banner under which Israel was to fight and to conquer
the world. Ezekiel is the only prophet who does not use it, simply
because he follows the Pentateuch so strictly in his style. And it is
not met with in the book of Job, just because the theocratic
constitution of the Israelitish nation is never referred to in the
problem of that book.)

The remark introduced in [Sa1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003),
"and there were the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, priests of the
Lord," i.e., performing the duties of the priesthood, serves as a
preparation for what follows. This reason for the remark sufficiently
explains why the sons of Eli only are mentioned here, and not Eli
himself, since, although the latter still presided over the sanctuary as
high priest, he was too old to perform the duties connected with the
offering of sacrifice. The addition made by the lxx, Ἡλὶ καὶ, is an
arbitrary interpolation, occasioned by a misapprehension of the reason
for mentioning the sons of Eli.

[Sa1 1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#004)

"And it came to pass, the day, and he offered sacrifice" (for, "on which
he offered sacrifice"), that he gave to Peninnah and her children
portions of the flesh of the sacrifice at the sacrificial meal; but to
Hannah he gave אפּים אחת מגה, "one portion for two persons," i.e., a
double portion, because he loved her, but Jehovah had shut up her womb:
i.e., he gave it as an expression of his love to her, to indicate by a
sign, "thou art as dear to me as if thou hadst born me a child" (O. v.
Gerlach). This explanation of the difficult word אפּים, of which very
different interpretations have been given, is the one adopted by Tanchum
Hieros., and is the only one which can be grammatically sustained, or
yields an appropriate sense. The meaning face (facies) is placed beyond
all doubt by [Gen 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019) and other
passages; and the use of לאפּי as a synonym for לפני in [Sa1
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#023), also establishes the meaning
"person," since פּנים is used in this sense in [Sa2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#011). It is true that there are no
other passages that can be adduced to prove that the singular אף was
also used in this sense; but as the word was employed promiscuously in
both singular and plural in the derivative sense of anger, there is no
reason for denying that the singular may also have been employed in the
sense of face (πρόσωπον). The combination of אפּים with אחת מגה in the
absolute state is supported by many other examples of the same kind (see
Ewald, 287, h). The meaning double has been correctly adopted in the
Syriac, whereas Luther follows the tristis of the Vulgate, and renders
the word traurig, or sad. But this meaning, which Fr. Bttcher has lately
taken under his protection, cannot be philologically sustained either by
the expression פניך נפלוּ ([Gen 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#006)),
or by [Dan 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#020), or in any other way.
אף and אפּים do indeed signify anger, but anger and sadness are two very
different ideas. But when Bttcher substitutes "angrily or unwillingly"
for sadly, the incongruity strikes you at once: "he gave her a portion
unwillingly, because he loved her!" For the custom of singling out a
person by giving double or even large portions, see the remarks on [Gen
43:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#034).

[Sa1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#006)

"And her adversary (Peninnah) also provoked her with provocation, to
irritate her." The גּם is placed before the noun belonging to the verb,
to add force to the meaning. רעם (Hiphil), to excite, put into (inward)
commotion, not exactly to make angry.

[Sa1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#007)

"So did he (Elkanah) from year to year (namely give to Hannah a double
portion at the sacrificial meal), as often as she went up to the house
of the Lord. So did she (Peninnah) provoke her (Hannah), so that she
wept, and did not eat." The two כּן correspond to one another. Just as
Elkanah showed his love to Hannah at every sacrificial festival, so did
Peninnah repeat her provocation, the effect of which was that Hannah
gave vent to her grief in tears, and did not eat.

[Sa1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#008)

Elkanah sought to comfort her in her grief by the affectionate appeal:
"Am I not better to thee (טּוב, i.e., dearer) than ten children?" Ten is
a found number for a large number.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 1:9</span></span>

Hannah's prayer for a son. - [Sa1
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009). "After the eating at Shiloh,
and after the drinking," i.e., after the sacrificial meal was over,
Hannah rose up with a troubled heart, to pour out her grief in prayer
before God, whilst Eli was sitting before the door-posts of the palace
of Jehovah, and vowed this vow: "Lord of Zebaoth, if Thou regardest the
distress of Thy maiden, and givest men's seed to Thy maiden, I will give
him to the Lord all his life long, and no razor shall come upon his
head." The choice of the infinitive absolute שׁתה instead of the
infinitive construct is analogous to the combination of two nouns, the
first of which is defined by a suffix, and the second written absolutely
(see e.g., וזמרת עזּי, [Exo 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002); cf.
[Sa2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005), and Ewald, 339, b). The
words from ועלי onwards to נפשׁ מרת form two circumstantial clauses
inserted in the main sentence, to throw light upon the situation and the
further progress of the affair. The tabernacle is called "the palace of
Jehovah" (cf. [Sa1 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022)), not on
account of the magnificence and splendour of the building, but as the
dwelling-place of Jehovah of hosts, the God-king of Israel, as in [Psa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008), etc. מזוּזה is probably a porch,
which had been placed before the curtain that formed the entranced into
the holy place, when the tabernacle was erected permanently at Shiloh.
נפשׁ מרת, troubled in soul (cf. [Kg2
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#027)). תבכּה וּבכה is really
subordinate to תּתפּלּל, in the sense of "weeping much during her
prayer." The depth of her trouble was also manifest in the crowding
together of the words in which she poured out the desire of her heart
before God: "If Thou wilt look upon the distress of Thine handmaid, and
remember and not forget," etc. "Men's seed" (semen virorum), i.e., a
male child. אנשׁים is the plural of אישׁ, a man (see Ewald, 186-7), from
the root אשׁ, which combines the two ideas of fire, regarded as life,
and giving life and firmness. The vow contained two points: (1) she
would give the son she had prayed for to be the Lord's all the days of
his life, i.e., would dedicate him to the Lord for a lifelong service,
which, as we have already observed at [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001), the Levites as such were not
bound to perform; and (2) no razor should come upon his head, by which
he was set apart as a Nazarite for his whole life (see at [Num
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002)., and [Jdg
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005)). The Nazarite, again, was
neither bound to perform a lifelong service nor to remain constantly at
the sanctuary, but was simply consecrated for a certain time, whilst the
sacrifice offered at his release from the vow shadowed forth a complete
surrender to the Lord. The second point, therefore, added a new
condition to the first, and one which was not necessarily connected with
it, but which first gave the true consecration to the service of the
Lord at the sanctuary. At the same time, the qualification of Samuel for
priestly functions, such as the offering of sacrifice, can neither be
deduced from the first point in the vow, nor yet from the second. If,
therefore, at a later period, when the Lord had called him to be a
prophet, and had thereby placed him at the head of the nation, Samuel
officiated at the presentation of sacrifice, he was not qualified to
perform this service either as a Levite or as a lifelong Nazarite, but
performed it solely by virtue of his prophetic calling.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 1:12</span></span>

But when Hannah prayed much (i.e., a long time) before the Lord, and Eli
noticed her mouth, and, as she was praying inwardly, only saw her lips
move, but did not hear her voice, he thought she was drunken, and called
out to her: "How long dost thou show thyself drunken? put away thy wine
from thee," i.e., go away and sleep off thine intoxication (cf. [Sa1
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#037)). לבּהּ על מדבּרת, lit. speaking
to her heart. על is not to be confounded with אל ([Gen
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#045)), but has the subordinate idea
of a comforting address, as in [Gen
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#003), etc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 1:15</span></span>

Hannah answered: "No, my lord, I am a woman of an oppressed spirit. I
have not drunk wine and strong drink, but have poured out my soul before
the Lord (see [Psa 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005)). Do not count
thine handmaid for a worthless woman, for I have spoken hitherto out of
great sighing and grief." לפני נתן, to set or lay before a person, i.e.,
generally to give a person up to another; here to place him in thought
in the position of another, i.e., to take him for another. שׂיה,
meditation, inward movement of the heart, sighing.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 1:17</span></span>

Eli then replied: "Go in peace, and the God of Israel give (grant) thy
request (שׁלתך for שׁאלתך), which thou hast asked of Him." This word of
the high priest was not a prediction, but a pious wish, which God in His
grace most gloriously fulfilled.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 1:18</span></span>

Hannah then went her way, saying, "Let thine handmaid find grace in
thine eyes," i.e., let me be honoured with thy favour and thine
intercession, and was strengthened and comforted by the word of the high
priest, which assured her that her prayer would be heard by God; and she
did eat, "and her countenance was no more," sc., troubled and sad, as it
had been before. This may be readily supplied from the context, through
which the word countenance (פּנים) acquires the sense of a troubled
countenance, as in [Job 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#027).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 1:19</span></span>

Samuel's birth, and dedication to the Lord. - [Sa1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019), [Sa1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020). The next morning Elkanah
returned home to Ramah (see at [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)) with his two wives, having first
of all worshipped before the Lord; after which he knew his wife Hannah,
and Jehovah remembered her, i.e., heard her prayer. "In the revolution
of the days," i.e., of the period of her conception and pregnancy,
Hannah conceived and bare a son, whom she called Samuel; "for (she said)
I have asked him of the Lord." The name שׁמוּאל (Σαμουήλ, lxx) is not
formed from שׁמוּ = שׁם and אל, name of God (Ges. Thes. p. 1434), but
from אל שׁמוּע, heard of God, a Deo exauditus, with an elision of the ע
(see Ewald, 275, a., Not. 3); and the words "because I have asked him of
the Lord" are not an etymological explanation of the name, but an
exposition founded upon the facts. Because Hannah had asked him of
Jehovah, she gave him the name, "the God-heard," as a memorial of the
hearing of her prayer.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 1:21</span></span>

When Elkanah went up again with his family to Shiloh, to present his
yearly sacrifice and his vow to the Lord, Hannah said to her husband
that she would not go up till she had weaned the boy, and could present
him to the Lord, that he might remain there for ever. הימים זבח, the
sacrifice of the days, i.e., which he was accustomed to offer on the
days when he went up to the sanctuary; really, therefore, the annual
sacrifice. It follows from the expression "and his vow," that Elkanah
had also vowed a vow to the Lord, in case the beloved Hannah should have
a son. The vow referred to the presentation of a sacrifice. And this
explains the combination of את־נדרו with לזבּח.

(Note: The lxx add to τὰς εὐχὰς αὐτοῦ the clause καὶ πάσας τὰς δεκάτας
τῆς γῆς αὐτοῦ ("and all the tithes of his land"). This addition is just
as arbitrary as the alteration of the singular נדרו into the plural τὰς
εὐχὰς αὐτοῦ. The translator overlooked the special reference of the word
נדרו to the child desired by Elkanah, and imagined - probably with [Deu
12:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#026) in his mind, where vows are
ordered to be paid at the sanctuary in connection with slain offerings
and sacrificial meals - that when Elkanah made his annual journey to the
tabernacle he would discharge all his obligations to God, and
consequently would pay his tithes. The genuineness of this additional
clause cannot be sustained by an appeal to Josephus (Ant. v. 10, 3), who
also has δεκάτας τε ἔφερον, for Josephus wrote his work upon the basis
of the Alexandrian version. This statement of Josephus is only worthy of
notice, inasmuch as it proves the incorrectness of the conjecture of
Thenius, that the allusion to the tithes was intentionally dropped out
of the Hebrew text by copyists, who regarded Samuel's Levitical descent
as clearly established by [Ch1 6:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#007)
and [Ch1 6:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#019). For Josephus (l. c.
2) expressly describes Elkanah as a Levite, and takes no offence at the
offering of tithes attributed to him in the Septuagint, simply because
he was well acquainted with the law, and knew that the Levites had to
pay to the priests a tenth of the tithes that they received from the
other tribes, as a heave-offering of Jehovah ([Num
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#026).; cf. [Neh
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#038)). Consequently the presentation
of tithe on the part of Elkanah, if it were really well founded in the
biblical text, would not furnish any argument against his Levitical
descent.)

Weaning took place very late among the Israelites. According to 2 Macc.
7:28, the Hebrew mothers were in the habit of suckling their children
for three years. When the weaning had taken place, Hannah would bring
her son up to the sanctuary, to appear before the face of the Lord, and
remain there for ever, i.e., his whole life long. The Levites generally
were only required to perform service at the sanctuary from their
twenty-fifth to their fiftieth year ([Num
8:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024)); but Samuel was to be
presented to the Lord immediately after his weaning had taken place, and
to remain at the sanctuary for ever, i.e., to belong entirely to the
Lord. To this end he was to receive his training at the sanctuary, that
at the very earliest waking up of his spiritual susceptibilities he
might receive the impressions of the sacred presence of God. There is no
necessity, therefore, to understand the word גּמל (wean) as including
what followed the weaning, namely, the training of the child up to his
thirteenth year (Seb. Schmidt), on the ground that a child of three
years old could only have been a burden to Eli: for the word never has
this meaning, not even in [Kg1 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#020);
and, as O. v. Gerlach has observed, his earliest training might have
been superintended by one of the women who worshipped at the door of the
tabernacle ([Sa1 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 1:23</span></span>

Elkanah expressed his approval of Hannah's decision, and added, "only
the Lord establish His word," i.e., fulfil it. By "His word" we are not
to understand some direct revelation from God respecting the birth and
destination of Samuel, as the Rabbins suppose, but in all probability
the word of Eli the high priest to Hannah, "The God of Israel grant thy
petition" ([Sa1 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017)), which might be
regarded by the parents of Samuel after his birth as a promise from
Jehovah himself, and therefore might naturally excite the wish and
suggest the prayer that the Lord would graciously fulfil the further
hopes, which the parents cherished in relation to the son whom they had
dedicated to the Lord by a vow. The paraphrase of דּברו in the rendering
given by the lxx, τὸ ἐξελθὸν ὲκ τοῦ στόματός σου, is the subjective view
of the translator himself, and does not warrant an emendation of the
original text.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 1:24</span></span>

As soon as the boy was weaned, Hannah brought him, although still a נער,
i.e., a tender boy, to Shiloh, with a sacrifice of three oxen, an ephah
of meal, and a pitcher of wine, and gave him up to Eli when the ox
(bullock) had been slain, i.e., offered in sacrifice as a
burnt-offering. The striking circumstance that, according to [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024), Samuel's parents brought three
oxen with them to Shiloh, and yet in [Sa1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#025) the ox (הפּר) alone is spoken of
as being slain (or sacrificed), may be explained very simply on the
supposition that in [Sa1 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#025) that
particular sacrifice is referred to, which was associated with the
presentation of the boy, that is to say, the burnt-offering by virtue of
which the boy was consecrated to the Lord as a spiritual sacrifice for a
lifelong service at His sanctuary, whereas the other two oxen served as
the yearly festal offering, i.e., the burnt-offerings and
thank-offerings which Elkanah presented year by year, and the
presentation of which the writer did not think it needful to mention,
simply because it followed partly from [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003) and partly from the Mosaic law.

(Note: The interpretation of שׁלשׁה בּפרים by ἐν μόσχῳ τριετίζοντι
(lxx), upon which Thenius would found an alteration of the text, is
proved to be both arbitrary and wrong by the fact that the translators
themselves afterwards mention the θυσία, which Elkanah brought year by
year, and the μόσχος, and consequently represent him as offering at
least two animals, in direct opposition to the μόσχῳ τριετίζοντι. This
discrepancy cannot be removed by the assertion that in [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024) the sacrificial animal intended
for the dedication of the boy is the only one mentioned; and the
presentation of the regular festal sacrifice is taken for granted, for
an ephah of meal would not be the proper quantity to be offered in
connection with a single ox, since, according to the law in [Num
15:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#008), only three-tenths of an ephah
of meal were required when an ox was presented as a burnt-offering or
slain offering. The presentation of an ephah of meal presupposes the
offering of three oxen, and therefore shows that in [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024) the materials are mentioned for
all the sacrifices that Elkanah was about to offer.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 1:26</span></span>

When the boy was presented, his mother made herself known to the high
priest as the woman who had previously prayed to the Lord at that place
(see [Sa1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011).), and said, "For this
child I prayed; and the Lord hath granted me my request which I asked of
Him: therefore I also make him one asked of the Lord all the days that
he liveth; he is asked of the Lord." וגם אנכי: I also; et ego vicissim
(Cler.). השׁאיל, to let a person ask, to grant his request, to give him
what he asks ([Exo 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036)), signifies
here to make a person "asked" (שׁאוּל). The meaning to lend, which the
lexicons give to the word both here and [Exo
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036), has no other support than the
false rendering of the lxx, and is altogether unsuitable both in the one
and the other. Jehovah had not lent the son to Hannah, but had given him
(see [Sa1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011)); still less could a
man lend his son to the Lord. The last clause of [Sa1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#028), "and he worshipped the Lord
there," refers to Elkanah, qui in votum Hannae consenserat, and not to
Samuel. On a superficial glance, the plural ישׁתּחווּ, which is found in
some Codd., and in the Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic, appears the more
suitable; but when we look more closely at the connection in which the
clause stands, we see at once that it does not wind up the foregoing
account, but simply introduces the closing act of the transference of
Samuel. Consequently the singular is perfectly appropriate; and
notwithstanding the fact that the subject is not mentioned, the allusion
to Samuel is placed beyond all doubt. When Hannah had given up her son
to the high priest, his father Elkanah first of all worshipped before
the Lord in the sanctuary, and then Hannah worshipped in the song of
praise, which follows in [Sa1 2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 2](sa1002)

</div>
