<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1001)  [Next](sa1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 2:1</span></span>

Hannah's song of praise. - The prayer in which Hannah poured out the
feelings of her heart, after the dedication of her son to the Lord, is a
song of praise of a prophetic and Messianic character. After giving
utterance in the introduction to the rejoicing and exulting of her soul
at the salvation that had reached her ([Sa1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)), she praises the Lord as the only
holy One, the only rock of the righteous, who rules on earth with
omniscience and righteousness, brings down the proud and lofty, kills
and makes alive, maketh poor and maketh rich ([Sa1
2:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#002)). She then closes with the
confident assurance that He will keep His saints, and cast down the
rebellious, and will judge the ends of the earth, and exalt the power of
His king ([Sa1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#009), [Sa1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010)).

This psalm is the mature fruit of the Spirit of God. The pious woman,
who had gone with all the earnest longings of a mother's heart to pray
to the Lord God of Israel for a son, that she might consecrate him to
the lifelong service of the Lord, "discerned in her own individual
experience the general laws of the divine economy, and its signification
in relation to the whole history of the kingdom of God" (Auberlen, p.
564). The experience which she, bowed down and oppressed as she was, had
had of the gracious government of the omniscient and holy covenant God,
was a pledge to her of the gracious way in which the nation itself was
led by God, and a sign by which she discerned how God not only delivered
at all times the poor and wretched who trusted in Him out of their
poverty and distress, and set them up, but would also lift up and
glorify His whole nation, which was at that time so deeply bowed down
and oppressed by its foes. Acquainted as she was with the destination of
Israel to be a kingdom, from the promises which God had given to the
patriarchs, and filled as she was with the longing that had been
awakened in the nation for the realization of these promises, she could
see in spirit, and through the inspiration of God, the king whom the
Lord was about to give to His people, and through whom He would raise it
up to might and dominion.

The refusal of modern critics to admit the genuineness of this song is
founded upon an a priori and utter denial of the supernatural saving
revelations of God, and upon a consequent inability to discern the
prophetic illumination of the pious Hannah, and a complete
misinterpretation of the contents of her song of praise. The "proud and
lofty," whom God humbles and casts down, are not the heathen or the
national foes of Israel, and the "poor and wretched" whom He exalts and
makes rich are not the Israelites as such; but the former are the
ungodly, and the latter the pious, in Israel itself. And the description
is so well sustained throughout, that it is only by the most arbitrary
criticism that it can be interpreted as referring to definite historical
events, such as the victory of David over Goliath (Thenius), or a
victory of the Israelites over heathen nations (Ewald and others). Still
less can any argument be drawn from the words of the song in support of
its later origin, or its composition by David or one of the earliest of
the kings of Israel. On the contrary, not only is its genuineness
supported by the general consideration that the author of these books
would never have ascribed a song to Hannah, if he had not found it in
the sources he employed; but still more decisively by the circumstance
that the songs of praise of Mary and Zechariah, in [Luk
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046). and [Luk
1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068)., show, through the manner in
which they rest upon this ode, in what way it was understood by the
pious Israelites of every age, and how, like the pious Hannah, they
recognised and praised in their own individual experience the government
of the holy God in the midst of His kingdom.

[Sa1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)

The first verse forms the introduction to the song. Holy joy in the Lord
at the blessing which she had received impelled the favoured mother to
the praise of God:

1 My heart is joyful in the Lord,

My horn is exalted in the Lord,

My mouth is opened wide over mine enemies:

For I rejoice in Thy salvation.

Of the four members of this verse, the first answers to the third, and
the second to the fourth. The heart rejoices at the lifting up of her
horn, the mouth opens wide to proclaim the salvation before which the
enemies would be dumb. "My horn is high" does not mean 'I am proud'
(Ewald), but "my power is great in the Lord." The horn is the symbol of
strength, and is taken from oxen whose strength is in their horns (vid.,
[Deu 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Psa
75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005), etc.). The power was high or
exalted by the salvation which the Lord had manifested to her. To Him
all the glory was due, because He had proved himself to be the holy One,
and a rock upon which a man could rest his confidence.

[Sa1 2:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#002)

2 None is holy as the Lord; for there is none beside Thee;

And no rock is as our God.

3 Speak ye not much lofty, lofty;

Let (not) insolence go out of thy mouth!

For the Lord is an omniscient God,

And with Him deeds are weighed.

God manifests himself as holy in the government of the kingdom of His
grace by His guidance of the righteous to salvation (see at [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)). But holiness is simply the
moral reflection of the glory of the one absolute God. This explains the
reason given for His holiness, viz., "there is not one (a God) beside
thee" (cf. [Sa2 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#032)). As the holy
and only One, God is the rock (vid., [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015); [Psa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003)) in which the righteous can
always trust. The wicked therefore should tremble before His holiness,
and not talk in their pride of the lofty things which they have
accomplished or intend to perform. גּבהה is defined more precisely in
the following clause, which is also dependent upon אל by the word עתק,
as insolent words spoken by the wicked against the righteous (see [Psa
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)). For Jehovah hears such words;
He is "a God of knowledge" (Deus scientiarum), a God who sees and knows
every single thing. The plural דּעות has an intensive signification.
עללות נתכּנוּ לא might be rendered "deeds are not weighed, or equal"
(cf. [Eze 18:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#025); [Eze
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#017)). But this would only apply to
the actions of men; for the acts of God are always just, or weighed. But
an assertion respecting the actions of men does not suit the context.
Hence this clause is reckoned in the Masora as one of the passages in
which לא stands for לו (see at [Exo
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)). "To Him (with Him) deeds are
weighed:" that is to say, the acts of God are weighed, i.e., equal or
just. This is the real meaning according to the passages in Ezekiel, and
not "the actions of men are weighed by Him" (De Wette, Maurer, Ewald,
etc.): for God weighs the minds and hearts of men ([Pro
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#002); [Pro
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#002); [Pro
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#012)), not their actions. This
expression never occurs. The weighed or righteous acts of God are
described in [Sa1 2:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#004) in great and
general traits, as displayed in the government of His kingdom through
the marvellous changes which occur in the circumstances connected with
the lives of the righteous and the wicked.

[Sa1 2:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#004)

4 Bow-heroes are confounded,

And stumbling ones gird themselves with strength;

5 Full ones hire themselves out for bread,

And hungry ones cease to be.

Yea, the barren beareth seven (children),

And she that is rich in children pines away.

6 The Lord kills and makes alive;

Leads down into hell, and leads up.

7 The Lord makes poor and makes rich,

Humbles and also exalts.

8 He raises mean ones out of the dust,

He lifts up poor ones out of the dunghill,

To set them beside the noble;

And He apportions to them the seat of glory:

For the pillars of the earth are the Lord's,

And He sets the earth upon them.

In [Sa1 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#004), the predicate חתּים is
construed with the nomen rectum גּבּרים, not with the nomen regens קשׁת,
because the former is the leading term (vid., Ges. 148, 1, and Ewald,
317, d.). The thought to be expressed is, not that the bow itself is to
be broken, but that the heroes who carry the bow are to be confounded or
broken inwardly. "Bows of the heroes" stands for heroes carrying bows.
For this reason the verb is to be taken in the sense of confounded, not
broken, especially as, apart from [Jer
51:56](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#056), חתת is not used to denote the
breaking of outward things, but the breaking of men.

[Sa1 2:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005)

שׂבעים are the rich and well to do; these would become so poor as to be
obliged to hire themselves out for bread. חדל, to cease to be what they
were before. The use of עד as a conjunction, in the sense of "yea" or
"in fact," may be explained as an elliptical expression, signifying "it
comes to this, that." "Seven children" are mentioned as the full number
of the divine blessing in children (see [Rut
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#015)). "The mother of many children"
pines away, because she has lost all her sons, and with them her support
in her old age (see [Jer 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#009)). This
comes from the Lord, who kills, etc. (cf. [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)). The words of [Sa1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006) are figurative. God hurls down
into death and the danger of death, and also rescues therefrom (see [Psa
30:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)). The first three clauses of
[Sa1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008) are repeated verbatim in [Psa
113:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007). Dust and the dunghill are
figures used to denote the deepest degradation and ignominy. The
antithesis to this is, sitting upon the chair or throne of glory, the
seat occupied by noble princes. The Lord does all this, for He is the
creator and upholder of the world. The pillars (מצקי, from צוּק = יצק)
of the earth are the Lord's; i.e., they were created or set up by Him,
and by Him they are sustained. Now as Jehovah, the God of Israel, the
Holy One, governs the world with His almighty power, the righteous have
nothing to fear. With this thought the last strophe of the song begins:

[Sa1 2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#009)

9 The feet of His saints He will keep,

And the wicked perish in darkness;

For by power no one becomes strong.

10 The Lord - those who contend against Him are confounded.

He thunders above him in the heavens;

The Lord will judge the ends of the earth,

That He may lend might to His king, And exalt the horn of His anointed.

The Lord keeps the feet of the righteous, so that they do not tremble
and stumble, i.e., so that the righteous do not fall into adversity and
perish therein (vid., Ps. 56:14; [Psa
116:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#008); [Psa
121:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#003)). But the wicked, who oppress
and persecute the righteous, will perish in darkness, i.e., in
adversity, when God withdraws the light of His grace, so that they fall
into distress and calamity. For no man can be strong through his own
power, so as to meet the storms of life. All who fight against the Lord
are destroyed. To bring out the antithesis between man and God,
"Jehovah" is written absolutely at the commencement of the sentence in
[Sa1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010) : "As for Jehovah, those who
contend against Him are broken," both inwardly and outwardly (חתת, as in
[Sa1 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#004)). The word עלו, which
follows, is not to be changed into עליהם. There is simply a rapid
alternation of the numbers, such as we frequently meet with in excited
language. "Above him," i.e., above every one who contends against God,
He thunders. Thunder is a premonitory sign of the approach of the Lord
to judgment. In the thunder, man is made to feel in an alarming way the
presence of the omnipotent God. In the words, "The Lord will judge the
ends of the earth," i.e., the earth to its utmost extremities, or the
whole world, Hannah's prayer rises up to a prophetic glance at the
consummation of the kingdom of God. As certainly as the Lord God keeps
the righteous at all times, and casts down the wicked, so certainly will
He judge the whole world, to hurl down all His foes, and perfect His
kingdom which He has founded in Israel. And as every kingdom culminates
in its throne, or in the full might and government of a king, so the
kingdom of God can only attain its full perfection in the king whom the
Lord will give to His people, and endow with His might. The king, or the
anointed of the Lord, of whom Hannah prophesies in the spirit, is not
one single king of Israel, either David or Christ, but an ideal king,
though not a mere personification of the throne about to be established,
but the actual king whom Israel received in David and his race, which
culminated in the Messiah. The exaltation of the horn of the anointed to
Jehovah commenced with the victorious and splendid expansion of the
power of David, was repeated with every victory over the enemies of God
and His kingdom gained by the successive kings of David's house, goes on
in the advancing spread of the kingdom of Christ, and will eventually
attain to its eternal consummation in the judgment of the last day,
through which all the enemies of Christ will be made His footstool.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 2:11</span></span>

Samuel the servant of the Lord under Eli. Ungodliness of the sons of
Eli. - [Sa1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011) forms the transition
to what follows. After Hannah's psalm of thanksgiving, Elkanah went back
with his family to his home at Ramah, and the boy (Samuel) was serving,
i.e., ministered to the Lord, in the presence of Eli the priest. The
fact that nothing is said about Elkanah's wives going with him, does not
warrant the interpretation given by Thenius, that Elkanah went home
alone. It was taken for granted that his wives went with him, according
to [Sa1 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#021) ("all his house").
את־יחוה שׁרת, which signifies literally, both here and in [Sa1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001), to serve the Lord, and which is
used interchangeably with יי את־פּני שׁרת ([Sa1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018)), to serve in the presence of the
Lord, is used to denote the duties performed both by priests and Levites
in connection with the worship of God, in which Samuel took part, as he
grew up, under the superintendence of Eli and according to his
instruction.

[Sa1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012)

But Eli's sons, Hophni and Phinehas ([Sa1
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#034)), were בליּעל בּני, worthless
fellows, and knew not the Lord, sc., as He should be known, i.e., did
not fear Him, or trouble themselves about Him (vid., [Job
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#021); [Hos
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#002); [Hos
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#004)).

[Sa1 2:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#013)

"And the right of the priests towards the people was (the following)."
Mishpat signifies the right which they had usurped to themselves in
relation to the people. "If any one brought a sacrifice (זבח זבח
כּל־אישׁ is placed first, and construed absolutely: 'as for every one
who brought a slain-offering'), the priest's servant (lit. young man)
came while the flesh was boiling, with a three-pronged fork in his hand,
and thrust into the kettle, or pot, or bowl, or saucepan. All that the
fork brought up the priest took. This they did to all the Israelites who
came thither to Shiloh."

[Sa1 2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#015)

They did still worse. "Even before the fat was consumed," i.e., before
the fat portions of the sacrifice had been placed in the altar-fire for
the Lord ([Lev 3:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003)), the priest's
servant came and demanded flesh of the person sacrificing, to be roasted
for the priest; "for he will not take boiled flesh of thee, but only חי,
raw, i.e., fresh meat." And if the person sacrificing replied, "They
will burn the fat directly (lit. 'at this time,' as in [Gen
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#031); [Kg1
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#005)), then take for thyself, as thy
soul desireth," he said, "No (לו for לא), but thou shalt give now; if
not, I take by force." These abuses were practised by the priests in
connection with the thank-offerings, with which a sacrificial meal was
associated. Of these offerings, with which a sacrificial meal was
associated. Of these offerings, the portion which legally fell to the
priest as his share was the heave-leg and wave-breast. And this he was
to receive after the fat portions of the sacrifice had been burned upon
the altar (see [Lev 7:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#030)). To take
the flesh of the sacrificial animal and roast it before this offering
had been made, was a crime which was equivalent to a robbery of God, and
is therefore referred to here with the emphatic particle גּם, as being
the worst crime that the sons of Eli committed. Moreover, the priests
could not claim any of the flesh which the offerer of the sacrifice
boiled for the sacrificial meal, after burning the fat portions upon the
altar and giving up the portions which belonged to them, to say nothing
of their taking it forcibly out of the pots while it was being boiled.

[Sa1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#017)

Such conduct as this on the part of the young men (the priests'
servants), was a great sin in the sight of the Lord, as they thereby
brought the sacrifice of the Lord into contempt. נאץ, causative, to
bring into contempt, furnish occasion for blaspheming (as in [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)). "The robbery which they
committed was a small sin in comparison with the contempt of the
sacrifices themselves, which they were the means of spreading among the
people" (O. v. Gerlach). Minchah does not refer here to the
meat-offering as the accompaniment to the slain-offerings, but to the
sacrificial offering generally, as a gift presented for the Lord.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 2:18</span></span>

Samuel's service before the Lord. - [Sa1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018). Samuel served as a boy before
the Lord by the side of the worthless sons of Eli, girt with an ephod of
white material (בּד, see at [Exo
28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042)). The ephod was a
shoulder-dress, no doubt resembling the high priest's in shape (see [Exo
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006).), but altogether different in
the material of which it was made, viz., simple white cloth, like the
other articles of clothing that were worn by the priests. At that time,
according to [Sa1 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#018), all the
priests wore clothing of this kind; and, according to [Sa2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014), David did the same on the
occasion of a religious festival. Samuel received a dress of this kind
even when a boy, because he was set apart to a lifelong service before
the Lord. חגוּר is the technical expression for putting on the ephod,
because the two pieces of which it was composed were girt round the body
with a girdle.

[Sa1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#019)

The small מעיל also (Angl. "coat"), which Samuel's mother made and
brought him every year, when she came with her husband to Shiloh to the
yearly sacrifice, was probably a coat resembling the mel of the high
priest ([Exo 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031).), but was made of
course of some simpler material, and without the symbolical ornaments
attached to the lower hem, by which that official dress was
distinguished.

[Sa1 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#020)

The priestly clothing of the youthful Samuel was in harmony with the
spiritual relation in which he stood to the high priest and to Jehovah.
Eli blessed his parents for having given up the boy to the Lord, and
expressed this wish to the father: "The Lord lend thee seed of this
woman in the place of the one asked for (השּׁאלה), whom they (one) asked
for from the Lord." The striking use of the third pers. masc. שׁאל
instead of the second singular or plural may be accounted for on the
supposition that it is an indefinite form of speech, which the writer
chose because, although it was Hannah who prayed to the Lord for Samuel
in the sight of Eli, yet Eli might assume that the father, Elkanah, had
shared the wishes of his pious wife. The apparent harshness disappears
at once if we substitute the passive; whereas in Hebrew active
constructions were always preferred to passive, wherever it was possible
to employ them (Ewald, 294, b.). The singular suffix attached to למקומו
after the plural הלכוּ may be explained on the simple ground, that a
dwelling-place is determined by the husband, or master of the house.

[Sa1 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#021)

The particle כּי, "for" (Jehovah visited), does not mean if, as, or
when, nor is it to be regarded as a copyist's error. It is only
necessary to supply the thought contained in the words, "Eli blessed
Elkanah," viz., that Eli's blessing was not an empty fruitless wish; and
to understand the passage in some such way as this: Eli's word was
fulfilled, or still more simply, they went to their home blessed; for
Jehovah visited Hannah, blessed her with "three sons and two daughters;
but the boy Samuel grew up with the Lord," i.e., near to Him (at the
sanctuary), and under His protection and blessing.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 2:22</span></span>

Eli's treatment of the sins of his sons. - [Sa1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022). The aged Eli reproved his sons
with solemn warnings on account of their sins; but without his warnings
being listened to. From the reproof itself we learn, that beside the sin
noticed in [Sa1 2:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012), they also
committed the crime of lying with the women who served at the tabernacle
(see at [Exo 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008)), and thus profaned
the sanctuary with whoredom. But Eli, with the infirmities of his old
age, did nothing further to prevent these abominations than to say to
his sons, "Why do ye according to the sayings which I hear, sayings
about you which are evil, of this whole people." רעים את־דּבריכם is
inserted to make the meaning clearer, and כּל־ה מאת is dependent upon
שׁמע. "This whole people" signifies all the people that came to Shiloh,
and heard and saw the wicked doings there.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 2:24</span></span>

בּני אל, "Not, my sons," i.e., do not such things, "for the report which
I hear is not good; they make the people of Jehovah to transgress."
מערים is written without the pronoun אתּם in an indefinite construction,
like משׁלּחים in [Sa1 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#003) (Maurer).
Ewald's rendering as given by Thenius, "The report which I hear the
people of God bring," is just as inadmissible as the one proposed by
Bttcher, "The report which, as I hear, the people of God are spreading."
The assertion made by Thenius, that העביר, without any further
definition, cannot mean to cause to sin or transgress, is correct enough
no doubt; but it does not prove that this meaning is inadmissible in the
passage before us, since the further definition is actually to be found
in the context.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 2:25</span></span>

"If man sins against man, God judges him; but if a man sins against
Jehovah, who can interpose with entreaty for him?" In the use of פּללו
and יתפּלּל־לו there is a paranomasia which cannot be reproduced in our
language. פּלּל signifies to decide or pass sentence ([Gen
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#011)), then to arbitrate, to settle a
dispute as arbitrator ([Eze 16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052);
[Psa 106:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#030)), and in the Hithpael to
act as mediator, hence to entreat. And these meanings are applicable
here. In the case of one man's sin against another, God settles the
dispute as arbitrator through the proper authorities; whereas, when a
man sins against God, no one can interpose as arbitrator. Such a sin
cannot be disposed of by intercession. But Eli's sons did not listen to
this admonition, which was designed to reform daring sinners with mild
words and representation; "for," adds the historian, "Jehovah was
resolved to slay them." The father's reproof made no impression upon
them, because they were already given up to the judgment of hardening.
(On hardening as a divine sentence, see the discussions at [Exo
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021).)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 2:26</span></span>

The youthful Samuel, on the other hand, continued to grow in stature,
and in favour with God and man (see [Luk
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 2:27</span></span>

Announcement of the judgment upon Eli and his house. - [Sa1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027). Before the Lord interposed in
judgment, He sent a prophet (a "man of God," as in [Jdg
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#006)) to the aged Eli, to announce as
a warning for all ages the judgment which was about to fall upon the
worthless priests of his house. In order to arouse Eli's own conscience,
he had pointed out to him, on the one hand, the grace manifested in the
choice of his father's house, i.e., the house of Aaron, to keep His
sanctuary ([Sa1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027) and [Sa1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#028)), and, on the other hand, the
desecration of the sanctuary by the wickedness of his sons ([Sa1
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#029)). Then follows the sentence: The
choice of the family of Aaron still stood fast, but the deepest disgrace
would come upon the despisers of the Lord ([Sa1
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)): the strength of his house would
be broken; all the members of his house were to die early deaths. They
were not, however, to be removed entirely from service at the altar, but
to their sorrow were to survive the fall of the sanctuary ([Sa1
2:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#031)). But the Lord would raise up
a faithful priest, and cause him to walk before His anointed, and from
him all that were left of the house of Eli would be obliged to beg their
bread ([Sa1 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#035), [Sa1
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#036)). To arrive at the true
interpretation of this announcement of punishment, we must picture to
ourselves the historical circumstances that come into consideration
here. Eli the high priest was a descendant of Ithamar, the younger son
of Aaron, as we may see from the fact that his great-grandson Ahimelech
was "of the sons of Ithamar" ([Ch1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003)). In perfect agreement with this,
Josephus (Ant. v. 11, 5) relates, that after the high priest Ozi of the
family of Eleazar, Eli of the family of Ithamar received the
high-priesthood. The circumstances which led to the transfer of this
honour from the line of Eleazar to that of Ithamar are unknown. We
cannot imagine it to have been occasioned by an extinction of the line
of Eleazar, for the simple reason that, in the time of David, Zadok the
descendant of Eleazar is spoken of as high priest along with Abiathar
and Ahimelech, the descendants of Eli ([Sa2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017); [Sa2
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#025)). After the deposition of
Abiathar he was reinstated by Solomon as sole high priest ([Kg1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027)), and the dignity was transmitted
to his descendants. This fact also overthrows the conjecture of
Clericus, that the transfer of the high-priesthood to Eli took place by
the command of God on account of the grievous sins of the high priests
of the line of Eleazar; for in that case Zadok would not have received
this office again in connection with Abiathar. We have, no doubt, to
search for the true reason in the circumstances of the times of the
later judges, namely in the fact that at the death of the last high
priest of the family of Eleazar before the time of Eli, the remaining
son was not equal to the occasion, either because he was still an
infant, or at any rate because he was too young and inexperienced, so
that he could not enter upon the office, and Eli, who was probably
related by marriage to the high priest's family, and was no doubt a
vigorous man, was compelled to take the oversight of the congregation;
and, together with the supreme administration of the affairs of the
nation as judge, received the post of high priest as well, and filled it
till the time of his death, simply because in those troublous times
there was not one of the descendants of Eleazar who was able to fill the
supreme office of judge, which was combined with that of high priest.
For we cannot possibly think of an unjust usurpation of the office of
high priest on the part of Eli, since the very judgment denounced
against him and his house presupposes that he had entered upon the
office in a just and upright way, and that the wickedness of his sons
was all that was brought against him. For a considerable time after the
death of Eli the high-priesthood lost almost all its significance. All
Israel turned to Samuel, whom the Lord established as His prophet by
means of revelations, and whom He also chose as the deliverer of His
people. The tabernacle at Shiloh, which ceased to be the scene of the
gracious presence of God after the loss of the ark, was probably
presided over first of all after Eli's death by his grandson Ahitub, the
son of Phinehas, as his successor in the high-priesthood. He was
followed in the time of Saul by his son Ahijah or Ahimelech, who gave
David the shew-bread to eat at Nob, to which the tabernacle had been
removed in the meantime, and was put to death by Saul in consequence,
along with all the priests who were found there. His son Abiathar,
however, escaped the massacre, and fled to David ([Sa1
22:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009); [Sa1
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006)). In the reign of David he is
mentioned as high priest along with Zadok; but he was afterwards deposed
by Solomon ([Sa2 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#024); [Sa2
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015); [Sa2
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#012); [Sa2
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#025); [Kg1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027)).

Different interpretations have been given of these verses. The majority
of commentators understand them as signifying that the loss of the
high-priesthood is here foretold to Eli, and also the institution of
Zadok in the office. But such a view is too contracted, and does not
exhaust the meaning of the words. The very introduction to the prophet's
words points to something greater than this: "Thus saith the Lord, Did I
reveal myself to thy father's house, when they were in Egypt at the
house of Pharaoh?" The ה interrogative is not used for הלא (nonne), but
is emphatic, as in [Jer 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020). The
question is an appeal to Eli's conscience, which he cannot deny, but is
obliged to confirm. By Eli's father's house we are not to understand
Ithamar and his family, but Aaron, from whom Eli was descended through
Ithamar. God revealed himself to the tribe-father of Eli by appointing
Aaron to be the spokesman of Moses before Pharaoh ([Exo
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#014). and [Exo
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#027)), and still more by calling Aaron
to the priesthood, for which the way was prepared by the fact that, from
the very beginning, God made use of Aaron, in company with Moses, to
carry out His purpose of delivering Israel out of Egypt, and entrusted
Moses and Aaron with the arrangements for the celebration of the
passover ([Exo 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001), [Exo
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043)). This occurred when they, the
fathers of Eli, Aaron and his sons, were still in Egypt at the house of
Pharaoh, i.e., still under Pharaoh's rule.

[Sa1 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#028)

"And did I choose him out of all the tribes for a priest to myself." The
interrogative particle is not to be repeated before וּבחור, but the
construction becomes affirmative with the inf. abs. instead of the
perfect. "Him" refers back to "thy father" in [Sa1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027), and signifies Aaron. The
expression "for a priest" is still further defined by the clauses which
follow: על מ לעלות, "to ascend upon mine altar," i.e., to approach my
altar of burnt-offering and perform the sacrificial worship; "to kindle
incense," i.e., to perform the service in the holy place, the principal
feature in which was the daily kindling of the incense, which is
mentioned instar omnium; "to wear the ephod before me," i.e., to perform
the service in the holy of holies, which the high priest could only
enter when wearing the ephod to represent Israel before the Lord ([Exo
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#012)). "And have given to thy
father's house all the firings of the children of Israel" (see at [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009)). These words are to be
understood, according to [Deu 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001), as
signifying that the Lord had given to the house of Aaron, i.e., to the
priesthood, the sacrifices of Jehovah to eat in the place of any
inheritance in the land, according to the portions appointed in the
sacrificial law in Lev 6-7, and Num 18.

[Sa1 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#029)

With such distinction conferred upon the priesthood, and such careful
provision made for it, the conduct of the priests under Eli was an
inexcusable crime. "Why do ye tread with your feet my slain-offerings
and meat-offerings, which I have commanded in the dwelling-place?"
Slain-offering and meat-offering are general expressions embracing all
the altar-sacrifices. מעון is an accusative ("in the dwelling"), like
בּית, in the house. "The dwelling" is the tabernacle. This reproof
applied to the priests generally, including Eli, who had not vigorously
resisted these abuses. The words which follow, "and thou honourest thy
sons more than me," relate to Eli himself, and any other high priest who
like Eli should tolerate the abuses of the priests. "To fatten
yourselves with the first of every sacrificial gift of Israel, of my
people." לעמּי serves as a periphrasis for the genitive, and is chosen
for the purpose of giving greater prominence to the idea of עמּי (my
people). רשׁית, the first of every sacrificial gift (minchah, as in [Sa1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#017)), which Israel offered as the
nation of Jehovah, ought to have been given up to its God in the
altar-fire because it was the best; whereas, according to [Sa1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#015), [Sa1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#016), the sons of Eli took away the
best for themselves.

[Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)

For this reason, the saying of the Lord, "Thy house (i.e., the family of
Eli) and thy father's house (Eli's relations in the other lines, i.e.,
the whole priesthood) shall walk before me for ever" ([Num
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013)), should henceforth run thus:
"This be far from me; but them that honour me I will honour, and they
that despise me shall be despised." The first declaration of the Lord is
not to be referred to Eli particularly, as it is by C. a Lapide and
others, and understood as signifying that the high-priesthood was
thereby transferred from the family of Eleazar to that of Ithamar, and
promised to Eli for his descendants for all time. This is decidedly at
variance with the fact, that although "walking before the Lord" is not a
general expression denoting a pious walk with God, as in [Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001), but refers to the service of the
priests at the sanctuary as walking before the face of God, yet it
cannot possibly be specially and exclusively restricted to the right of
entering the most holy place, which was the prerogative of the high
priest alone. These words of the Lord, therefore, applied to the whole
priesthood, or the whole house of Aaron, to which the priesthood had
been promised, "for a perpetual statute" ([Exo
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#009)). This promise was afterwards
renewed to Phinehas especially, on account of the zeal which he
displayed for the honour of Jehovah in connection with the idolatry of
the people at Shittim ([Num 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013)).
But even this renewed promise only secured to him an eternal priesthood
as a covenant of peace with the Lord, and not specially the
high-priesthood, although that was included as the culminating point of
the priesthood. Consequently it was not abrogated by the temporary
transfer of the high-priesthood from the descendants of Phinehas to the
priestly line of Ithamar, because even then they still retained the
priesthood. By the expression "be it far from me," sc., to permit this
to take place, God does not revoke His previous promise, but simply
denounces a false trust therein as irreconcilable with His holiness.
That promise would only be fulfilled so far as the priests themselves
honoured the Lord in their office, whilst despisers of God who
dishonoured Him by sin and presumptuous wickedness, would be themselves
despised.

This contempt would speedily come upon the house of Eli.

[Sa1 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#031)

"Behold, days come," - a formula with which prophets were accustomed to
announce future events (see [Kg2
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#017); [Isa
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#006); [Amo
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#002); [Amo
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011); [Amo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013); [Jer
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032), etc.), - "then will I cut off
thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house, that there shall be no old
man in thine house." To cut off the arm means to destroy the strength
either of a man or of a family (see Job. [Sa1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009); [Psa
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#017)). The strength of a family,
however, consists in the vital energy of its members, and shows itself
in the fact that they reach a good old age, and do not pine away early
and die. This strength was to vanish in Eli's house; no one would ever
again preserve his life to old age.

[Sa1 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#032)

"And thou wilt see oppression of the dwelling in all that He has shown
of good to Israel." The meaning of these words, which have been
explained in very different ways, appears to be the following: In all
the benefits which the lord would confer upon His people, Eli would see
only distress for the dwelling of God, inasmuch as the tabernacle would
fall more and more into decay. In the person of Eli, the high priest at
that time, the high priest generally is addressed as the custodian of
the sanctuary; so that what is said is not to be limited to him
personally, but applies to all the high priests of his house. מעון is
not Eli's dwelling-place, but the dwelling-place of God, i.e., the
tabernacle, as in [Sa1 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#029), and is a
genitive dependent upon צר. היטיב, in the sense of benefiting a person,
doing him good, is construed with the accusative of the person, as in
[Deu 28:63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#063); [Deu
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#016); [Deu
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#005). The subject to the verb ייטיב is
Jehovah, and is not expressly mentioned, simply because it is so clearly
implied in the words themselves. This threat began to be fulfilled even
in Eli's own days. The distress or tribulation for the tabernacle began
with the capture of the ark by the Philistines ([Sa1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011)), and continued during the time
that the Lord was sending help and deliverance to His people through the
medium of Samuel, in their spiritual and physical oppression. The ark of
the covenant - the heart of the sanctuary - was not restored to the
tabernacle in the time of Samuel; and the tabernacle itself was removed
from Shiloh to Nob, probably in the time of war; and when Saul had had
all the priests put to death ([Sa1
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#002); [Sa1
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#011).), it was removed to Gibeon,
which necessarily caused it to fall more and more into neglect. Among
the different explanations, the rendering given by Aquila (καὶ ἐπιβλέψει
\[? ἐπιβλέψης\] ἀντίζηλον κατοικητηρίου) has met with the greatest
approval, and has been followed by Jerome (et videbis aemulum tuum),
Luther, and many others, including De Wette. According to this
rendering, the words are either supposed to refer to the attitude of
Samuel towards Eli, or to the deposition of Abiathar, and the
institution of Zadok by Solomon in his place ([Kg1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027)). But צר does not mean the
antagonist or rival, but simply the oppressor or enemy; and Samuel was
not an enemy of Eli any more than Zadok was of Abiathar. Moreover, if
this be adopted as the rendering of צר, it is impossible to find any
suitable meaning for the following clause. In the second half of the
verse the threat of [Sa1 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#031) is
repeated with still greater emphasis. כּל־היּמים, all the time, i.e., so
long as thine house shall exist.

[Sa1 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#033)

"And I will not cut off every one to thee from mine altar, that thine
eyes may languish, and thy soul consume away; and all the increase of
thine house shall die as men." The two leading clauses of this verse
correspond to the two principal thoughts of the previous verse, which
are hereby more precisely defined and explained. Eli was to see the
distress of the sanctuary; for to him, i.e., of his family, there would
always be some one serving at the altar of God, that he might look upon
the decay with his eyes, and pine away with grief in consequence. אישׁ
signifies every one, or any one, and is not to be restricted, as Thenius
supposes, to Ahitub, the son of Phinehas, the brother of Ichabod; for it
cannot be shown from [Sa1 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#003) and
[Sa1 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020), that he was the only one
that was left of the house of Eli. And secondly, there was to be no old
man, no one advanced in life, in his house; but all the increase of the
house was to die in the full bloom of manhood. אנשׁים, in contrast with
זקן, is used to denote men in the prime of life.

[Sa1 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#034)

"And let this be the sign to thee, what shall happen to (come upon) thy
two sons, Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall both die." For the
fulfilment of this, see [Sa1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011).
This occurrence, which Eli lived to see, but did not long survive ([Sa1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#017).), was to be the sign to him that
the predicted punishment would be carried out in its fullest extent.

[Sa1 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#035)

But the priesthood itself was not to fall with the fall of Eli's house
and priesthood; on the contrary the Lord would raise up for himself a
tried priest, who would act according to His heart. "And I will build
for him a lasting house, and he will walk before mine anointed for
ever."

[Sa1 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#036)

Whoever, on the other hand, should still remain of Eli's house, would
come "bowing before him (to get) a silver penny and a slice of bread,"
and would say, "Put me, I pray, in one of the priests' offices, that I
may get a piece of bread to eat." אגורה, that which is collected,
signifies some small coin, of which a collection was made by begging
single coins. Commentators are divided in their opinions as to the
historical allusions contained in this prophecy. By the "tried priest,"
Ephraem Syrus understood both the prophet Samuel and the priest Zadok.
"As for the facts themselves," he says, "it is evident that, when Eli
died, Samuel succeeded him in the government, and that Zadok received
the high-priesthood when it was taken from his family." Since his time,
most of the commentators, including Theodoret and the Rabbins, have
decided in favour of Zadok. Augustine, however, and in modern times
Thenius and O. v. Gerlach, give the preference to Samuel. The fathers
and earlier theologians also regarded Samuel and Zadok as the type of
Christ, and supposed the passage to contain a prediction of the
abrogation of the Aaronic priesthood by Jesus Christ.

(Note: Theodoret, qu. vii. in 1 Reg. Οὐκοῦν ἡ πρόῤῥησις κυρίως μὲν
ἁρμόττει τῷ σωτὴρι Χριστῷ. Κατὰ δὲ ἱστορίαν τῷ Σαδούκ, ὅς ἐκ τοῦ Ἐλεάζαρ
κατάγων τὸ γένος τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην διὰ τοῦ Σολομῶνος ἐδέξατο. Augustine
says (De civit. Dei xvii. 5, 2): "Although Samuel was not of a different
tribe from the one which had been appointed by the Lord to serve at the
altar, he was not of the sons of Aaron, whose descendants had been set
apart as priests; and thus the change is shadowed forth, which was
afterwards to be introduced through Jesus Christ." And again, 3: "What
follows ([Sa1 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#035)) refers to that
priest, whose figure was borne by Samuel when succeeding to Eli." So
again in the Berleburger Bible, to the words, "I will raise me up a
faithful priest," this note is added: "Zadok, of the family of Phinehas
and Eleazar, whom king Solomon, as the anointed of God, appointed high
priest by his ordinance, setting aside the house of Eli ([Kg1
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#035); [Ch1
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#022)). At the same time, just as in
the person of Solomon the Spirit of prophecy pointed to the true Solomon
and Anointed One, so in this priest did He also point to Jesus Christ
the great High Priest.")

This higher reference of the words is in any case to be retained; for
the rabbinical interpretation, by which Grotius, Clericus, and others
abide, - namely, that the transfer of the high-priesthood from the
descendants of Eli to Zadok, the descendant of Eleazar, is all that is
predicted, and that the prophecy was entirely fulfilled when Abiathar
was deposed by Solomon ([Kg1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027)), -
is not in accordance with the words of the text. On the other hand,
Theodoret and Augustine both clearly saw that the words of Jehovah, "I
revealed myself to thy father's house in Egypt," and, "Thy house shall
walk before me for ever," do not apply to Ithamar, but to Aaron. "Which
of his fathers," says Augustine, "was in that Egyptian bondage, form
which they were liberated when he was chosen to the priesthood,
excepting Aaron? It is with reference to his posterity, therefore, that
it is here affirmed that they would not be priests for ever; and this we
see already fulfilled." The only thing that appears untenable is the
manner in which the fathers combine this historical reference to Eli and
Samuel, or Zadok, with the Messianic interpretation, viz., either by
referring [Sa1 2:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#031) to Eli and his
house, and then regarding the sentence pronounced upon Eli as simply a
type of the Messianic fulfilment, or by admitting the Messianic allusion
simply as an allegory.

The true interpretation may be obtained from a correct insight into the
relation in which the prophecy itself stands to its fulfilment. Just as,
in the person of Eli and his sons, the threat announces deep degradation
and even destruction to all the priests of the house of Aaron who should
walk in the footsteps of the sons of Eli, and the death of the two sons
of Eli in one day was to be merely a sign that the threatened punishment
would be completely fulfilled upon the ungodly priests; so, on the other
hand, the promise of the raising up of the tried priest, for whom God
would build a lasting house, also refers to all the priests whom the
Lord would raise up as faithful servants of His altar, and only receives
its complete and final fulfilment in Christ, the true and eternal High
Priest. But if we endeavour to determine more precisely from the history
itself, which of the Old Testament priests are included, we must not
exclude either Samuel or Zadok, but must certainly affirm that the
prophecy was partially fulfilled in both. Samuel, as the prophet of the
Lord, was placed at the head of the nation after the death of Eli; so
that he not only stepped into Eli's place as judge, but stood forth as
priest before the Lord and the nation, and "had the important and sacred
duty to perform of going before the anointed, the king, whom Israel was
to receive through him; whereas for a long time the Aaronic priesthood
fell into such contempt, that, during the general decline of the worship
of God, it was obliged to go begging for honour and support, and became
dependent upon the new order of things that was introduced by Samuel"
(O. v. Gerlach). Moreover, Samuel acquired a strong house in the
numerous posterity that was given to him by God. The grandson of Samuel
was Heman, "the king's seer in the words of God," who was placed by
David over the choir at the house of God, and had fourteen sons and
three daughters ([Ch1 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#033); [Ch1
25:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#004)). But the very fact that these
descendants of Samuel did not follow their father in the priesthood,
shows very clearly that a lasting house was not built to Samuel as a
tried priest through them, and therefore that we have to seek for the
further historical fulfilment of this promise in the priesthood of
Zadok. As the word of the Lord concerning the house of Eli, even if it
did not find its only fulfilment in the deposition of Abiathar ([Kg1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027)), was at any rate partially
fulfilled in that deposition; so the promise concerning the tried priest
to be raised up received a new fulfilment in the fact that Zadok thereby
became the sole high priest, and transmitted the office to his
descendants, though this was neither its last nor its highest
fulfilment. This final fulfilment is hinted at in the vision of the new
temple, as seen by the prophet Ezekiel, in connection with which the
sons of Zadok are named as the priests, who, because they had not fallen
away with the children of Israel, were to draw near to the Lord, and
perform His service in the new organization of the kingdom of God as set
forth in that vision ([Eze 40:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#046); [Eze
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#019); [Eze
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015); [Eze
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#011)). This fulfilment is effected in
connection with Christ and His kingdom. Consequently, the anointed of
the Lord, before whom the tried priest would walk for ever, is not
Solomon, but rather David, and the Son of David, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 3](sa1003)

</div>
