<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1004)  [Next](sa1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 5:0</span></span>

Humiliation of the Philistines by Means of the Ark of the Covenant - 1
Samuel 5-7:1

Whilst the Israelites were mourning over the loss of the ark of God, the
Philistines were also to derive no pleasure from their booty, but rather
to learn that the God of Israel, who had given up to them His greatest
sanctuary to humble His own degenerate nation, was the only true God,
beside Whom there were no other gods. Not only was the principal deity
of the Philistines thrown down into the dust and dashed to pieces by the
glory of Jehovah; but the Philistines themselves were so smitten, that
their princes were compelled to send back the ark into the land of
Israel, together with a trespass-offering, to appease the wrath of God,
which pressed so heavily upon them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 5:1</span></span>

The Ark in the Land of the Philistines. - [Sa1
5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#001). The Philistines carried the ark
from Ebenezer, where they had captured it, into their capital, Ashdod
(Esdud; see at [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)), and placed
it there in the temple of Dagon, by the side of the idol Dagon,
evidently as a dedicatory offering to this god of theirs, by whose help
they imagined that they had obtained the victory over both the
Israelites and their God. With regard to the image of Dagon, compounded
of man and fish, i.e., of a human body, with head and hands, and a
fish's tail, see, in addition to [Jdg
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#023), Stark's Gaza, pp. 248ff.,
308ff., and Layard's Nineveh and its Remains, pp. 466-7, where there is
a bas-relief from Khorsabad, in which "a figure is seen swimming in the
sea, with the upper part of the body resembling a bearded man, wearing
the ordinary conical tiara of royalty, adorned with elephants' tusks,
and the lower part resembling the body of a fish. It has the hand lifted
up, as if in astonishment or fear, and is surrounded by fishes, crabs,
and other marine animals" (Stark, p. 308). As this bas-relief
represents, according to Layard, the war of an Assyrian king with the
inhabitants of the coast of Syria, most probably of Sargon, who had to
carry on a long conflict with the Philistian towns, more especially with
Ashdod, there can hardly be any doubt that we have a representation of
the Philistian Dagon here. This deity was a personification of the
generative and vivifying principle of nature, for which the fish with
its innumerable multiplication was specially adapted, and set forth the
idea of the giver of all earthly good.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 5:3</span></span>

The next morning the Ashdodites found Dagon lying on his face upon the
ground before the ark of Jehovah, and restored him to his place again,
evidently supposing that the idol had fallen or been thrown down by some
accident.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 5:4</span></span>

But they were obliged to give up this notion when they found the god
lying on his face upon the ground again the next morning in front of the
ark of Jehovah, and in fact broken to pieces, so that Dagon's head and
the two hollow hands of his arms lay severed upon the threshold, and
nothing was left but the trunk of the fish (דּגון). The word Dagon, in
this last clause, is used in an appellative sense, viz., the fishy part,
or fish's shape, from דּג, a fish. המּפתּן is no doubt the threshold of
the door of the recess in which the image was set up. We cannot infer
from this, however, as Thenius has done, that with the small dimensions
of the recesses in the ancient temples, if the image fell forward, the
pieces named might easily fall upon the threshold. This naturalistic
interpretation of the miracle is not only proved to be untenable by the
word כּרתות, since כּרוּת means cut off, and not broken off, but is also
precluded by the improbability, not to say impossibility, of the thing
itself. For if the image of Dagon, which was standing by the side of the
ark, was thrown down towards the ark, so as to lie upon its face in
front of it, the pieces that were broken off, viz., the head and hands,
could not have fallen sideways, so as to lie upon the threshold. Even
the first fall of the image of Dagon was a miracle. From the fact that
their god Dagon lay upon its face before the ark of Jehovah, i.e., lay
prostrate upon the earth, as though worshipping before the God of
Israel, the Philistines were to learn, that even their supreme deity had
been obliged to fall down before the majesty of Jehovah, the God of the
Israelites. But as they did not discern the meaning of this miraculous
sign, the second miracle was to show them the annihilation of their idol
through the God of Israel, in such a way as to preclude every thought of
accident. The disgrace attending the annihilation of their idol was
probably to be heightened by the fact, that the pieces of Dagon that
were smitten off were lying upon the threshold, inasmuch as what lay
upon the threshold was easily trodden upon by any one who entered the
house. This is intimated in the custom referred to in [Sa1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#005), that in consequence of this
occurrence, the priests of Dagon, and all who entered the temple of
Dagon at Ashdod, down to the time of the historian himself, would not
step upon the threshold of Dagon, i.e., the threshold where Dagon's head
and hands had lain, but stepped over the threshold (not "leaped over,"
as many commentators assume on the ground of [Zep
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005), which has nothing to do with the
matter), that they might not touch with their feet, and so defile, the
place where the pieces of their god had lain.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 5:6</span></span>

The visitation of God was not restricted to the demolition of the statue
of Dagon, but affected the people of Ashdod as well. "The hand of
Jehovah was heavy upon the Ashdodites, and laid them waste." השׁם, from
שׁמם, when applied to men, as in [Mic
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#013), signifies to make desolate not
only by diseases, but also by the withdrawal or diminution of the means
of subsistence, the devastation of the fields, and such like. That the
latter is included here, is evident from the dedicatory offerings with
which the Philistines sought to mitigate the wrath of the God of the
Israelites ([Sa1 6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#004), [Sa1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#011), [Sa1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018)), although the verse before us
simply mentions the diseases with which God visited them.

(Note: At the close of [Sa1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003) and
[Sa1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006) the Septuagint contains some
comprehensive additions; viz., at the close of [Sa1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003) : Καὶ ἐβαρύνθη χεὶρ Κυρίου ἐπι
τοὺς Ἀζωτίους καὶ ἐβασάνιζεν αὐτους, καὶ ἐπάταζεν αὐτους εἰς τάς ἕδρας
αὐτων, τὴν Ἄζωτον καὶ τὰ ὅρια αὐτῆς; and at the end of [Sa1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#004) : Καὶ μέσον τῆς χώρας αὐτῆς
ἀνεφυησαν μύες καὶ ἐγένετο σύγχυσις θανάτου μεγάλη ἐν τῇ πολει. This
last clause we also find in the Vulgate, expressed as follows: Et
eballiverunt villae et agri in medio regionis illius, et nati sunt
mures, et facta est confusio mortis magnae in civitate. Ewald's decision
with regard to these clauses (Gesch. ii. p. 541) is, that they are not
wanted at [Sa1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003), [Sa1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006), but that they are all the more
necessary at [Sa1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001); whereas at [Sa1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003), [Sa1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006), they would rather injure the
sense. Thenius admits that the clause appended to [Sa1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003) is nothing more than a second
translation of our sixth verse, which has been interpolated by a copyist
of the Greek in the wrong place; whereas that of [Sa1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006) contains the original though
somewhat corrupt text, according to which the Hebrew text should be
emended. But an impartial examination would show very clearly, that all
these additions are nothing more than paraphrases founded upon the
context. The last part of the addition to [Sa1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006) is taken verbatim from [Sa1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#011), whilst the first part is a
conjecture based upon [Sa1 6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#004).
Jerome, if indeed the addition in our text of the Vulgate really
originated with him, and was not transferred into his version from the
Itala, did not venture to suppress the clause interpolated in the
Alexandrian version. This is very evident from the words confusio mortis
magnae, which are a literal rendering of σύγχυσις θανάτου μεγάλη;
whereas in [Sa1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#011), Jerome has given
to מות מהוּמת, which the lxx rendered σύγχυσις θανάτου, the much more
accurate rendering pavor mortis. Moreover, neither the Syriac nor Targum
Jonath. has this clause; so that long before the time of Jerome, the
Hebrew text existed in the form in which the Masoretes have handed it
down to us.)

"And He smote them with עפלים, i.e., boils:" according to the Rabbins,
swellings on the anus, mariscae (see at [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027)). For עפלים the Masoretes have
invariably substituted טחרים, which is used in [Sa1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#011), [Sa1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#017), and was probably regarded as
more decorous. Ashdod is a more precise definition of the word them,
viz., Ashdod, i.e., the inhabitants of Ashdod and its territory.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 5:7</span></span>

"When the Ashdodites saw that it was so," they were unwilling to keep
the ark of the God of Israel any longer, because the hand of Jehovah lay
heavy upon them and their god Dagon; whereupon the princes of the
Philistines (סרני, as in [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003),
etc.) assembled together, and came to the resolution to "let the ark of
the God of Israel turn (i.e., be taken) to Gath" ([Sa1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#008)). The princes of the Philistines
probably imagined that the calamity which the Ashdodites attributed to
the ark of God, either did not proceed from the ark, i.e., from the God
of Israel, or if actually connected with the presence of the ark, simply
arose from the fact that the city itself was hateful to the God of the
Israelites, or that the Dagon of Ashdod was weaker than the Jehovah of
Israel: they therefore resolved to let the ark be taken to Gath in order
to pacify the Ashdodites. According to our account, the city of Gath
seems to have stood between Ashdod and Akron (see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 5:9</span></span>

But when the ark was brought to Gath, the hand of Jehovah came upon that
city also with very great alarm. גּדולה מהוּמה is subordinated to the
main sentence either adverbially or in the accusative. Jehovah smote the
people of the city, small and great, so that boils broke out upon their
hinder parts.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 5:10</span></span>

They therefore sent the ark of God to Ekron, i.e., Akir, the
north-western city of the Philistines (see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)). But the Ekronites, who had been
informed of what had taken place in Ashdod and Gath, cried out, when the
ark came into their city, "They have brought the ark of the God of
Israel to me, to slay me and my people" (these words are to be regarded
as spoken by the whole town); and they said to all the princes of the
Philistines whom they had called together, "Send away the ark of the God
of Israel, that it may return to its place, and not slay me and my
people. For deadly alarm (מות מהוּמת, confusion of death, i.e., alarm
produced by many sudden deaths) ruled in the whole city; very heavy was
the hand of God there. The people who did not die were smitten with
boils, and the cry of the city ascended to heaven." From this
description, which simply indicates briefly the particulars of the
plagues that God inflicted upon Ekron, we may see very clearly that
Ekron was visited even more severely than Ashdod and Gath. This was
naturally the case. The longer the Philistines resisted and refused to
recognise the chastening hand of the living God in the plagues inflicted
upon them, the more severely would they necessarily be punished, that
they might be brought at last to see that the God of Israel, whose
sanctuary they still wanted to keep as a trophy of their victory over
that nation, was the omnipotent God, who was able to destroy His foes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 6](sa1006)

</div>
