<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1030)  [Next](sa2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 31:0</span></span>

Death and Burial of Saul and His Sons - [Sa1
31:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001)

The end of the unhappy king corresponded to his life ever since the day
of his rejection as king. When he had lost the battle, and saw his three
sons fallen at his side, and the archers of the enemy pressing hard upon
him, without either repentance or remorse he put an end to his life by
suicide, to escape the disgrace of being wounded and abused by the foe
([Sa1 31:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001)). But he did not attain
his object; for the next day the enemy found his corpse and those of his
sons, and proceeded to plunder, mutilate, and abuse them ([Sa1
31:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008)). However, the king of Israel
was not to be left to perish in utter disgrace. The citizens of Jabesh
remembered the deliverance which Saul had brought to their city after
his election as king, and showed their gratitude by giving an honourable
burial to Saul and his sons ([Sa1
31:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011)). There is a parallel to this
chapter in [Ch1 10:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001), which agrees
exactly with the account before us, with very few deviations indeed, and
those mostly verbal, and merely introduces a hortatory clause at the end
([Ch1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#013), [Ch1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 31:1</span></span>

The account of the war between the Philistines and Israel, the
commencement of which has already been mentioned in [Sa1
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001), [Sa1
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#004)., and [Sa1
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#001), is resumed in [Sa1
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001) in a circumstantial clause; and
to this there is attached a description of the progress and result of
the battle, more especially with reference to Saul. Consequently, in
[Ch1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001), where there had been no
previous allusion to the war, the participle נלחמים is changed into the
perfect. The following is the way in which we should express the
circumstantial clause: "Now when the Philistines were fighting against
Israel, the men of Israel fled before the Philistines, and slain men
fell in the mountains of Gilboa" (vid., [Sa1
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#004)). The principal engagement took
place in the plain of Jezreel. But when the Israelites were obliged to
yield, they fled up the mountains of Gilboa, and were pursued and slain
there.

[Sa1 31:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#002)

The Philistines followed Saul, smote (i.e., put to death) his three sons
(see at [Sa1 14:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#049)), and fought
fiercely against Saul himself. When the archers (בּקּשׁת אנשׁים is an
explanatory apposition to המּורים) hit him, i.e., overtook him, he was
greatly alarmed at them (יחל, from חיל or חוּל),

(Note: The lxx have adopted the rendering καὶ ἐτραυμάτισαν εἰς τὰ
ὑποχόνδρια, they wounded him in the abdomen, whilst the Vulgate
rendering is vulneratus est vehementer a sagittariis. In [Ch1
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#003) the Sept. rendering is καὶ
ἐπόνεσεν ἀπὸ τῶν τόξων, and that of the Vulgate et vulneraverunt
jaculis. The translators have therefore derived יחל from חלל = חלה, and
then given a free rendering to the other words. But this rendering is
overthrown by the word מאד, very, vehemently, to say nothing of the fact
that the verb חלל or חלה cannot be proved to be ever used in the sense
of wounding. If Saul had been so severely wounded that he could not kill
himself, and therefore asked his armour-bearer to slay him, as Thenius
supposes, he would not have had the strength to pierce himself with his
sword when the armour-bearer refused. The further conjecture of Thenius,
that the Hebrew text should be read thus, in accordance with the lxx,
המּררים אל ויּחל, "he was wounded in the region of the gall," is opposed
by the circumstance that ὑποχόνδρια is not the gall or region of the
gall, but what is under the χόνδρος, or breast cartilage, viz., the
abdomen and bowels.)

and called upon his armour-bearer to pierce him with the sword, "lest
these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and play with me," i.e.,
cool their courage upon me by maltreating me. But as the armour-bearer
would not do this, because he was very much afraid, since he was
supposed to be answerable for the king's life, Saul inflicted death upon
himself with his sword; whereupon the armour-bearer also fell upon his
sword and died with his king, so that on that day Saul and this three
sons and his armour-bearer all died; also "all his men" (for which we
have "all his house" in the Chronicles), i.e., not all the warriors who
went out with him to battle, but all the king's servants, or all the
members of his house, sc., who had taken part in the battle. Neither
Abner nor his son Ishbosheth was included, for the latter was not in the
battle; and although the former was Saul's cousin and commander-in-chief
(see [Sa1 14:50-51](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#050)), he did not belong
to his house or servants.

[Sa1 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007)

When the men of Israel upon the sides that were opposite to the valley
(Jezreel) and the Jordan saw that the Israelites (the Israelitish troop)
fled, and Saul and his sons were dead, they took to flight out of the
cities, whereupon the Philistines took possession of them. עבר is used
here to signify the side opposite to the place of conflict in the valley
of Jezreel, which the writer assumed as his standpoint (cf. [Sa1
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#040)); so that העמק עבר is the
country to the west of the valley of Jezreel, and היּרדּן עבר the
country to the west of the Jordan, i.e., between Gilboa and the Jordan.
These districts, i.e., the whole of the country round about the valley
of Jezreel, the Philistines took possession of, so that the whole of the
northern part of the land of Israel, in other words the whole land with
the exception of Peraea and the tribe-land of Judah, came into their
hands when Saul was slain.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 31:8</span></span>

On the day following the battle, when the Philistines tripped the slain,
they found Saul and his three sons lying upon Gilboa; and having cut off
their heads and plundered their weapons, they went them (the heads and
weapons) as trophies into the land of the Philistines, i.e., round about
to the different towns and hamlets of their land, to announce the joyful
news in their idol-temples (the writer of the Chronicles mentions the
idols themselves) and to the people, and then deposited their weapons
(the weapons of Saul and his sons) in the Astarte-houses. But the
corpses they fastened to the town-wall of Beth-shean, i.e., Beisan, in
the valley of the Jordan (see at [Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011)). Beth-azabbim and
Beth-ashtaroth are composite words; the first part is indeclinable, and
the plural form is expressed by the second word: idol-houses and
Astarte-houses, like beth-aboth (father's-houses: see at [Exo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014)). On the Astartes, see at [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013). It is not expressly stated
indeed in [Sa1 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#009), [Sa1
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#010), that the Philistines plundered
the bodies of Saul's sons as well, and mutilated them by cutting off
their heads; but ראשׁו and כּליו, his (i.e., Saul's) head and his
weapons, alone are mentioned. At the same time, it is every evident from
[Sa1 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012), where the Jabeshites are
said to have taken down from the wall of Beth-shean not Saul's body
only, but the bodies of his sons also, that the Philistines had treated
the corpses of Saul's sons in just the same manner as that of Saul
himself. The writer speaks distinctly of the abuse of Saul's body only,
because it was his death that he had chiefly in mind at the time. To the
word וישׁלּחוּ we must supply in thought the object ראשׁו and כּליו from
the preceding clause. גּויּת and גּויּת ([Sa1
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#010) and [Sa1
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012)) are the corpses without the
heads. The fact that the Philistines nailed them to the town-wall of
Beth-shean presupposes the capture of that city, from which it is
evident that they had occupied the land as far as the Jordan. The
definite word Beth-ashtaroth is changed by the writer of the Chronicles
into Beth-elohim, temples of the gods; or rather he has interpreted it
in this manner without altering the sense, as the Astartes are merely
mentioned as the principal deities for the idols generally. The writer
of the Chronicles has also omitted to mention the nailing of the corpses
to the wall of Beth-shean, but he states instead that "they fastened his
skull in the temple of Dagon," a fact which is passed over in the
account before us. From this we may see how both writers have restricted
themselves to the principal points, or those which appeared to them of
the greatest importance (vid., Bertheau on [Ch1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#010)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 31:11</span></span>

When the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead heard this, all the brave men
of the town set out to Beth-shean, took down the bodies of Saul and his
sons from the wall, brought them to Jabesh, and burned them there. "But
their bones they buried under the tamarisk at Jabesh, and fasted seven
days," to mourn for the king their former deliverer (see [Sa1
11:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001)). These statements are given
in a very condensed form in the Chronicles ([Sa1
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011), [Sa1
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012)). Not only is the fact that
"they went the whole night" omitted, as being of no essential importance
to the general history; but the removal of the bodies from the town-wall
is also passed over, because their being fastened there had not been
mentioned, and also the burning of the bodies. The reason for the last
omission is not to be sought for in the fact that the author of the
Chronicles regarded burning as ignominious, according to [Lev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014); [Lev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009), but because he did not see how
to reconcile the burning of the bodies with the burial of the bones. It
was not the custom in Israel to burn the corpse, but to bury it in the
ground. The former was restricted to the worst criminals (see at [Lev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014)). Consequently the Chaldee
interpreted the word "burnt" as relating to the burning of spices, a
custom which we meet with afterwards as a special honour shown to
certain of the kings of Judah on the occasion of their burial ([Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014); [Ch2
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#019); [Jer
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005)). But this is expressed by שׂרפה
לו שׂרף, "to make a burning for him," whereas here it is stated
distinctly that "they burnt them." The reason for the burning of the
bodies in the case of Saul and his sons is to be sought for in the
peculiarity of the circumstances; viz., partly in the fact that the
bodies were mutilated by the removal of the heads, and therefore a
regular burial of the dead was impossible, and partly in their anxiety
lest, if the Philistines followed up their victory and came to Jabesh,
they should desecrate the bodies still further. But even this was not a
complete burning to ashes, but merely a burning of the skin and flesh;
so that the bones still remained, and they were buried in the ground
under a shady tree. Instead of "under the (well-known) tamarisk"
(eshel), we have האלה תּחת (under the strong tree) in [Ch1
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#011). David afterwards had them
fetched away and buried in Saul's family grave at Zela, in the land of
Benjamin ([Sa2 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#011).). The seven
days' fast kept by the Jabeshites was a sign of public and general
mourning on the part of the inhabitants of that town at the death of the
king, who had once rescued them from the most abominable slavery.

In this ignominious fate of Saul there was manifested the righteous
judgment of God in consequence of the hardening of his heart. But the
love which the citizens of Jabesh displayed in their treatment of the
corpses of Saul and his sons, had reference not to the king as rejected
by God, but to the king as anointed with the Spirit of Jehovah, and was
a practical condemnation, not of the divine judgment which had fallen
upon Saul, but of the cruelty of the enemies of Israel and its anointed.
For although Saul had waged war almost incessantly against the
Philistines, it is not known that in any one of his victories he had
ever been guilty of such cruelties towards the conquered and slaughtered
foe as could justify this barbarous revenge on the part of the
uncircumcised upon his lifeless corpse.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Introduction](sa2000)

</div>
