<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1006)  [Next](sa1008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 7:1</span></span>

The inhabitants of Kirjath-jearim complied with this request, and
brought the ark into the house of Abinadab upon the height, and
sanctified Abinadab's son Eleazar to be the keeper of the ark.
Kirjath-jearim, the present Kuryet el Enab (see at [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017)), was neither a priestly nor a
Levitical city. The reason why the ark was taken there, is to be sought
for, therefore, in the situation of the town, i.e., in the fact that
Kirjath-jearim was the nearest large town on the road from Bethshemesh
to Shiloh. We have no definite information, however, as to the reason
why it was not taken on to Shiloh, to be placed in the tabernacle, but
was allowed to remain in the house of Abinadab at Kirjath-jearim, where
a keeper was expressly appointed to take charge of it; so that we can
only confine ourselves to conjectures. Ewald's opinion (Gesch. ii. 540),
that the Philistines had conquered Shiloh after the victory described in
1 Samuel 4, and had destroyed the ancient sanctuary there, i.e., the
tabernacle, is at variance with the accounts given in [Sa1
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#006); [Kg1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#004); [Ch2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#003), respecting the continuance of
worship in the tabernacle at Nob and Gibeon. There is much more to be
said in support of the conjecture, that the carrying away of the ark by
the Philistines was regarded as a judgment upon the sanctuary, which had
been desecrated by the reckless conduct of the sons of Eli, and
consequently, that even when the ark itself was recovered, they would
not take it back without an express declaration of the will of God, but
were satisfied, as a temporary arrangement, to leave the ark in
Kirjath-jearim, which was farther removed from the cities of the
Philistines. And there it remained, because no declaration of the divine
will followed respecting its removal into the tabernacle, and the
tabernacle itself had to be removed from Shiloh to Nob, and eventually
to Gibeon, until David had effected the conquest of the citadel of Zion,
and chosen Jerusalem as his capital, when it was removed from
Kirjath-jearim to Jerusalem (2 Samuel 6). It is not stated that Abinadab
was a Levites; but this is very probable, because otherwise they would
hardly have consecrated his son to be the keeper of the ark, but would
have chosen a Levite for the office.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 7:2</span></span>

Purification of Israel from idolatry. - Twenty years passed away from
that time forward, while the ark remained at Kirjath-jearim, and all
Israel mourned after Jehovah. Then Samuel said to them, "If ye turn to
the Lord with all your heart, put away the strange gods from the midst
of you, and the Astartes, and direct your heart firmly upon the Lord,
and serve Him only, that He may save you out of the hand of the
Philistines." And the Israelites listened to this appeal. The single
clauses of [Sa1 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002) and [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003) are connected together by vav
consec., and are not to be separated from one another. There is no gap
between these verses; but they contain the same closely and logically
connected thought,

(Note: There is no force at all in the proofs which Thenius has adduced
of a gap between [Sa1 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002) and [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003). It by no means follows, that
because the Philistines had brought back the ark, their rule over the
Israelites had ceased, so as to make the words "he will deliver you,"
etc., incomprehensible. Moreover, the appearance of Samuel as judge does
not presuppose that his assumption of this office must necessarily have
been mentioned before. As a general rule, there was no such formal
assumption of the office, and this would be least of all the case with
Samuel, who had been recognised as an accredited prophet of Jehovah
([Sa1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019).). And lastly, the
reference to idols, and to their being put away in consequence of
Samuel's appeal, is intelligible enough, without any express account of
their falling into idolatry, if we bear in mind, on the one hand, the
constant inclination of the people to serve other gods, and if we
observe, on the other hand, that Samuel called upon the people to turn
to the Lord with all their heart and serve Him alone, which not only
does not preclude, but actually implies, the outward continuance of the
worship of Jehovah.)

which may be arranged in one period in the following manner: "And it
came to pass, when the days multiplied from the time that the ark
remained at Kirjath-jearim, and grew to twenty years, and the whole
house of Israel mourned after Jehovah, that Samuel said," etc. The verbs
ויּרבּוּ, ויּהיוּ, and ויּנּהוּ, are merely continuations of the
infinitive שׁבת, and the main sentence is resumed in the words שׁמוּאל
ויּאמר. The contents of the verses require that the clauses should be
combined in this manner. The statement that twenty years had passed can
only be understood on the supposition that some kind of turning-point
ensued at the close of that time. The complaining of the people after
Jehovah was no such turning-point, but became one simply from the fact
that this complaining was followed by some result. This result is
described in [Sa1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003). It consisted in
the fact that Samuel exhorted the people to put away the strange gods
([Sa1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003)); and that when the people
listened to his exhortation ([Sa1
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004)), he helped them to gain a victory
over the Philistines ([Sa1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005).).
ינּהוּ, from נהה, to lament or complain ([Mic
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004); [Eze
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#018)). "The phrase, to lament after
God, is taken from human affairs, when one person follows another with
earnest solicitations and complaints, until he at length assents. We
have an example of this in the Syrophenician woman in Matt 15." (Seb.
Schmidt). The meaning "to assemble together," which is the one adopted
by Gesenius, is forced upon the word from the Chaldee אתנהי, and it
cannot be shown that the word was ever used in this sense in Hebrew.
Samuel's appeal in [Sa1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003) recalls to
mind [Jos 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014), and [Gen
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002); but the words, "If ye do return
unto the Lord with all your hearts," assume that the turning of the
people to the Lord their God had already inwardly commenced, and indeed,
as the participle שׁבים expresses duration, had commenced as a permanent
thing, and simply demand that the inward turning of the heart to God
should be manifested outwardly as well, by the putting away of all their
idols, and should thus be carried out to completion. The "strange gods"
(see [Gen 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002)) are described in [Sa1
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004) as "Baalim." On Baalim and
Ashtaroth, see at [Jdg 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011), [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013). לב הכין, to direct the heart
firmly: see [Psa 78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008); [Ch2
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#019).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 7:5</span></span>

Victory obtained over the Philistines through Samuel's prayer. - [Sa1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005), [Sa1
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006). When Israel had turned to the
Lord with all its heart, and had put away all its idols, Samuel gathered
together all the people at Mizpeh, to prepare them for fighting against
the Philistines by a solemn day for penitence and prayer. For it is very
evident that the object of calling all the people to Mizpeh was that the
religious act performed there might serve as a consecration for battle,
not only from the circumstance that, according to [Sa1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007), when the Philistines heard of the
meeting, they drew near to make war upon Israel, but also from the
contents of [Sa1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005) : "Samuel said
(sc., to the heads or representatives of the nation), Gather all Israel
to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the Lord." His intention could
not possibly have been any other than to put the people into the right
relation to their God, and thus to prepare the way for their deliverance
out of the bondage of the Philistines. Samuel appointed Mizpeh, i.e.,
Nebi Samwil, on the western boundary of the tribe of Benjamin (see at
[Jos 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026)), as the place of meeting,
partly no doubt on historical grounds, viz., because it was there that
the tribes had formerly held their consultations respecting the
wickedness of the inhabitants of Gibeah, and had resolved to make war
upon Benjamin ([Jdg 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001).), but still
more no doubt, because Mizpeh, on the western border of the mountains,
was the most suitable place for commencing the conflict with the
Philistines.

[Sa1 7:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006)

When they had assembled together here, "they drew water and poured it
out before Jehovah, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have
sinned against the Lord." Drawing water and pouring it out before
Jehovah was a symbolical act, which has been thus correctly explained by
the Chaldee, on the whole: "They poured out their heart like water in
penitence before the Lord." This is evident from the figurative
expressions, "poured out like water," in [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015), and "pour out thy heart like
water," in [Lam 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019), which are used
to denote inward dissolution through pain, misery, and distress (see
[Sa2 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014)). Hence the pouring out of
water before God was a symbolical representation of the temporal and
spiritual distress in which they were at the time, - a practical
confession before God, "Behold, we are before Thee like water that has
been poured out;" and as it was their own sin and rebellion against God
that had brought this distress upon them, it was at the same time a
confession of their misery, and an act of the deepest humiliation before
the Lord. They gave a still further practical expression to this
humiliation by fasting (צוּם), as a sign of their inward distress of
mind on account of their sin, and an oral confession of their sin
against the Lord. By the word שׁם, which is added to ויּאמרוּ, "they
said "there," i.e., at Mizpeh, the oral confession of their sin is
formally separated from the two symbolical acts of humiliation before
God, though by this very separation it is practically placed on a par
with them. What they did symbolically by the pouring out of water and
fasting, they explained and confirmed by their verbal confession. שׁם is
never an adverb of time signifying "then;" neither in [Psa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005); [Psa
132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017), nor [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011). "And thus Samuel judged the
children of Israel at Mizpeh." ויּשׁפּט does not mean "he became judge"
(Mich. and others), any more than "he punished every one according to
his iniquity" (Thenius, after David Kimchi). Judging the people neither
consisted in a censure pronounced by Samuel afterwards, nor in
absolution granted to the penitent after they had made a confession of
their sin, but in the fact that Samuel summoned the nation to Mizpeh to
humble itself before Jehovah, and there secured for it, through his
intercession, the forgiveness of its sin, and a renewal of the favour of
its God, and thus restored the proper relation between Israel and its
God, so that the Lord could proceed to vindicate His people's rights
against their foes.

When the Philistines heard of the gathering of the Israelites at Mizpeh
([Sa1 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007), [Sa1
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#008)), their princes went up against
Israel to make war upon it; and the Israelites, in their fear of the
Philistines, entreated Samuel, "Do not cease to cry for us to the Lord
our God, that He may save us out of the hand of the Philistines." [Sa1
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009). "And Samuel took a milk-lamb (a
lamb that was still sucking, probably, according to [Lev
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027), a lamb seven days old), and
offered it whole as a burnt-offering to the Lord." כּליל is used
adverbially, according to its original meaning as an adverb, "whole."
The Chaldee has not given the word at all, probably because the
translators regarded it as pleonastic, since every burnt-offering was
consumed upon the altar whole, and consequently the word כּליל was
sometimes used in a substantive sense, as synonymous with עולה ([Deu
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010); Ps. 51:21). But in the passage
before us, כּליל is not synonymous with עולה, but simply affirms that
the lamb was offered upon the altar without being cut up or divided.
Samuel selected a young lamb for the burnt-offering, not "as being the
purest and most innocent kind of sacrificial animal," - for it cannot
possibly be shown that very young animals were regarded as purer than
those that were full-grown, - but as being the most suitable to
represent the nation that had wakened up to new life through its
conversion to the Lord, and was, as it were, new-born. For the
burnt-offering represented the man, who consecrated therein his life and
labour to the Lord. The sacrifice was the substratum for prayer. When
Samuel offered it, he cried to the Lord for the children of Israel; and
the Lord "answered," i.e., granted, his prayer.

[Sa1 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010)

When the Philistines advanced during the offering of the sacrifice to
fight against Israel, "Jehovah thundered with a great noise," i.e., with
loud peals, against the Philistines, and threw them into confusion, so
that they were smitten before Israel. The thunder, which alarmed the
Philistines and threw them into confusion (יהמּם, as in [Jos
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010)), was the answer of God to
Samuel's crying to the Lord.

[Sa1 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#011)

As soon as they took to flight, the Israelites advanced from Mizpeh, and
pursued and smote them to below Beth-car. The situation of this town or
locality, which is only mentioned here, has not yet been discovered.
Josephus (Ant. vi. 2, 2) has μέχρι Κοῤῥαίων.

[Sa1 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#012)

As a memorial of this victory, Samuel placed a stone between Mizpeh and
Shen, to which he gave the name of Eben-ha-ezer, i.e., stone of help, as
a standing memorial that the Lord had thus far helped His people. The
situation of Shen is also not known. The name Shen (i.e., tooth) seems
to indicate a projecting point of rock (see [Sa1
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#004)), but may also signify a place
situated upon such a point.

[Sa1 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#013)

Through this victory which was obtained by the miraculous help of God,
the Philistines were so humbled, that they no more invaded the territory
of Israel, i.e., with lasting success, as they had done before. This
limitation of the words "they came no more" (lit. "they did not add
again to come into the border of Israel"), is implied in the context;
for the words which immediately follow, "and the hand of Jehovah was
against the Philistines all the days of Samuel," show that they made
attempts to recover their lost supremacy, but that so long as Samuel
lived they were unable to effect anything against Israel. This is also
manifest from the successful battles fought by Saul (1 Samuel 13 and
14), when the Philistines had made fresh attempts to subjugate Israel
during his reign. The defeats inflicted upon them by Saul also belong to
the days of Samuel, who died but a very few years before Saul himself.
Because of these battles which Saul fought with the Philistines, Lyra
and Brentius understand the expression "all the days of Samuel" as
referring not to the lifetime of Samuel, but simply to the duration of
his official life as judge, viz., till the commencement of Saul's reign.
But this is at variance with [Sa1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015), where Samuel is said to have
judged Israel all the days of his life. Seb. Schmidt has given, on the
whole, the correct explanation of [Sa1
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#013) : "They came no more so as to
obtain a victory and subdue the Israelites as before; yet they did
return, so that the hand of the Lord was against them, i.e., so that
they were repulsed with great slaughter, although they were not actually
expelled, or the Israelites delivered from tribute and the presence of
military garrisons, and that all the days that the judicial life of
Samuel lasted, in fact all his life, since they were also smitten by
Saul."

[Sa1 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#014)

In consequence of the defeat at Ebenezer, the Philistines were obliged
to restore to the Israelites the cities which they had taken from them,
"from Ekron to Gath." This definition of the limits is probably to be
understood as exclusive, i.e., as signifying that the Israelites
received back their cities up to the very borders of the Philistines,
measuring these borders from Ekron to Gath, and not that the Israelites
received Ekron and Gath also. For although these chief cities of the
Philistines had been allotted to the tribes of Judah and Dan in the time
of Joshua ([Jos 13:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003); [Jos
15:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#045)), yet, notwithstanding the
fact that Judah and Simeon conquered Ekron, together with Gaza and
Askelon, after the death of Joshua ([Jdg
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018)), the Israelites did not obtain
any permanent possession. "And their territory" (coasts), i.e., the
territory of the towns that were given back to Israel, not that of Ekron
and Gath, "did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And
there was peace between Israel and the Amorites;" i.e., the Canaanitish
tribes also kept peace with Israel after this victory of the Israelites
over the Philistines, and during the time of Samuel. The Amorites are
mentioned, as in [Jos 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#006), as being
the most powerful of the Canaanitish tribes, who had forced the Danites
out of the plain into the mountains ([Jdg
1:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#034)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 7:15</span></span>

Samuel's judicial labours. - With the calling of the people to Mizpeh,
and the victory at Ebenezer that had been obtained through his prayer,
Samuel had assumed the government of the whole nation; so that his
office as judge dates from his period, although he had laboured as
prophet among the people from the death of Eli, and had thereby prepared
the way for the conversion of Israel to the Lord. As his prophetic
labours were described in general terms in [Sa1
3:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019), so are his labours as judge
in the verses before us: viz., in [Sa1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#015) their duration, - "all the days
of his life," as his activity during Saul's reign and the anointing of
David (1 Samuel 15-16) sufficiently prove; and then in [Sa1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#016), [Sa1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#017) their general character, - "he
went round from year to year" (וסבב serves as a more precise definition
of והלך, he went and travelled round) to Bethel, i.e., Beitin (see at
[Jos 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002)), Gilgal, and Mizpeh (see at.
[Sa1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#005)), and judged Israel at all
these places. Which Gilgal is meant, whether the one situated in the
valley of the Jordan ([Jos 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019)), or
the Jiljilia on the higher ground to the south-west of Shiloh (see at
[Jos 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#035)), cannot be determined with
perfect certainty. The latter is favoured partly by the order in which
the three places visited by Samuel on his circuits occur, since
according to this he probably went first of all from Ramah to Bethel,
which was to the north-east, then farther north or north-west to
Jiljilia, and then turning back went towards the south-east to Mizpeh,
and returning thence to Ramah performed a complete circuit; whereas, if
the Gilgal in the valley of the Jordan had been the place referred to,
we should expect him to go there first of all from Ramah, and then
towards the north-east to Bethel, and from that to the south-west to
Mizpeh; and partly also by the circumstance that, according to [Kg2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001) and [Kg2
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038), there was a school of the
prophets at Jiljilia in the time of Elijah and Elisha, the founding of
which probably dated as far back as the days of Samuel. If this
conjecture were really a well-founded one, it would furnish a strong
proof that it was in this place, and not in the Gilgal in the valley of
the Jordan, that Samuel judged the people. But as this conjecture cannot
be raised into a certainty, the evidence in favour of Jiljilia is not so
conclusive as I myself formerly supposed (see also the remarks on [Sa1
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#014)). כּל־המּקומות את is
grammatically considered an accusative, and is in apposition to
את־ישׂראל, lit., Israel, viz., all the places named, i.e., Israel which
inhabited all these places, and was to be found there. "And this return
was to Ramah;" i.e., after finishing the annual circuit he returned to
Ramah, where he had his house. There he judged Israel, and also built an
altar to conduct the religious affairs of the nation. Up to the death of
Eli, Samuel lived and laboured at Shiloh ([Sa1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#021)). But when the ark was carried
away by the Philistines, and consequently the tabernacle at Shiloh lost
what was most essential to it as a sanctuary, and ceased at once to be
the scene of the gracious presence of God, Samuel went to his native
town Ramah, and there built an altar as the place of sacrifice for
Jehovah, who had manifested himself to him. The building of the altar at
Ramah would naturally be suggested to the prophet by these extraordinary
circumstances, even if it had not been expressly commanded by Jehovah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 8](sa1008)

</div>
