<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1029)  [Next](sa1031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 30:1</span></span>

During David's absence the Amalekites had invaded the south country,
smitten Ziklag and burnt it down, and carried off the women and children
whom they found there; whereat not only were David and his men plunged
into great grief on their return upon the third day but David especially
was involved in very great trouble, inasmuch as the people wanted to
stone him. But he strengthened himself in the Lord his God ([Sa1
30:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)).

[Sa1 30:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)

[Sa1 30:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001) form one period, which is
expanded by the introduction of several circumstantial clauses. The
apodosis to "It came to pass, when," etc. ([Sa1
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)), does not follow till [Sa1
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#004), "Then David and the people,"
etc. But this is formally attached to [Sa1
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#003), "so David and his men came,"
with which the protasis commenced in [Sa1
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001) is resumed in an altered form.
"It came to pass, when David and his men came to Ziklag ... the
Amalekites had invaded ... and had carried off the wives ... and had
gone their way, and David and his men came into the town (for 'when
David and his men came,' etc.), and behold it was burned ... . Then
David and the people with him lifted up their voice." "On the third
day:" after David's dismission by Achish, not after David's departure
from Ziklag. David had at any rate gone with Achish beyond Gath, and had
not been sent back till the whole of the princes of the Philistines had
united their armies ([Sa1 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#002).), so
that he must have been absent from Ziklag more than two days, or two
days and a half. This is placed beyond all doubt by [Sa1
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#011)., since the Amalekites are there
described as having gone off with their booty three days before David
followed them, and therefore they had taken Ziklag and burned it three
days before David's return. These foes had therefore taken advantage of
the absence of David and his warriors, to avenge themselves for David's
invasions and plunderings ([Sa1 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008)).
Of those who were carried off, "the women" alone expressly mentioned in
[Sa1 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#002), although the female
population and all the children had been removed, as we may see from the
expression "small and great" ([Sa1
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#003), [Sa1
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#006)). The lxx were therefore correct,
so far as the sense is concerned, in introducing the words καὶ πάντα
before בּהּ עשׁר. "They had killed no one, but (only) carried away."
נהג, to carry away captive, as in [Isa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#004). Among those who had been carried
off were David's two wives, Ahinoam and Abigail (vid., [Sa1
25:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#042); [Sa1
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#003)).

[Sa1 30:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#006)

David was greatly distressed in consequence; "for the people thought
('said,' sc., in their hearts) to stone him," because they sought the
occasion of their calamity in his connection with Achish, with which
many of his adherents may very probably have been dissatisfied. "For the
soul of the whole people was embittered (i.e., all the people were
embittered in their souls) because of their sons and daughters," who had
been carried away into slavery. "But David strengthened himself in the
Lord his God," i.e., sought consolation and strength in prayer and
believing confidence in the Lord ([Sa1
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#007).). This strength he manifested in
the resolution to follow the foes and rescue their booty from them. To
this end he had the ephod brought by the high priest Abiathar (cf. [Sa1
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009)), and inquired by means of the
Urim of the Lord, "Shall I pursue this troop? Shall I overtake it?"
These questions were answered in the affirmative; and the promise was
added, "and thou wilt rescue." So David pursued the enemy with his six
hundred men as far as the brook Besor, where the rest, i.e., two
hundred, remained standing (stayed behind). The words עמדוּ והנּותרים,
which are appended in the form of a circumstantial clause, are to be
connected, so far as the facts are concerned, with what follows: whilst
the others remained behind, David pursued the enemy still farther with
four hundred men. By the word הנּותרים the historian has somewhat
anticipated the matter, and therefore regards it as necessary to define
the expression still further in [Sa1
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#010). We are precluded from changing
the text, as Thenius suggests, by the circumstance that all the early
translators read it in this manner, and have endeavoured to make the
expression intelligible by paraphrasing it. These two hundred men were
too tired to cross the brook and go any farther. (פּגר, which only
occurs here and in [Sa1 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#021),
signifies, in Syriac, to be weary or exhausted.) As Ziklag was burnt
down, of course they found no provisions there, and were consequently
obliged to set out in pursuit of the foe without being able to provide
themselves with the necessary supplies. The brook Besor is supposed to
be the Wady Sheriah, which enters the sea below Ashkelon (see v. Raumer,
Pal. p. 52).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 30:11</span></span>

On their further march they found an Egyptian lying exhausted upon the
field; and having brought him to David, they gave him food and drink,
namely "a slice of fig-cake (cf. [Sa1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018)), and raisin-cakes to eat;
whereupon his spirit of life returned (i.e., he came to himself again),
as he had neither eaten bread nor drunk water for three days."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 30:13</span></span>

When David asked him whence he had come (to whom, i.e., to what people
or tribe, dost thou belong?), the young man said that he was an
Egyptian, and servant of an Amalekite, and that he had been left behind
by his master when he fell sick three days before ("to-day three," sc.,
days): he also said, "We invaded the south of the Crethites, and what
belongs to Judah, and the south of Caleb, and burned Ziklag with fire."
הכּרתי, identical with כּרתים ([Eze
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016); [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005)), denotes those tribes of the
Philistines who dwelt in the south-west of Canaan, and is used by
Ezekiel and Zephaniah as synonymous with Philistim. The origin of the
name is involved in obscurity, as the explanation which prevailed for a
time, viz., that it was derived from Creta, is without sufficient
foundation (vid., Stark, Gaza, pp. 66 and 99ff.). The Negeb "belonging
to Judah" is the eastern portion of the Negeb. One part of it belonged
to the family of Caleb, and was called Caleb's Negeb (vid., [Sa1
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#003)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 30:15</span></span>

This Egyptian then conducted David, at his request, when he had sworn
that he would neither kill him nor deliver him up to his master, down to
the hostile troops, who were spread over the whole land, eating,
drinking, and making merry, on account of all the great booty which they
had brought out of the land of the Philistines and Judah.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 30:17</span></span>

David surprised them in the midst of their security, and smote them from
the evening twilight till the evening of the next day, so that no one
escaped, with the exception of four hundred young men, who fled upon
camels. Nesheph signifies the evening twilight here, not the dawn, - a
meaning which is not even sustained by [Job
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004). The form מחרתם appears to be an
adverbial formation, like יומם.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 30:18</span></span>

Through this victory David rescued all that the Amalekites had taken,
his two wives, and all the children great and small; also the booty that
they had taken with them, so that nothing was missing.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 30:20</span></span>

[Sa1 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#020) is obscure: "And David took
all the sheep and the oxen: they drove them before those cattle, and
said, This is David's booty." In order to obtain any meaning whatever
from this literal rendering of the words, we must understand by the
sheep and oxen those which belonged to the Amalekites, and the flocks
taken from them as booty; and by "those cattle," the cattle belonging to
David and his men, which the Amalekites had driven away, and the
Israelites had now recovered from them: so that David had the sheep and
oxen which he had taken from the Amalekites as booty driven in front of
the rest of the cattle which the Israelites had recovered; whereupon the
drovers exclaimed, "This (the sheep and oxen) is David's booty." It is
true that there is nothing said in what goes before about any booty that
David had taken from the Amalekites, in addition to what they had taken
from the Israelites; but the fact that David had really taken such booty
is perfectly obvious from [Sa1
30:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#026), where he is said to have
sent portions of the booty of the enemies of Jehovah to different places
in the land. If this explanation be not accepted, there is no other
course open than to follow the Vulgate, alter לפני into לפניו, and
render the middle clause thus: "they drove those cattle (viz., the sheep
and oxen already mentioned) before him," as Luther has done. But even in
that case we could hardly understand anything else by the sheep and oxen
than the cattle belonging to the Amalekites, and taken from them as
booty.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 30:21</span></span>

When David came back to the two hundred men whom he had left by the
brook Besor (יושׁיבם, they made them sit, remain), they went to meet him
and his warriors, and were heartily greeted by David.

[Sa1 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#022)

Then all kinds of evil and worthless men of those who had gone with
David to the battle replied: "Because they have not gone with us (lit.
with me, the person speaking), we will not give them any of the booty
that we have seized, except to every one his wife and his children: they
may lead them away, and go."

[Sa1 30:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#023)

David opposed this selfish and envious proposal, saying, "Do not so, my
brethren, with that (את, the sign of the accusative, not the
preposition; see Ewald, 329, a.: lit. with regard to that) which Jehovah
hath done to us, and He hath guarded us (since He hath guarded us), and
given this troop which came upon us into our hand. And who will hearken
to you in this matter? But (כּי, according to the negation involved in
the question) as the portion of him that went into the battle, so be the
portion of him that stayed by the things; they shall share together."
הורד is a copyist's error for היּרד.

[Sa1 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#025)

So was it from that day and forward; and he (David) made it (this
regulation as to the booty) "the law and right for Israel unto this
day."

[Sa1 30:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#026)

When David returned to Ziklag, he sent portions of the booty to the
elders of Judah, to his friends, with this message: "Behold, here ye
have a blessing of the booty of the enemies of Jehovah" (which we took
from the enemies of Jehovah); and this he did, according to [Sa1
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#031), to all the places in which he
had wandered with his men, i.e., where he had wandered about during his
flight from Saul, and in which he had no doubt received assistance.
Sending these gifts could not fail to make the elders of these cities
well disposed towards him, and so to facilitate his recognition as king
after the death of Saul, which occurred immediately afterwards. Some of
these places may have been plundered by the Amalekites, since they had
invaded the Negeb of Judah ([Sa1
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014)). The cities referred to were
Bethel, - not the Bethel so often mentioned, the present Beitin, in the
tribe of Benjamin, but Betheul ([Ch1
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#030)) or Bethul, in the tribe of
Simeon ([Jos 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#004)), which Knobel
supposes to be Elusa or el Khalasa (see at [Jos
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#030)). The reading Βαιθσούρ in the
lxx is a worthless conjecture. Ramah of the south, which was allotted to
the tribe of Simeon, has not yet been discovered (see at [Jos
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#008)). Jattir has been preserved in
the ruins of Attir, on the southern portion of the Mountains of Judah
(see at [Jos 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)). Aror is still to
be seen in ruins, viz., in the foundations of walls built in enormous
stones in Wady Arara, where there are many cavities for holding water,
about three hours E.S.E. of Bersaba, and twenty miles to the south of
Hebron (vid., Rob. Pal. ii. p. 620, and v. de Velde, Mem. p. 288).
Siphmoth (or Shiphmoth, according to several MSS) is altogether unknown.
It may probably be referred to again in [Ch1
27:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#027), where Zabdi is called the
Shiphmite; but it is certainly not to be identified with Sepham, on the
north-east of the sea of Galilee ([Num
34:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#010)), as Thenius supposes.
Eshtemoa has been preserved in the village of Semua, with ancient ruins,
on the south-western portion of the mountains of Judah (see at [Jos
15:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#050)). Racal is never mentioned
again, and is entirely unknown. The lxx have five different names
instead of this, the last being Carmel, into which Thenius proposes to
alter Racal. But this can hardly be done with propriety, as the lxx also
introduced the Philistian Gath, which certainly does not belong here;
whilst in [Sa1 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#030) they have totally
different names, some of which are decidedly wrong. The cities of the
Jerahmeelites and Kenites were situated in the Negeb of Judah ([Sa1
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#010)), but their names cannot be
traced.

[Sa1 30:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#030)

Hormah in the Negeb ([Jos 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#030)) is
Zephath, the present Zepta, on the western slope of the Rakhma plateau
(see at [Jos 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#014)). Cor-ashan,
probably the same place as Ashan in the shephelah, upon the border of
the Negeb, has not yet been discovered (see at [Jos
15:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#042)). Athach is only mentioned here,
and quite unknown. According to Thenius, it is probably a mistaken
spelling for Ether in the tribe of Simeon ([Jos
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#007); [Jos
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#043)). Hebron, the present el Khulil,
Abraham's city (see at [Jos 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003); [Gen
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 31](sa1031)

</div>
