<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2014)  [Next](sa2016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 15:0</span></span>

Absalom's Rebellion and David's Flight - 2 Samuel 15-16:14

After this restoration to favour, Absalom soon began to aspire to the
throne, setting up a princely court, and endeavouring to turn the hearts
of the people towards himself, by addressing in a friendly manner any
who came to seek redress from the king in matters in dispute, and by
saying things adapted to throw suspicion upon his father's rule ([Sa2
15:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001)). When he had succeeded in
this, he asked permission from the king to take a journey to Hebron,
under the pretence of wanting to fulfil a vow which he had made during
his banishment; and when once there, he soon proceeded with his
rebellious intentions ([Sa2 15:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#007)).
As soon as David heard of it, he determined to fly from Jerusalem, and
crossed the Kidron with his faithful adherents. Having sent the priests
with the ark of the covenant back to the city, he went up to the Mount
of Olives, amidst the loud lamentations of the people. Hushai, who came
to meet him, he sent to the city, to frustrate the counsel of
Ahithophel, who was one of the conspirators, and to send information to
him of what was going forward (vv. 13-37). When he reached the top,
Ziba, Mephibosheth's servant, came to meet him with provisions and
succour ([Sa2 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)) whilst Shimei, a
relation of the house of Saul, followed him with curses and stones ([Sa2
16:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)).

With this rebellion the calamities which Nathan had predicted to David
on account of his sin with Bathsheba began to burst upon him in all
their fulness. The success of the rebellion itself may be accounted for,
from the fact that the consciousness of his own fault not only made
David weak towards his sons, but produced a want of firmness in his
resolutions; whilst the imperfections and defects in the internal
administration of the kingdom, when the time of the brilliant victories
was past, became more and more perceptible to the people, and furnished
occasion for dissatisfaction with his government, which Absalom was
skilful enough to bend to his own purposes. During the time that this
rebellion was in progress, David poured out his lamentations to the Lord
(in [Psa 41:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001) and 55) as to the
faithlessness of his most confidential councillors, and prayed for the
judgment of retribution upon the conduct of this wicked band. After it
had broken out, he uttered his longings to return to the sanctuary at
Jerusalem, and his firm confidence that he should be delivered out of
his distresses and reinstated in his kingdom, first of all in [Psa
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001) and [Psa
63:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001) during his flight in the
desert of Judah, and in [Psa 61:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001)
and [Psa 62:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001) during his stay in
the land to the east of the Jordan.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 15:1</span></span>

[Sa2 15:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001)

Absalom seeks to secure the people's favour. - [Sa2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001). Soon afterwards (this seems to
be the meaning of כּן מאחרי as distinguished from כּן אהרי; cf. [Sa2
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#028)) Absalom set up a carriage (i.e.,
a state-carriage; cf. [Sa1 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011)) and
horses, and fifty men as runners before him, i.e., to run before him
when he drove out, and attract the attention of the people by a display
of princely pomp, as Adonijah afterwards did ([Kg1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005)). He then went early in the
morning to the side of the road to the gate of the palace, and called
out to every one who was about to go to the king "for judgment," i.e.,
seek justice in connection with any matter in dispute, and asked him,
"Of what city art thou?" and also, as we may see from the reply in [Sa2
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#003), inquired into his feelings
towards the king, and then said, "Thy matters are good and right, but
there is no hearer for thee with the king." שׁמע signifies the judicial
officer, who heard complainants and examined into their different
causes, for the purpose of laying them before the king for settlement.
Of course the king himself could not give a hearing to every
complainant, and make a personal investigation of his cause; nor could
his judges procure justice for every complainant, however justly they
might act, though it is possible that they may not always have performed
their duty conscientiously.

[Sa2 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#004)

Absalom also said, "Oh that I might be judge in the land, and every one
who had a cause might come before me; I would procure him justice!"
ישׂמני מי is a wish: "who might (i.e., oh that one might) appoint me
judge," an analogous expression to יתּן ot מי (vid., Gesenius, 136, 1,
and Ewald, 329, c.). עלי placed before יבא for the sake of emphasis, may
be explained from the fact that a judge sat, so that the person who
stood before him rose above him (comp. [Exo
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013) with [Gen
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#008)). הצדּיק, to speak justly, or
help to justice.

[Sa2 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#005)

And when any one came near to him to prostrate himself before him, he
took him by the hand and kissed him. It was by conduct of this kind that
Agamemnon is said to have secured the command of the Grecian army
(Euripid. Iphig. Aul. v. 337ff.).

[Sa2 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#006)

Thus Absalom stole the heart of the men of Israel. גּנּב לב does not
mean to deceive or cheat, like לב גּנּב in the Kal in [Gen
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#020), but to steal the heart, i.e.,
to bring a person over to his side secretly and by stratagem.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 15:7</span></span>

Absalom's rebellion. - [Sa2 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#007), [Sa2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#008). After the lapse of forty (?)
years Absalom said to the king, "Pray I will go (i.e., pray allow me to
go) and perform a vow in Hebron which I vowed to the Lord during my stay
at Geshur" ([Sa2 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#008)). The number
forty is altogether unsuitable, as it cannot possibly be understood
either as relating to the age of Absalom or to the year of David's
reign: for Absalom was born at Hebron after David had begun to reign,
and David only reigned forty years and a half in all, and Absalom's
rebellion certainly did not take place in the last few weeks of his
reign. It is quite as inappropriate to assume, as the terminus a quo of
the forty years, either the commencement of Saul's reign, as several of
the Rabbins have done, as well as the author of the marginal note in
Cod. 380 of De Rossi (שאול למלכות), or the anointing of David at
Bethlehem, as Luther (in the marginal note) and Lightfoot do; for the
word "after" evidently refers to some event in the life of Absalom, to
which allusion has previously been made, namely, either to the time of
his reconciliation with David ([Sa2
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#033)), or (what is not so probable)
to the period of his return from Geshur to Jerusalem ([Sa2
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#023)). Consequently the reading
adopted by the Syriac, Arabic, and Vulgate, also by Theodoret and
others, viz., "four years," must certainly be the correct one, and not
"forty days," which we find in Codd. 70 and 96 in Kennicott, since forty
days would be far too short a time for maturing the rebellion. It is
true, that with the reading ארבּע we should expect, as a rule, the
plural שׁנים. At the same time, the numbers from two to ten are
sometimes construed with a singular noun (e.g., [Kg2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001); cf. Gesenius, 120, 2). The
pretended vow was, that if Jehovah would bring him back to Jerusalem, he
would serve Jehovah. את־יהוה עבד, "to do a service to Jehovah," can only
mean to offer a sacrifice, which is the explanation given by Josephus.
The Chethib ישׁיב is not the infinitive, but the imperfect Hiphil: si
reduxerit, reduxerit me, which is employed in an unusual manner instead
of the inf. absol., for the sake of emphasis. The Keri ישׁוּב would have
to be taken as an adverb "again;" but this is quite unnecessary.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 15:9</span></span>

The king consented, and Absalom went to Hebron. Absalom had selected
this city, probably assigning as the reason that he was born there, but
really because his father David had been made king there, and also
possibly because there may have been many persons there who had been
displeased by the removal of the court to Jerusalem.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 15:10</span></span>

When Absalom went to Hebron, he sent spies into all the tribes of Israel
to say, "When ye hear the sound of the trumpet, say, Absalom has become
king in Hebron." We must suppose the sending the spies to have been
contemporaneous with the removal of Absalom to Hebron, so that ויּשׁלח
is used quite regularly, and there is no reason for translating it as a
pluperfect. The messengers sent out are called "spies," because they
were first of all to ascertain the feelings of the people in the
different tribes, and were only to execute their commission in places
where they could reckon upon support. The conspiracy had hitherto been
kept very secret, as we may see from the statement in [Sa2
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#011) : "With Absalom there had gone
two hundred men out of Jerusalem, invited (to the sacrificial festival),
and going in their simplicity, who knew nothing at all of the affair."
(כּל־דּבר לא: nothing at all.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 15:12</span></span>

Moreover, Absalom sent for Ahithophel, David's councillor, to come from
his own town Giloh, when he offered the sacrifices. The unusual
construction of את ישׁלח with מעירו may be explained from the pregnant
character of the expression: he sent and bade come, i.e., he summoned
Ahithophel out of his city. Giloh, Ahithophel's home, was upon the
mountains of Judah, to the south or south-west of Hebron (see at [Jos
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#051)). Ahithophel had no doubt been
previously initiated into Absalom's plans, and had probably gone to his
native city, merely that he might come to him with the greater ease;
since his general place of abode, as king's councillor, must have been
in Jerusalem. "And the conspiracy became strong; for the people
multiplied continually with Absalom" (the latter is a circumstantial
clause). These words give a condensed summary of the result of the
enterprise.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 15:13</span></span>

David's flight from Jerusalem. - [Sa2
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#013), [Sa2
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#014). When this intelligence reached
David, "The heart of the men of Israel is after Absalom" (אהר היה, as in
[Sa2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#010), to be attached to a person
as king; see at [Sa1 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#014)), he said
to his servants that were with him in Jerusalem, "Arise, let us flee,
for there will be no escape for us from Absalom! Make speed to depart,
lest he overtake us suddenly, and drive the calamity (the judgment
threatened in [Sa2 12:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010)) over us,
and smite the city with the edge of the sword." David was perhaps afraid
that Jerusalem might fall into Absalom's power through treachery, and
therefore resolved to fly as speedily as possible, not only in order to
prevent a terrible massacre, but also to give his own faithful adherents
time to assemble.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 15:15</span></span>

As his servants declared themselves ready to follow him, the king went
out of the city with all his family in his train (lit. at his feet, as
in [Jdg 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#010), [Jdg
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#015), etc.), but left ten concubines
behind to keep the palace.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 15:17</span></span>

When outside the city the king and all the people in his suite (i.e.,
the royal family and their servants) halted at "the house of the
distance." המּרחק is probably a proper name given to a house in the
neighbourhood of the city and on the road to Jericho, which was called
"the farthest house," viz., from the city.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 15:18</span></span>

And all his servants, i.e., his state officers and attendants, went
along by his side, and the whole body-guard (the Crethi and Plethi: see
at [Sa2 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018)); and all the Gathites,
namely the six hundred men who had come in his train from Gath, went
along in front of the king. David directed the fugitives to all into
rank, the servants going by his side, and the body-guard and the six
hundred old companions in arms, who probably also formed a kind of
body-guard, marching in front. The verb עבר (passed on) cannot be
understood as signifying to file past on account of its connection with
על־ידו (beside him, or by his side). The expression Gittim is strange,
as we cannot possibly think of actual Gathites or Philistines from Gath.
The apposition (the six hundred men, etc.) shows clearly enough that the
six hundred old companions in arms are intended, the men who gathered
round David on his flight from Saul and emigrated with him to Gath ([Sa1
27:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002)), who afterwards lived with him
in Ziklag ([Sa1 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008); [Sa1
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#002); [Sa1
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001), [Sa1
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#009)), and eventually followed him to
Hebron and Jerusalem ([Sa2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#003); [Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)). In all probability they formed a
separate company of well-tried veterans or a kind of body-guard in
Jerusalem, and were commonly known as Gathites.

(Note: The Septuagint also has πάντες οἱ Γεθαῖοι, and has generally
rendered the Masoretic text correctly. But כּל־עבדיו has been translated
incorrectly, or at all events in a manner likely to mislead, viz.,
πάντες οἱ παῖδες αὐτοῦ. But in the Septuagint text, as it has come down
to us, another paraphrase has been interpolated into the literal
translation, which Thenius would adopt as an emendation of the Hebrew
text, notwithstanding the fact that the critical corruptness of the
Alexandrian text must be obvious to every one.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 15:19</span></span>

A military commander named Ittai, who had emigrated from Gath and come
over to David not long before, also accompanied the king from the city.
It is evident from [Sa2 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#002), where
Ittai is said to have commanded a third part of the army sent against
Absalom, and to have been placed on an equality with Joab and Abishai
the most experienced generals, that Ittai was a Philistian general who
had entered David's service. The reason for his going over to David is
not known. According to [Sa2 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#022) of
this chapter, Ittai did not come alone, but brought all his family with
him (taph: the little ones). The opinion expressed by Thenius, that he
had come to Jerusalem as a hostage, is merely founded upon a false
interpretation of the last two clauses of the verse before us. David
said to Ittai, "Wherefore goest thou also with us? return and stay with
the king; for thou art a stranger, and also emigrating to thy place."
There is no irony in the words "stay with the king," as Thenius and
Clericus suppose (viz., "with the man who behaves as if he were king");
nor is there an acknowledgment of Absalom as king, which certainly could
never have emanated from David. The words contain nothing more than the
simple though: Do you remain with whoever is or shall be king, since
there is no necessity for you as a stranger to take sides at all. This
is the explanation given by Seb. Schmidt: "It is not your place to
decide this context as to who ought to be king; but you may remain quiet
and see whom God shall appoint as king, and whether it be I or Absalom,
you can serve the one that God shall choose." This is the only way in
which we can explain the reason assigned for the admonition, viz., "Thou
art a stranger," and not an Israelite. There is some difficulty
connected with the following words (rendered in the Eng. version "and
also an exile"). In the Septuagint and Vulgate they are rendered καὶ ὅτι
μετώκησας σὺ ἐκ τοῦ τόπου σου, et egressus es de loco tuo (and thou hast
gone out from thine own place); but in adopting this rendering the
translators have not only passed over the גּם (also), but have taken
למקומך for ממּקומך. Nevertheless Thenius proposes to bring the text into
harmony with these versions for the purpose of bringing out the meaning,
"and moreover thou art one carried away from his own home." But this is
decidedly a mistake; for David would never have made a Philistine - who
had just before been carried away from his own home, or, as Thenius
understands it, who had been brought to Jerusalem as a hostage - the
commander of a third of his army. The meaning is rather the following:
"And thou hast still no fatherland," i.e., thou art still wandering
about through the earth like an exile from his country: wherever thou
findest a place, and art allowed to settle, there only canst thou dwell.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 15:20</span></span>

"Thy coming is yesterday (from yesterday), and should I disturb thee
to-day to go with us, when I am going just where I go?" i.e., wherever
my way may lie (I go I know not whither; Chald.: cf. [Sa1
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#013)). The Chethib אנוּעך is a
copyist's error. The thought requires the Hiphil אניעך (Keri), as נוּע
in the Kal has the intransitive meaning, to totter, sway about, or move
hither and thither. "Return and take thy brethren back; grace and truth
be with thee." It is evidently more in accordance with the train of
thought to separate עמּך from the previous clause and connect it with
ואמת חסד, though this is opposed to the accents, than to adopt the
adverbial interpretation, "take back thy brethren with thee in grace and
truth," as Maurer proposes. (For the thought itself, see [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003)). The reference is to the grace
and truth (faithfulness) of God, which David desired that Ittai should
receive upon his way. In the Septuagint and Vulgate the passage is
paraphrased thus: "Jehovah show thee grace and truth," after [Sa2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#006); but it by no means follows from
this that עמּך ועשׂה והוה has fallen out of the Hebrew text.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 15:21</span></span>

But Ittai replied with a solemn oath, "Assuredly at the place where my
lord the king shall be (stay), whether for death or life, there will thy
servant be." אם כּי means "only," as in [Gen
40:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#014), [Job
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#008); here, in a declaration on oath,
it is equivalent to assuredly (vid., Ewald, 356, b.). The Chethib is
therefore correct, and the erasure of אם in the Keri is a bad
emendation. The כּי in the apodosis is either an emphatic declaration,
yea, or like ὅτι merely introduces a distinct assertion.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 15:22</span></span>

After this assurance of his devotedness, David let Ittai do as he
pleased. ועבר לך, "go and pass on." עבר does not mean to pass by, but to
go forward. Thus Ittai and his men and all his family that was with him
went forward with the king. By "the little ones" (taph) we are to
understand a man's whole family, as in many other instances (see at [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)).

[Sa2 15:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#022)

The king crosses the Kidron, and sends the priests back with the ark to
Jerusalem. - [Sa2 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#023). All the land
(as in [Sa1 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#025)) wept aloud when all
the people went forward; and the king went over the brook Kidron, and
all the people went over in the direction of (lit. in the face of) the
way to the desert. The brook Kidron is a winter torrent, i.e., a
mountain torrent which only flows during the heavy rains of winter
(χείμαῤῥος τοῦ Κεδρών, [Joh 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)). It
is on the eastern side of Jerusalem, between the city and the Mount of
Olives, and derives its name from the appearance of the water when
rendered muddy through the melting of the snow (cf. [Job
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#016)). In summer it is nothing more
than a dry channel in the valley of Jehoshaphat (see Robinson, Pal. i.
396, and v. Raumer, Pal. p. 309, note 81). "The wilderness" (midbar) is
the northern part of the desert of Judah, through which the road to
Jericho and the Jordan lay.

[Sa2 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#024)

Zadok the priest and all the Levites (who were in Jerusalem) left the
city with the fugitive king, bearing the ark of the covenant: "And they
set down the ark of God, and Abiathar came up, till all the people had
come completely over from the city." ויּעל, ἀνέβη, ascendit (lxx,
Vulg.), may probably be accounted for from the fact that Abiathar did
not come to join the fugitives till the procession halted at the Mount
of Olives; so that עלה, like ἀναβαίνειν, merely refers to his actually
going up, and ויּעל affirms that Abiathar joined them until all the
people from the city had arrived. The rendering proposed by Michaelis
and Bttcher ("he offered sacrifices") is precluded by the fact that עלה
never means to sacrifice when written without עולה, or unless the
context points distinctly to sacrifices, as in [Sa2
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#022); [Sa1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#028). The ark of the covenant was put
down, because those who went out with the king made a halt, to give the
people who were still coming time to join the procession.

[Sa2 15:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#025)

Then the king said to Zadok, "Take back the ark of God into the city! If
I find favour in the eyes of Jehovah, He will bring me back and let me
see Him (i.e., himself: the reference is to God) and His dwelling (i.e.,
the ark of the covenant as the throne of the divine glory in the tent
that had been set up for it). But if He thus say, I have not delight in
thee; behold, here am I, let Him do to me as seemeth good to Him." Thus
David put his fate in believing confidence into the hand of the Lord,
because he felt that it was the Lord who was chastising him for his sons
through this rebellion.

[Sa2 15:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#027)

He also said still further to Zadok, "Thou seer! return into the city in
peace." אתּה הרואה, with ה interrog., does not yield any appropriate
sense, as ה cannot stand for הלוא here, simply because it does not
relate to a thing which the person addressed could not deny.
Consequently the word must be pointed thus, הראה (with the article), and
rendered as a vocative, as it has been by Jerome and Luther. ראה, seer,
is equivalent to prophet. He applies this epithet to Zadok, as the high
priest who received divine revelations by means of the Urim. The meaning
is, Thou Zadok art equal to a prophet; therefore thy proper place is in
Jerusalem (O. v. Gerlach). Zadok was to stand as it were upon the watch
there with Abiathar, and the sons of both to observe the events that
occurred, and send him word through their sons into the plain of the
Jordan. "Behold, I will tarry by the ferries of the desert, till a word
comes from you to show me," sc., what has taken place, or how the things
shape themselves in Jerusalem. Instead of בּעברות, the earlier
translators as well as the Masoretes adopted the reading בּערבות, "in
the steppes of the desert." The allusion in this case would be to the
steppes of Jericho ([Kg2 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#005)). But
Bttcher has very properly defended the Chethib on the strength of [Sa2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016), where the Keri has ערבות again,
though עברות is the true reading (cf. [Sa2
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#019)). The "ferries of the desert"
are the places where the Jordan could be crossed, the fords of the
Jordan ([Jos 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#007); [Jdg
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#028)).

[Sa2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#029)

Zadok and Abiathar then returned to the city with the ark of God.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 15:30</span></span>

Ahithophel and Hushai. - [Sa2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030),
[Sa2 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#031). When David was going by
the height of the olive-trees, i.e., the Mount of Olives, weeping as he
went, with his head covered, and barefooted, as a sign of grief and
mourning (see [Est 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012); [Eze
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#017)), and with the people who
accompanied him also mourning, he received intelligence that Ahithophel
(see at [Sa2 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012)) was with Absalom,
and among the conspirators. הגּיד ודוד gives no sense; for David cannot
be the subject, because the next clause, "and David said," etc.,
contains most distinctly an expression of David's on receiving some
information. Thenius would therefore alter הגּיד into the Hophal הגּד,
whilst Ewald (131, a) would change it into הגּיד, an unusual form of the
Hophal, "David was informed," according to the construction of the
Hiphil with the accusative. But although this construction of the Hiphil
is placed beyond all doubt by [Job
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#037); [Job
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#004), and [Eze
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#010), the Hiphil is construed as a
rule, as the Hophal always is, with ל of the person who receives
information. Consequently דּוד must be altered into לדוד, and הגּיד
taken as impersonal, "they announced to David." Upon receipt of this
intelligence David prayed to the Lord, that He would "turn the counsel
of Ahithophel into foolishness," make it appear as folly, i.e.,
frustrate it, - a prayer which God answered (vid., [Sa2
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001).).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 15:32</span></span>

On David's arrival at the height where people were accustomed to
worship, i.e., upon the top of the Mount of Olives, the Archite Hushai
came to meet him with his clothes rent and earth upon his head, that is
to say, in the deepest mourning (see [Sa1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#012)). It is evident from the words
וגו אשׁר־ישׁתּחוה that there was a place of worship upon the top of the
Mount of Olives, probably a bamah, such as continued to exist in
different places throughout the land, even after the building of the
temple. According to [Sa2 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#037); [Sa2
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#016), and [Ch1
27:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#033), Hushai was רעה, a friend of
David, i.e., one of his privy councillors. הארכּי (the Archite), if we
may judge from [Jos 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#002), was the name
of a family whose possessions were upon the southern boundary of the
tribe of Ephraim, between Bethel and Ataroth. Hushai was probably a very
old man, as David said to him ([Sa2
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#033), [Sa2
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#034)), "If thou goest with me, thou
wilt be a burden to me. But if thou returnest to the city and offerest
Absalom thy services, thou canst bring for me the counsel of Ahithophel
to nought. If thou sayest to Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king;
servant of thy father (i.e., as regards this) I was that of old, but now
I am thy servant." The ו before אני introduces the apodosis both times
(vid., Ewald, 348, a.).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa2 15:35</span></span>

David then commissioned him to communicate to the priests Zadok and
Abiathar all that he should hear of the king's house, and send word to
him through their sons.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa2 15:37</span></span>

So Hushai went into the city when Absalom came to Jerusalem. The w

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

before the second clause, followed by the imperfect יבוא, indicates
contemporaneous occurrence (vid., Ewald, 346, b.).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 16](sa2016)

</div>

</div>
