<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2021)  [Next](sa2023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 22:0</span></span>

David's Psalm of Thanksgiving for Victory over All His Enemies - 2
Samuel 22

In the following psalm of thanksgiving, David praises the Lord as his
deliverer out of all dangers during his agitated life and conflicts with
his foes ([Sa2 22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002)). In the first
half he pictures his marvellous deliverance out of all the troubles
which he passed through, especially in the time of Saul's persecutions,
under the image of an extraordinary theophany (vv. 5-20), and unfolds
the ground of this deliverance ([Sa2
22:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021)). In the second half he
proclaims the mighty help of the Lord, and his consequent victories over
the foreign enemies of his government (vv. 29-46), and closes with
renewed praise of God for all His glorious deeds ([Sa2
22:47-51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047)). The psalm is thus arranged
in two leading divisions, with an introductory and concluding strophe.
But we cannot discover any definite system of strophes in the further
arrangement of the principal divisions, as the several groups of
thoughts are not rounded off symmetrically.

The contents and form of this song of praise answer to the fact attested
by the heading, that it was composed by David in the later years of his
reign, when God had rescued him from all his foes, and helped his
kingdom to victory over all the neighbouring heathen nations. The
genuineness of the psalm is acknowledged to be indisputable by all the
modern critics, except J. Olshausen and Hupfeld,

(Note: Even Hitzig observes (die Psalmen, i. p. 95): "There is no ground
whatever for calling in question the Davidic authorship of the psalm,
and therefore the statement made in the heading; and, in fact, there is
all the more reason for adhering to it, because it is attested twice.
The recurrence of the psalm as one of Davidic origin in 2 Samuel 22 is
of some weight, since not the slightest suspicion attaches to any of the
other songs of sayings attributed to David in the second book of Samuel
(e.g., [Sa2 3:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033); [Sa2
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008); [Sa2
7:18-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#018); [Sa2
23:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)). Moreover, the psalm is
evidently ancient, and suited to the classical period of the language
and its poetry. [Sa2 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#031) is quoted
as early as [Pro 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005), and [Sa2
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#034) in [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019). The psalm was also regarded as
Davidic at a very early period, as the 'diaskeuast' of the second book
of Samuel met with the heading, which attributes the psalm to David. No
doubt this opinion might be founded upon [Sa2
22:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#051); and with perfect justice if it
were: for if the psalm was not composed by David, it must have been
composed in his name and spirit; and who could have been this
contemporaneous and equal poet?" Again, after quoting several thoroughly
Davidic signs, he says at p. 96: "It is very obvious with how little
justice the words of [Sa2 22:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#051),
relating to [Sa2 7:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012), [Sa2
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#026), [Sa2
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#029), have been pronounced spurious.
Besides, the psalm can no more have concluded with למשׁיחו ([Sa2
22:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#051)) than with [Sa2
22:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#050); and if David refers to himself
by name at the commencement in [Sa2
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001), and in the middle in [Sa2
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#020), why should he not do the same at
the close?")

who, with hypercritical scepticism, dispute the Davidic origin of the
psalm on subjective grounds of aesthetic taste. This psalm is found in
the Psalter as Ps 18, though with many divergences in single words and
clauses, which do not, however, essentially affect the meaning.
Commentators are divided in opinion as to the relation in which the two
different forms of the text stand to one another. The idea that the text
of 2 Samuel. rests upon a careless copy and tradition must decidedly be
rejected: for, on the one hand, by far the larger portion of the
deviations in our text from that of the Psalter are not to be attributed
to carelessness on the part of copyists, but are evidently alterations
made with thoughtfulness and deliberation: e.g., the omission of the
very first passage ([Sa2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001)), "I
will love Thee, O Lord, my strength;" the change of צוּרי אלי (my God,
my strength, or rock) into צוּרי אלהי (the God of my rock), as "the God
of the rock" occurs again in [Sa2
22:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047) of the text before us; or the
substitution of ויּרא (He was seen, [Sa2
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#011)) for ויּדא (He did fly), etc. On
the other hand, the original reading has undoubtedly been retained in
many passages of our text, whilst simpler and more common forms have
been substituted in that of the Psalms; e.g., in v. 5, מות משׁבּרי
instead of מות fo d חבלי; in v. 8, השּׁמים מוסדות (the foundations of
the heavens) for הרים מוסדי (the foundations of the hills); in v. 12,
השׁרת־מים for חשׁכת־מים; in v. 16, ים אפיקי for מים אפיקי; in v. 28,
תּשׁפּיל על־רמים ועניך for תּשׁפּיל רמות וענים; in v. 33, דּרכּו תמים
ויּתּר for דּרכּי תמים ויּתּן; and in v. 44, לראשׁ תּשׁמרני for לראשׁ
תּשׂימני, and several others. In general, however, the text of the
Psalms bears the stamp of poetical originality more than the text before
us, and the latter indicates a desire to give greater clearness and
simplicity to the poetical style. Consequently neither of the two texts
that have come down to us contains the original text of the psalm of
David unaltered; but the two recensions have been made quite
independently of each other, one for the insertion of the psalm in the
Psalter intended for liturgical use, and the other when it was
incorporated into the history of David's reign, which formed the
groundwork of our books of Samuel. The first revision may have been made
by David himself when he arranged his Psalms for liturgical purposes;
but the second was effected by the prophetic historian, whose object it
was, when inserting David's psalm of praise in the history of his reign,
not so much to give it with diplomatic literality, as to introduce it in
a form that should be easily intelligible and true to the sense.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 22:1</span></span>

The heading is formed precisely according to the introductory formula of
the song of Moses in [Deu 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#030), and
was no doubt taken from the larger historical work employed by the
author of our books. It was probably also adopted from this into the
canonical collection of the Psalter, and simply brought into conformity
with the headings of the other psalms by the alteration of דּוד וידבּר
(and David said) into דּבּר עשׁר לדוד יהוה לעבד ("Of David, the servant
of the Lord, who spake:" Eng. ver.), and the insertion of למנצּח ("to
the chief musician:" Eng. ver.) at the head (see Delitzsch on the
Psalms). "In the day," i.e., at the time, "when Jehovah had delivered
him." Deliverance "out of the hand of Saul" is specially mentioned, not
because this was the last, but because it was the greatest and most
glorious, - a deliverance out of the deepest misery into regal might and
glory. The psalm is opened by ויּאמר in both texts.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 22:2</span></span>

[Sa2 22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002) form the introduction.

2 Jehovah is my rock, my castle, and my deliverer to me;

3 My Rock-God, in whom I trust:

My shield and horn of my salvation, my fortress and my refuge,

My Saviour; from violence Thou redeemest me.

4 I call upon the praised one, Jehovah,

And I am saved from my enemies.

This introduction contains the sum and substance of the whole psalm,
inasmuch as David groups the many experiences of divine deliverance in
his agitated life into a long series of predicates, in all of which he
extols God as his defence, refuge, and deliverer. The heaping up of
these predicates is an expression both of liveliest gratitude, and also
of hope for the future. The different predicates, however, are not to be
taken as in apposition to Jehovah, or as vocatives, but are declarations
concerning God, how He had proved himself faithful to the Psalmist in
all the calamities of his life, and would assuredly do so still. David
calls God וּמצרתי סלעי (my rock, and my castle) in [Psa
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#004) as well (cf. [Psa
71:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#004)). The two epithets are borrowed
from the natural character of Palestine, where steep and almost
inaccessible rocks afford protection to the fugitive, as David had often
found at the time when Saul was pursuing him (vid., [Sa1
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#022); [Sa1
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#005)). But whilst David took refuge in
rocks, he placed his hopes of safety not in their inaccessible
character, but in God the Lord, the eternal spiritual rock, whom he
could see in the earthly rock, so that he called Him his true castle. לי
מפלטי (my deliverer to me) gives the real explanation of the foregoing
figures. The לי (to me) is omitted in [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002), and only serves to strengthen
the suffix, "my, yea my deliverer.' "My Rock-God," equivalent to, God
who is my Rock: this is formed after [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), where Moses calls the Lord the
Rock of Israel, because of His unchangeable faithfulness; for zur, a
rock, is a figure used to represent immoveable firmness. In [Psa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003) we find צוּרי אלי, "my God"
(strong one), "my rock," two synonyms which are joined together in our
text, so as to form one single predicate of God, which is repeated in
[Sa2 22:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047). The predicates which
follow, "my horn and my salvation-shield," describe God as the mighty
protector and defender of the righteous. A shield covers against hostile
attacks. In this respect God was Abraham's shield ([Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)), and the helping shield of
Israel ([Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029); cf. [Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004); [Psa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012)). He is the "horn of salvation,"
according to Luther, because He overcomes enemies, and rescues from
foes, and gives salvation. The figure is borrowed from animals, which
have their strength and defensive weapons in their horns (see at [Sa1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001)). "My fortress:" misgab is a high
place, where a person is secure against hostile attacks (see at [Psa
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)). The predicates which follow,
viz., my refuge, etc., are not given in [Psa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003), and are probably only added as a
rhythmical completion to the strophe, which was shortened by the
omission of the introductory lines, "I love thee heartily, Jehovah"
([Psa 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)). The last clause, "My
Saviour, who redeemest me from violence," corresponds to אחסה־בּו in the
first hemistich. In [Psa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004), David
sums up the contents of his psalm of thanksgiving in a general sentence
of experience, which may be called the theme of the psalm, for it
embraces "the result of the long life which lay behind him, so full of
dangers and deliverances." מהלּל, "the praised one," an epithet applied
to God, which occurs several times in the Psalms ([Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002); [Psa
96:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004); [Psa
113:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#003); [Psa
145:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#003)). It is in apposition to
Jehovah, and is placed first for the sake of emphasis: "I invoke Jehovah
as the praised one." The imperfects אקרא and אוּשׁע are used to denote
what continually happens. In [Sa2 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005)
we have the commencement of the account of the deliverances out of great
tribulations, which David had experienced at the hand of God.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 22:5</span></span>

5 For breakers of death had compassed me,

Streams of wickedness terrified me.

6 Cords of hell had girt me about,

Snares of death overtook me.

7 In my distress I called Jehovah,

And to my God I called;

And He heard my voice out of His temple,

And my crying came into His ears.

David had often been in danger of death, most frequently at the time
when he was pursued by Saul, but also in Absalom's conspiracy, and even
in several wars (cf. [Sa2 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#016)). All
these dangers, out of which the Lord delivered him, and not merely those
which originated with Saul, are included in [Sa2
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005), [Sa2
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#006). The figure "breakers or waves of
death" is analogous to that of the "streams of Belial." His distress is
represented in both of them under the image of violent floods of water.
In the psalm we find מות חבלי, "snares of death," as in [Psa
116:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#003), death being regarded as a
hunger with a net and snare (cf. [Psa
91:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003)): this does not answer to well to
the parallel נחלי, and therefore is not so good, since שׁאול חבלי
follows immediately. בליּעל (Belial), uselessness in a moral sense, or
worthlessness. The meaning "mischief," or injury in a physical sense,
which many expositors give to the word in this passage on account of the
parallel "death," cannot be grammatically sustained. Belial was
afterwards adopted as a name for the devil ([Co2
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)). Streams of wickedness are
calamities that proceed from wickedness, or originate with worthless
men. קדּם, to come to meet with a hostile intention, i.e., to fall upon
(vid., [Job 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#027)). היכל, the temple
out of which Jehovah heard him, was the heavenly abode of God, as in
[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004); for, according to [Sa2
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#008)., God came down from heaven to
help him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 22:8</span></span>

8 Then the earth swayed and trembled,

The foundations of the heavens shook

And swayed to and fro, because He was wroth.

9 Smoke ascended in His nose,

And fire out of His mouth devoured,

Red-hot coals burned out of Him.

10 And He bowed the heavens and came down,

And cloudy darkness under His feet.

Jehovah came down from heaven to save His servant, as He had formerly
come down upon Sinai to conclude His covenant with Israel in the midst
of terrible natural phenomena, which proclaimed the wrath of the
Almighty. The theophany under which David depicts the deliverance he had
experienced, had its type in the miraculous phenomenon which accompanied
the descent of God upon Sinai, and which suggested, as in the song of
Deborah ([Jdg 5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004)), the idea of a
terrible storm. It is true that the deliverance of David was not
actually attended by any such extraordinary natural phenomena; but the
saving hand of God from heaven was so obviously manifested, that the
deliverance experienced by him could be poetically described as a
miraculous interposition on the part of God. When the Lord rises up from
His heavenly temple to come down upon the earth to judgment, the whole
world trembles at the fierceness of His wrath. Not only does the earth
tremble, but the foundations of the heavens shake: the whole universe is
moved. In the psalm we have "the foundations of the hills" instead of
"the foundations of the heavens," - a weaker expression, signifying the
earth to its deepest foundations. The Hithpael יתגּעשׁ, lit., to sway
itself, expresses the idea of continuous swaying to and fro. לו חרה כּי,
"for it (sc., wrath) burned to him," it flamed up like a fire; cf. [Deu
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022); [Deu
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019). "Smoke," the forerunner of
fire, "ascended in His nose." The figurative idea is that of snorting or
violent breathing, which indicates the rising of wrath. Smoke is
followed by fire, which devours out of the mouth, i.e., bursts forth
devouring or consuming all that opposes it. The expression is
strengthened still further by the parallel: "red-hot coals come out of
Him," i.e., the flame of red-hot coals pours out of Him as out of a
glowing furnace (cf. [Gen 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017)). This
description is based entirely upon [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018), where the Lord comes down upon
Sinai in smoke and fire. We are not to picture to ourselves flashes of
lightning; for all these phenomena are merely the forerunners of the
appearance of God in the clouds, which is described in [Sa2
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#010), "He bowed the heavens" to come
down. ערפל, which is frequently connected with ענן, signifies cloudy
darkness, or dark clouds. The substratum of this description is the fact
that in a severe storm the heavens seem to sink down upon the earth with
their dark clouds. The Lord draws near riding upon black thunder-clouds,
"that the wicked may not behold His serene countenance, but only the
terrible signs of His fierce wrath and punishment" (J. H. Michaelis).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 22:11</span></span>

11 He rode upon a cherub and flew hither,

And appeared upon the wings of the wind.

12 He made darkness round about Him as pavilions,

Water-gathering, thick clouds.

13 Out of the splendour before Him

Burned red-hot coals of fire.

These three verses are a further expansion of [Sa2
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#019), and [Sa2
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#011) of [Sa2
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#010). The cherub is not a personified
earthly creature, for cherubim are angels around the throne of God (see
at [Gen 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022)). The poetical figure
"riding upon the cherub" is borrowed from the fact that God was
enthroned between the two cherubim upon the lid of the ark of the
covenant, and above their outspread wings ([Exo
25:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#020)). As the idea of His
"dwelling between the cherubim" ([Sa2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002); [Sa1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#004); [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002)) was founded upon this typical
manifestation of the gracious presence of God in the Most Holy place, so
here David depicts the descent of Jehovah from heaven as "riding upon a
cherub," picturing the cherub as a throne upon which God appears in the
clouds of heaven, though without therefore imagining Him as riding upon
a sphinx or driving in a chariot-throne. Such notions as these are
precluded by the addition of the term ויּעף, "did fly." The "flying" is
also suggested by the wings of the cherubim. As the divine "shechinah"
was enthroned above the ark of the covenant upon the wings of the
cherubim, David in his poetical description represents the cherub and
his wings as carrying the throne of God, to express the thought that
Jehovah came down from heaven as the judge and saviour of His servants
in the splendour of His divine glory, surrounded by cherubim who stand
as His highest servants around His throne, just as Moses in his blessing
([Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)) speaks of Jehovah as
coming out of myriads of His holy angels. The elementary substratum of
this was the wings of the wind, upon which He appeared. In the psalm we
have ויּדא, from דּאה, to soar ([Deu
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#039); [Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040)), which suggests the idea of
flying better than ויּרא (He was seen), though the latter gives the real
explanation. In [Sa2 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#012) and [Sa2
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#013), the "cloudy darkness under His
feet" ([Sa2 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#010)) is still further
expanded, so as to prepare the way for the description of thunder and
lightning in [Sa2 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#014). God in His
wrath withdraws His face from man. He envelopes himself in clouds. The
darkness round about him is the black thunder-cloud which forms His hut
or tent. The plural succoth is occasioned by the plural סביבתיו, "His
surroundings:" it is used with indefinite generality, and is more
probably the original term than סכּתו in the psalm. The "darkness" is
still further explained in the second clause, מים חשׁרת,
water-gatherings. חשׁרה (ἁπ. λεγ.) signifies, according to the Arabic, a
gathering or collection. The expression used in the psalm is מים חשׁכת,
water-darkness, which, if not less appropriate, is at any rate not the
original term. שׁחקים עבי, clouds of clouds, i.e., the thickest clouds;
a kind of superlative, in which a synonym is used instead of the same
noun.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 22:13</span></span>

The splendour of the divine nature enveloped in clouds breaks through
the dark covering in burning coals of fire. The coals of fire which
burst forth, i.e., which break out in flame from the dark clouds, are
the lightning which shoots forth from the dark storm-clouds in streams
of fire.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 22:14</span></span>

14 Jehovah thundered from the heavens,

And the Most High gave His voice.

15 He sent arrows, and scattered them;

Lightning, and discomfited them.

16 Then the beds of the sea became visible;

The foundations of the world were uncovered,

Through the threatening of Jehovah,

By the snorting of the breath of His nostrils.

God sent lightning as arrows upon the enemies along with violent
thunder, and threw them thereby into confusion. המם, to throw into
confusion, and thereby to destroy, is the standing expression for the
destruction of the foe accomplished by the miraculous interposition of
God (vid., [Exo 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024); [Exo
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027); [Jos
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010); [Jdg
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#015); [Sa1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010)). To the thunder there were added
stormy wind and earthquake, as an effect of the wrath of God, whereby
the foundations of the sea and land were laid bare, i.e., whereby the
depth of the abyss and of the hell in the interior of the earth, into
which the person to be rescued had fallen, were disclosed.

(Note: In [Sa2 22:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#013) the text of
the Psalms deviates greatly and in many instances from that before us.
In v. 13 we find אשׁ וגחלי בּרד עברוּ עביו instead of אשׁ גּחלי בּערוּ;
and after v. 14 אשׁ וגחלי בּרד is repeated in the psalm. In v. 15 we
have רב וּברקים for בּרק, and in v. 16 מים אפיקי for ים אפיקי. The other
deviations are inconsiderable. So far as the repetition of אשׁ וגחלי
בּרד at the end of v. 14 is concerned, it is not only superfluous, but
unsuitable, because the lightning following the thunder is described in
v. 15, and the words repeated are probably nothing more than a gloss
that has crept by an oversight into the text. The מים אפיקי in v. 16 is
an obvious softening down of the ים אפיקי of the text before us. In the
other deviations, however, the text of the Psalms is evidently the more
original of the two; the abridgment of the second clause of v. 13 is
evidently a simplification of the figurative description in the psalm,
and רב בּרקים in the 15th verse of the psalm is more poetical and a
stronger expression than the mere בּרק of our text.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 22:17</span></span>

17 He reached out of the height, He laid hold of me;

Drew me out of great waters:

18 Saved me from my enemy strong;

From my haters, because they were too strong for me.

19 They fell upon me in my day of calamity:

Then Jehovah became my stay,

20 And led me out into a broad place;

Delivered me, because He had pleasure in me.

The Lord stretched His hand from the height into the deep abysses, which
had been uncovered through the threatening of the wrath of God, and drew
out the sinking man. ישׁלח without יד is used to denote the stretching
out of the hand, and in the sense of reaching out to a thing (as in [Sa2
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)). רבּים מים (great waters) does
not refer to the enemy, but to the calamities and dangers (waves of
death and streams of Belial, [Sa2
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005)) into which the enemies of the
Psalmist had plunged him. ימשׁני, from משׁה ([Exo
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)), from which the name of Moses
was derived, to whom there is probably an allusion made. As Moses was
taken out of the waters of the Nile, so David was taken out of great
(many) waters. This deliverance is still further depicted in a more
literal terms in [Sa2 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#018). עז איבי,
my enemy strong, poetical for my strong enemy, does not refer to one
single enemy, namely Saul; but, as the parallel "my haters" shows, is a
poetical personification of all his enemies. They were stronger than
David, therefore the Lord had to deliver him with an almighty hand. The
"day of calamity" in which the enemy fell upon him (קדּם: see at [Sa2
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#006)) was the time when David wandered
about in the desert helpless and homeless, fleeing from the pursuit of
Saul. The Lord was then his support, or a staff on which he could
support himself (vid., [Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)), and
led him out of the strait into the broad, i.e., into a broad space where
he could move freely, because God had pleasure in him, and had chosen
him in His grace to be His servant. This reason for his deliverance is
carried out still further in what follows.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 22:21</span></span>

21 Jehovah rendered to me according to my righteousness,

According to the cleanness of my hands He recompensed me.

22 For I have observed the ways of Jehovah,

And have not wickedly departed from my God.

23 For all His rights are before my eyes;

And His statutes,-I do not depart from them.

24 And I was innocent towards Him,

And kept myself from mine iniquity.

גּמל signifies to do to a person good or evil, like the Greek εὖ and
κακῶς πράττειν τινά. The righteousness and cleanness of hands, i.e., the
innocence, which David attributed to himself, were not perfect
righteousness or holiness before God, but the righteousness of his
endeavours and deeds as contrasted with the unrighteousness and
wickedness of his adversaries and pursuers, and consisted in the fact
that he endeavoured earnestly and sincerely to walk in the ways of God
and to keep the divine commandments. מן רשׁע, to be wicked from, is a
pregnant expression, signifying to depart wickedly from God. לנגדּי,
i.e., as a standard before my eye. In the psalm we find עמּו תמים,
innocent in intercourse with the Lord, instead of לו תמים (see [Deu
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#013)); and for the fact itself,
David's own testimony in [Sa1
26:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#023), the testimony of God
concerning him in [Kg1 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#008), and the
testimony of history in [Kg1 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#005).
מעוני, from mine iniquity, i.e., from the iniquity which I might have
committed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 22:25</span></span>

25 Thus Jehovah repaid me according to my righteousness,

According to my cleanness before His eyes.

26 Towards the pious Thou showest thyself pious,

Towards the perfectly innocent Thou showest thyself innocent.

27 Towards the genuine Thou showest thyself genuine,

And towards the perverse Thou showest thyself crooked.

28 And afflicted people Thou helpest,

And Thine eyes are against the haughty; them Thou humblest.

The motive for deliverance, which was expounded in [Sa2
22:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021), is summed up briefly in [Sa2
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#025); and then in [Sa2
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#026) and [Sa2
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#027) it is carried back to the
general truth, that the conduct of God towards men is regulated
according to the conduct of men towards God. The vav cons. in ויּשׁב
expresses the logical consequence. כּברי is used instead of ידי כּבר in
[Sa2 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021), which is repeated in the
psalm simply for the sake of variation. The truth that God treats every
man in accordance with his conduct towards Him, is expounded in four
parallel clauses, in which the conduct of God is expressed in verbs in
the Hithpael, formed from the adjectives used to describe the conduct of
men towards God. To the חסיד, the pious or devoted to God, He also shows
himself pious; and innocent, blameless, to the תמים גּבּור, the man
strong in innocence, who walks in perfect innocence. נבר, a Niphal
participle, from בּרר, he who keeps himself pure, strives after purity
of walk. תּתּבר, an anomalous contraction of תּתבּרר (Ps.), analogous to
the formation of נבר for נברר. The form תּתּפּל for תּתפּתּל, to show
one's self perverse of crooked, is still more anomalous. God shows
himself so towards the perverse, by giving him up to his perverseness
([Rom 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)). This general truth is
applied in [Sa2 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#028) to the
congregation of God, in the contrast which it presents of humble and
haughty, and is expounded from the conduct of God, as displayed in the
history of Israel, towards these two classes of men, into which the
nation was divided. In the psalm, therefore, we find אתּה כּי, for which
the simple ו is substituted here, because the verse does not contain any
actual reason for what goes before. עני עם, afflicted people, is used to
denote the pious and depressed in the nation; רמים, the high, i.e., the
haughty, or godless rich and mighty in the nation. תּשׁפּיל is to be
taken as a relative: whom Thou humblest (see Ewald, 332, b.; and for the
thought, [Isa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011)). In the psalm the
unusual mode of expression in the second clause is changed into the more
common phrase, "Thou bringest down high, i.e., proud looks" (cf. [Pro
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#017); [Pro
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#004); [Pro
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#013); [Psa
131:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001), etc.).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 22:29</span></span>

[Sa2 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#029) commences the description
of the help which David had already received from God in his conflict
with the enemies of Israel, and which he would still receive.

29 For Thou art my lamp, O Jehovah!

And Jehovah maketh my darkness bright.

30 For through Thee I run troops,

And through my God I leap walls.

31 God - innocent is His way.

The word of Jehovah is refined,

A shield is He to all who trust in Him.

The explanatory כּי, with which the new description of the divine mercy
commences, refers to the thought implied in [Sa2
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#028), that David belonged to the
"afflicted people," whom the Lord always helps. As the Lord delivered
him out of the danger of death, because He took pleasure in him, so He
also gave him power over all his enemies. For He was his lamp, i.e., He
had lifted him out of a condition of depression and contempt into one of
glory and honour (see at [Sa2 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017)),
and would still further enlighten his darkness, i.e., "would cause the
light of His salvation to shine upon him and his tribe in all the
darkness of their distress" (Hengstenberg). In the psalm the verse reads
thus: "For Thou lightest (makest bright) my lamp (or candle), Jehovah my
God enlighteneth my darkness;" the bold figure "Jehovah the lamp of
David" being more literally explained. The figure is analogous to the
one in [Psa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001), "The Lord is my
light;" whilst the form ניר is a later mode of writing נר.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 22:30</span></span>

In the strength of his God he could run hostile troops and leap walls,
i.e., overcome every hostile power. ארוּץ, not from רצץ, to smash in
pieces, but from רוּץ, to run; construed with the accusative according
to the analogy of verbs of motion.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 22:31</span></span>

He derives this confidence from the acts of God, and also from His word.
האל (God) is written absolutely, like הצּוּר in [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004). The article points back to
בּאלהי. Jehovah is the God (האל), whose way is perfect, without blemish;
and His word is refined brass, pure silver (cf. [Psa
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)). He who trusts in Him is safe
from all foes. The last two clauses occur again in Agur's proverbs ([Pro
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005)). The thought of the last clause
is still further explained in [Sa2
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#032).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 22:32</span></span>

32 For who is God save Jehovah,

And who a rock save our God?

33 This God is my strong fortress,

And leads the innocent his way.

34 He makes my feet like the hinds,

And setteth me upon my high places;

35 He teacheth my hands to fight,

And my arms span brazen bows.

There is no true God who can help, except or by the side of Jehovah (cf.
[Deu 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031); [Sa1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#002)). צוּר, as in [Sa2
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002). This God is "my strong
fortress:" for this figure, comp. [Psa
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005) and [Psa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001). חיל, strength, might, is
construed with מעוּזי, by free subordination: "my fortress, a strong
one," like עז מחסי ([Psa 71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007); cf.
Ewald, 291, b.). יתּר for יתר, from תּוּר (vid., Ges. 72; Olshausen,
Gram. p. 579), in the sense of leading or taking round, as in [Pro
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#026). God leads the innocent his way,
i.e., He is his leader and guide therein. The Keri דּרכּי rests upon a
misunderstanding. There is an important difference in the reading of
this verse in Ps 18, viz., "The God who girdeth me with strength, and
makes my way innocent." The last clause is certainly an alteration which
simplifies the meaning, and so is also the first clause, the thought of
which occurs again, word for word, in [Sa2
22:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#040), with the addition of למּלחמה.
איּלה or איּלת, the hind, or female stag, is a figure of speech denoting
swiftness in running. "Like the hinds:" a condensed simile for "like the
hinds' feet," such as we frequently meet with in Hebrew (vid., Ges. 144,
Anm.). The reference is to swiftness in pursuit of the foe (vid., [Sa2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#018); [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008)). רגליו, his feet, for רגלי (my
feet) in the psalm, may be accounted for from the fact, that David had
spoken of himself in the third person as the innocent one. "My high
places" were not the high places of the enemy, that became his by virtue
of conquest, but the high places of his own land, which he maintained
triumphantly, so that he ruled the land for them. The expression is
formed after [Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013), and is
imitated in [Hab 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019). למּד is
generally construed with a double accusative: here it is written with an
accusative and ל, and signifies to instruct for the war. נחת, in the
psalm נחתה, on account of the feminine זרועתי, is not the Niphal of חתת,
to be broken in pieces, but the Piel of נחת, to cause to go down, to
press down the bow, i.e., to set it. The bow of brass is mentioned as
being the strongest: setting such a bow would be a sign of great heroic
strength. The two verses ([Sa2 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#034)
and [Sa2 22:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#035)) are simply a
particularizing description of the power and might with which the Lord
had endowed David to enable him to conquer all his foes.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa2 22:36</span></span>

36 And Thou reachest me the shield of my salvation,

And Thy hearing makes me great.

37 Thou makest my steps broad under me,

And my ankles have not trembled.

The Lord bestows the true strength for victory in His salvation. The
shield of salvation is the shield which consists of salvation, of the
helping grace of the Lord. ענתך, for which we find in the psalm ענותך,
thy humility, i.e., God's condescending grace, does not mean "thy
humiliation," but "thy hearkening," i.e., that practical hearkening on
the part of God, when called upon for help, which was manifested in the
fact that God made his steps broad, i.e., provided the walker with a
broad space for free motion, removing obstructions and stumbling-blocks
out of the way. God had done this for David, so that his ankles had not
trembled, i.e., he had not been wanting in the power to take firm and
safe steps. In this strength of his God he could destroy all his foes.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa2 22:38</span></span>

38 I will pursue my enemies and destroy them,

I will not turn till they are consumed.

39 I will consume them and dash them in pieces, that they may not arise,

And may fall under my feet.

40 And Thou girdest me with strength for war,

Thou bowest mine adversaries under me.

41 And Thou makest mine enemies turn the back to me;

My haters, I root them out.

The optative form ארדּפה serves to make the future signification of
ארדּף (in the psalm) the more apparent. Consequently it is quite out of
the question to take the other verbs as preterites. We are not compelled
to do this by the interchange of imperfects c. vav consec. with simple
imperfects, as the vav consec. is not used exclusively as expressive of
the past. On the contrary, the substance of the whole of the following
description shows very clearly that David refers not only to the
victories he has already won, but in general to the defeat of all his
foes in the past, the present, and the future; for he speaks as
distinctly as possible not only of their entire destruction ([Sa2
22:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#038), [Sa2
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#039), [Sa2
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#043)), but also of the fact that God
makes him the head of the nations, and distant and foreign nations to
him homage. Consequently he refers not only to his own personal
dominion, but also, on the strength of the promise which he had received
from God, to the increase of the dominion of the throne of his house,
whilst he proclaims in the Spirit the ultimate defeat of all the enemies
of the kingdom of God. This Messianic element in the following
description comes out in a way that cannot be mistaken, in the praise of
the Lord with which he concludes in [Sa2
22:47-51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047). ואשׁמידם, "I destroy them,"
is stronger than ואשּׂיגם, "I reach them" (in the psalm). In [Sa2
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#039) the words are crowded together,
to express the utter destruction of all foes. In the psalm ואכלּם is
omitted. ותּזרני for ותּאזּרני in the psalm is not a poetical Syriasm,
and still less a "careless solecism" (Hupfeld), but a simple
contraction, such as we meet with in many forms: e.g., מלּפנוּ for
מאלּפנוּ ([Job 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#011); cf. Ewald, 232,
b.). The form תּתּה for נתתּה (in the psalm) is unusual, and the
aphaeresis of the נ can only be accounted for from the fact that this
much-used word constantly drops its נ as a radical sound in the
imperfect (see Ewald, 195, c.). The phrase ערף לּי תּתּה is formed after
[Exo 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027). "Giving the enemy to a
person's back" means causing them to turn the back, i.e., putting them
to flight.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">sa2 22:42</span></span>

42 They look out, but there is no deliverer;

For Jehovah, but He answereth them not.

43 And I rub in pieces as the dust of the earth,

Like the mire of the streets I crush them and stamp upon them.

The cry of the foe for help is not attended to; they are annihilated
without quarter. ישׁעוּ, to look out to God for help (with אל and על;
vid., [Isa 17:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#007)), is more poetical
than ישׁוּעוּ, "they cry" (in the psalm); and כּעפר־ארץ is more simple
than על־פּני־רוּח כּעפר (in the psalm), "I crush them as dust before the
wind," for the wind does not crush the dust, but carries it away. In the
second clause of [Sa2 22:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#043), אדקּם is
used instead of אריקם in the psalm, and strengthened by ארקעם. אדקּם,
from דקק, to make thin, to crush; so that instead of "I pour them out
like mire of the streets which is trodden to pieces," the Psalmist
simply says, "I crush and stamp upon them like mire of the streets."
Through the utter destruction of the foe, God establishes the universal
dominion to which the throne of David is to attain.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">sa2 22:44</span></span>

44 And Thou rescuest me out of the strivings of my people,

Preservest me to be the head of the heathen.

People that I knew not serve me.

45 The sons of the stranger dissemble to me,

Upon hearsay they obey me.

46 The sons of the stranger despair,

And tremble out of their castles.

By "the strivings of my people" the more indefinite expression in the
psalm, "strivings of the people," is explained. The words refer to the
domestic conflicts of David, out of which the Lord delivered him, such
as the opposition of Ishbosheth and the rebellions of Absalom and Sheba.
These deliverances formed the prelude and basis of his dominion over the
heathen. Consequently תּשׁמרני (Thou preservest me to be the head of the
nations) occurs quite appropriately in the second clause; and תּשׂימני,
"Thou settest me," which occurs in the psalm, is a far less pregnant
expression. עם before ידעתּי לא is used indefinitely to signify foreign
nations. Toi king of Hamath ([Sa2
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#010)) was an example, and his
subjugation was a prelude of the future subjection of all the heathen to
the sceptre of the Son of David, as predicted in Ps 72. In v. 45 the two
clauses of the psalm are very appropriately transposed. The Hithpael
יתכחשׁוּ, as compared with יכחשׁוּ, is the later form. In the primary
passage ([Deu 33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029)) the Niphal is
used to signify the dissembling of friendship, or of involuntary homage
on the part of the vanquished towards the victor. אזן לשׁמוע, "by the
hearing of the ear," i.e., by hearsay, is a simple explanation of אזן
לשׁמע, at the rumour of the ears (vid., [Job
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005)), i.e., at the mere rumour of
David's victories. The foreign nations pine away, i.e., despair of ever
being able to resist the victorious power of David. יחגּרוּ, "they gird
themselves," does not yield any appropriate meaning, even if we should
take it in the sense of equipping themselves to go out to battle. The
word is probably a misspelling of יחרגוּ, which occurs in the psalm, חרג
being a ἁπ. λεγ. in the sense of being terrified, or trembling: they
tremble out of their castles, i.e., they come trembling out of their
castles (for the thought itself, see [Mic
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#017)). It is by no means probable that
the word חרג, which is so frequently met with in Hebrew, is used in this
one passage in the sense of "to limp," according to Syriac usage.

In conclusion, the Psalmist returns to the praise of the Lord, who had
so highly favoured him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">sa2 22:47</span></span>

47 Jehovah liveth, and blessed is my rock,

And the God of my refuge of salvation is exalted.

48 The God who giveth me vengeance,

And bringeth nations under me;

49 Who leadeth me out from mine enemies,

And exalteth me above mine adversaries,

Delivereth me from the man of violence.

The formula חי־יהוה does not mean "let Jehovah live," for the word יחי
would be used for that (vid., [Sa2
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#016); [Sa1
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024)), but is a declaration: "the
Lord is living." The declaration itself is to be taken as praise of God,
for "praising God is simply ascribing to Him the glorious perfections
which belong to him; we have only to give Him what is His own"
(Hengstenberg). The following clauses also contain simply declarations;
this is evident from the word ירוּם, since the optative ירם would be
used to denote a wish. The Lord is living or alive when He manifests His
life in acts of omnipotence. In the last clause, the expression צוּר
(rock) is intensified into ישׁעי צוּר אלהי (the God of my refuge, or
rock, of salvation), i.e., the God who is my saving rock (cf. [Sa2
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#003)). In the predicates of God in
[Sa2 22:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#048), [Sa2
22:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#049), the saving acts depicted by
David in vv. 5-20 and 29-46 are summed up briefly. Instead of מוריד, "He
causes to go down under me," i.e., He subjects to me, we find in the
psalm ויּדבּר, "He drives nations under me," and מפלטי instead of
מוציאי; and lastly, instead of חמס אישׁ in the psalm, we have here חמסים
אישׁ, as in [Psa 140:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#002). Therefore the
praise of the Lord shall be sounded among all nations.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">sa2 22:50</span></span>

50 Therefore will I praise Thee, O Jehovah, among the nations,

And sing praise to Thy name.

51 As He who magnifies the salvation of His king,

And showeth grace to His anointed,

To David, and his seed for ever.

The grace which the Lord had shown to David was so great, that the
praise thereof could not be restricted to the narrow limits of Israel.
With the dominion of David over the nations, there spread also the
knowledge, and with this the praise, of the Lord who had given him the
victory. Paul was therefore perfectly justified in quoting the verse
before us ([Sa2 22:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#050)) in [Rom
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#009), along with [Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043) and [Psa
117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001), as a proof that the salvation
of God was intended for the Gentiles also. The king whose salvation the
Lord had magnified, was not David as an individual, but David and his
seed for ever-that is to say, the royal family of David which culminated
in Christ. David could thus sing praises upon the ground of the promise
which he had received ([Sa2 7:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)),
and which is repeated almost verbatim in the last clause of [Sa2
22:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#051). The Chethib מגדיל is the Hiphil
participle מגדּיל, according to Ps. 18:51; and the Keri מגדּול, "tower
of the fulness of salvation," is a singular conjecture.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](sa2023)

</div>
