<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2004)  [Next](sa2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 5:0</span></span>

II\. The Government of David Over All Israel in the Time of Its Strength
And Glory - 2 Samuel 5

After the death of Ishbosheth, David was anointed in Hebron by all the
tribes as king over the whole of Israel ([Sa2
5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)). He then proceeded to attack
the Jebusites in Jerusalem, conquered their fortress Zion, and made
Jerusalem the capital of his kingdom; fortifying it still further, and
building a palace in it ([Sa2 5:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)),
after he had twice inflicted a defeat upon the Philistines ([Sa2
5:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)). But in order that the chief
city of his kingdom and the seat of his own palace might also be made
the religious centre of the whole nation as a congregation of Jehovah,
he first of all brought the ark of the covenant out of its place of
concealment, and had it conveyed in a festal procession to Zion, and
deposited there in a tent which had been specially prepared for it, as a
place of worship for the whole congregation (2 Samuel 6). He then
resolved to erect for the Lord in Jerusalem a temple fitted for His
name; and the Lord gave him in return the promise of the eternal
perpetuity of his throne (2 Samuel 7). To this there is appended a
cursory account of David's wars with the neighbouring nations, by which
not only his own sovereignty, but the Israelitish kingdom of God, was
raised into a commanding power among the nations and kingdoms of the
world. In connection with all this, David still maintained his affection
and fidelity towards the fallen royal family of Saul, and showed
compassion towards the last remaining descendant of that family ([Sa2
9:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)).

This account of the unfolding of the power and glory of the kingdom of
Israel, through the instrumentality of David and during his reign, is so
far arranged chronologically, that all the events and all the
enterprises of David mentioned in this section occurred in the first
half of his reign over the whole of the covenant nation. The
chronological arrangement, however, is not strictly adhered to, so far
as the details are concerned; but the standpoint of material resemblance
is so far connected with it, that all the greater wars of David are
grouped together in 2 Samuel 8 (see the introduction to 2 Samuel 8). It
is obvious from this, that the plan which the historian adopted was
first of all to describe the internal improvement of the Israelitish
kingdom of God by David, and then to proceed to the external development
of his power in conflict with the opposing nations of the world. David
Anointed King over All Israel. Jerusalem Taken, and Made the Capital of
the Kingdom. Victories over the Philistines. 2 Samuel 5.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 5:1</span></span>

[Sa2 5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

David Anointed King over all Israel. - [Sa2
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001) (compare with this the parallel
passages in [Ch1 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)). After the
death of Ishbosheth, all the tribes of Israel (except Judah) came to
Hebron in the persons of their representatives the elders (vid., [Sa2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003)), in response to the summons of
Abner ([Sa2 3:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#017)), to do homage to
David as their king. They assigned three reasons for their coming: (1.)
"Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh," i.e., thy blood-relations,
inasmuch as all the tribes of Israel were lineal descendants of Jacob
(vid., [Gen 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#014); [Jdg
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#002)). (2.) "In time past, when Saul
was king over us, thou wast the leader of Israel (thou leddest out and
broughtest in Israel)," i.e., thou didst superintend the affairs of
Israel (see at [Num 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#017); and for the
fact itself, [Sa1 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#005)). מוציא הייתה
is an error in writing for המּוציא היית, and מבי for מביא, with the א
dropped, as in [Kg1 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#021), etc. (vid.,
Olshausen, Gr. p. 69). (3.) They ended by asserting that Jehovah had
called him to be the shepherd and prince over His people. The remarks
which we have already made at [Sa2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#018) respecting Abner's appeal to a
similar utterance on the part of Jehovah, are equally applicable to the
words of Jehovah to David which are quoted here: "Thou shalt feed my
people Israel," etc. On the Piska, see the note to [Jos
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001).

[Sa2 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003)

"All the elders of Israel came" is a repetition of [Sa2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001), except that the expression "all
the tribes of Israel" is more distinctly defined as meaning "all the
elders of Israel." "So all the elders came; ... and king David made a
covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord (see at [Sa2
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#021)): and they anointed David king
over (all) Israel." The writer of the Chronicles adds, "according to the
word of the Lord through Samuel," i.e., so that the command of the Lord
to Samuel, to anoint David king over Israel ([Sa1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001), [Sa1
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012)), found its complete fulfilment
in this.

[Sa2 5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#004)

The age of David when he began to reign is given here, viz., thirty
years old; also the length of his reign, viz., seven years and a half at
Hebron over Judah, and thirty-three years at Jerusalem over Israel and
Judah. In the books of Chronicles these statements occur at the close of
David's reign ([Ch1 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#027)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 5:6</span></span>

Conquest of the Stronghold of Zion, and Choice of Jerusalem as the
Capital of the Kingdom (cf. [Ch1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#004),
[Ch1 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#009)). - These parallel accounts
agree in all the main points; but they are both of them merely brief
extracts from a more elaborate history, so that certain things, which
appeared of comparatively less importance, are passed over either in the
one or the other, and the full account is obtained by combining the two.
The conquest of the citadel Zion took place immediately after the
anointing of David as king over all the tribes of Israel. This is
apparent, not only from the fact that the account follows directly
afterwards, but also from the circumstance that, according to [Sa2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005), David reigned in Jerusalem just
as many years as he was king over all Israel.

[Sa2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)

The king went with his men (i.e., his fighting men: the Chronicles have
"all Israel," i.e., the fighting men of Israel) to Jerusalem to the
Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, i.e., the natives or Canaanites;
"and they said (the singular ויּאמר is used because היבוּסי is a
singular form) to David, Thou wilt not come hither (i.e., come in), but
the blind and lame will drive thee away: to say (i.e., by which they
meant to say), David will not come in." הסירך is not used for the
infinitive, but has been rightly understood by the lxx, Aben Ezra, and
others, as a perfect. The perfect expresses a thing accomplished, and
open to no dispute; and the use of the singular in the place of the
plural, as in [Isa 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032), is to be
explained from the fact that the verb precedes, and is only defined
precisely by the subject which follows (vid., Ewald, 319, a.). The
Jebusites relied upon the unusual natural advantages of their citadel,
which stood upon Mount Zion, a mountain shut in by deep valleys on three
different sides; so that in their haughty self-security they imagined
that they did not even need to employ healthy and powerful warriors to
resist the attack made by David, but that the blind and lame would
suffice.

[Sa2 5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007)

However, David took the citadel Zion, i.e., "the city of David." This
explanatory remark anticipates the course of events, as David did not
give this name to the conquered citadel, until he had chosen it as his
residence and capital (vid., [Sa2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009)). ציּון (Sion), from ציה, to be
dry: the dry or arid mountain or hill. This was the name of the southern
and loftiest mountain of Jerusalem. Upon this stood the fortress or
citadel of the town, which had hitherto remained in the possession of
the Jebusites; whereas the northern portion of the city of Jerusalem,
which was upon lower ground, had been conquered by the Judaeans and
Benjaminites very shortly after the death of Joshua (see at [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008)). - In [Sa2
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008) we have one circumstance mentioned
which occurred in connection with this conquest. On that day, i.e., when
he had advanced to the attack of the citadel Zion, David said, "Every
one who smites the Jebusites, let him hurl into the waterfall (i.e.,
down the precipice) both the lame and blind, who are hateful to David's
soul." This is most probably the proper interpretation of these obscure
words of David, which have been very differently explained. Taking up
the words of the Jebusites, David called all the defenders of the
citadel of Zion "lame and blind," and ordered them to be cast down the
precipice without quarter. צנּור signifies a waterfall (catarracta) in
[Psa 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008), the only other passage in
which it occurs, probably from צנר, to roar. This meaning may also be
preserved here, if we assume that at the foot of the steep precipice of
Zion there was a waterfall probably connected with the water of Siloah.
It is true we cannot determine anything with certainty concerning it,
as, notwithstanding the many recent researches in Jerusalem, the
situation of the Jebusite fortress and the character of the mountain of
Zion in ancient times are quite unknown to us. This explanation of the
word zinnor is simpler than Ewald's assumption that the word signifies
the steep side of a rock, which merely rests upon the fact that the
Greek word καταρράκτης originally signifies a plunge.

(Note: The earliest translators have only resorted to guesses. The
Seventy, with their ἁπτέσθω ἐν παραξιφιδι, have combined צנּור with
צנּה, which they render now and then μάχαιρα or ῥομφαία. This is also
done by the Syriac and Arabic. The Chaldee paraphrases in this manner:
"who begins to subjugate the citadel." Jerome, who probably followed the
Rabbins, has et tetigisset domatum fistulas (and touched the
water-pipes); and Luther, "und erlanget die Dachrinnen" (like the
English version, "whosoever getteth up to the gutter:" Tr.). Hitzig's
notion, that zinnor signifies ear ("whosoever boxes the ears of the
blind and lame") needs no refutation; nor does that of Fr. Bttcher, who
proposes to follow the Alexandrian rendering, and refer zinnor to a
"sword of honour or marshal's staff," which David promised to the
victor.)

ויגע should be pointed as a Hiphil ויגּע. The Masoretic pointing ויגּע
arises from their mistaken interpretation of the whole sentence. The
Chethibh שׂנאו might be the third pers. perf., "who hate David's soul;"
only in that case the omission of עשׁר would be surprising, and
consequently the Keri שׂנאי is to be preferred. "From this," adds the
writer, "the proverb arose, 'The blind and lame shall not enter the
house;' " in which proverb the epithet "blind and lame," which David
applied to the Jebusites who were hated by him, has the general
signification of "repulsive persons," with whom one does not wish to
have anything to do. In the Chronicles not only is the whole of [Sa2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007) omitted, with the proverb to which
the occurrence gave rise, but also the allusion to the blind and lame in
the words spoken by the Jebusites ([Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)); and another word of David's is
substituted instead, namely, that David would make the man who first
smote the Jebusites, i.e., who stormed their citadel, head and chief;

(Note: This is also inserted in the passage before us by the translators
of the English version: "he shall be chief and captain." - Tr.)

and also the statement that Joab obtained the prize. The historical
credibility of the statement cannot be disputed, as Thenius assumes, on
the ground that Joab had already been chief (sar) for a long time,
according to [Sa2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#013) : for the
passage referred to says nothing of the kind; and there is a very great
difference between the commander of an army in the time of war, and a
"head and chief," i.e., a commander-in-chief. The statement in [Sa2
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008) with regard to Joab's part, the
fortification of Jerusalem, shows very clearly that the author of the
Chronicles had other and more elaborate sources in his possession, which
contained fuller accounts than the author of our books has communicated.

[Sa2 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009)

"David dwelt in the fort," i.e., he selected the fort or citadel as his
palace, "and called it David's city." David may have been induced to
select the citadel of Zion as his palace, and by so doing to make
Jerusalem the capital of the whole kingdom, partly by the natural
strength of Zion, and partly by the situation of Jerusalem, viz., on the
border of the tribes of Benjamin and Judah, and tolerably near to the
centre of the land. "And David built, i.e., fortified (the city of
Zion), round about from Millo and inwards." In the Chronicles we have
ועד־הסּביב, "and to the environs or surroundings," i.e., to the
encircling wall which was opposite to the Millo. The fortification
"inwards" must have consisted in the enclosure of Mount Zion with a
strong wall upon the north side, where Jerusalem joined it as a lower
town, so as to defend the palace against the hostile attacks on the
north or town side, which had hitherto been left without fortifications.
The "Millo" was at any rate some kind of fortification, probably a large
tower or castle at one particular part of the surrounding wall (comp.
[Jdg 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#006) with [Jdg
9:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046) and [Jdg
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#049), where Millo is used
interchangeably with Migdal). The name ("the filling") probably
originated in the fact that through this tower or castle the
fortification of the city, or the surrounding wall, was filled or
completed. The definite article before Millo indicates that it was a
well-known fortress, probably one that had been erected by the
Jebusites. With regard to the situation of Millo, we may infer from this
passage, and [Ch1 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#008), that the tower
in question stood at one corner of the wall, either on the north-east or
north-west, "where the hill of Zion has the least elevation and
therefore needed the greatest strengthening from without" (Thenius on
[Kg1 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015)). This is fully sustained
both by [Kg1 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#027), where Solomon is
said to have closed the breach of the city of David by building
(fortifying) Millo, and by [Ch2 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005),
where Hezekiah is said to have built up all the wall of Jerusalem, and
made Millo strong, i.e., to have fortified it still further (vid., [Kg1
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015) and [Kg1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#024)).

[Sa2 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#010)

And David increased in greatness, i.e., in power and fame, for Jehovah
the God of hosts was with him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 5:11</span></span>

David's Palace, Wives and Children (comp. [Ch1
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#001)). - King Hiram of Tyre sent
messengers to David, and afterwards, by the express desire of the
latter, cedar-wood and builders, carpenters and stone-masons, who built
him a house, i.e., a palace. Hiram (Hirom in [Kg1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002); Huram in the Chronicles; lxx
Χειράμ; Josephus, Εἴραμος and Εἴρωμος), king of Tyre, was not only an
ally of David, but of his son Solomon also. He sent to the latter
cedar-wood and builders for the erection of the temple and of his own
palace ([Kg1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#008).; [Ch2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#002).), and fitted out a mercantile
fleet in conjunction with him ([Kg1
9:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#027); [Ch2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#010)); in return for which, Solomon
not only sent him an annual supply of corn, oil, and wine ([Kg1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011); [Ch2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#009)), but when all the buildings were
finished, twenty years after the erection of the temple, he made over to
him twenty of the towns of Galilee ([Kg1
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#010).). It is evident from these facts
that Hiram was still reigning in the twenty-fourth, or at any rate the
twentieth, year of Solomon's reign, and consequently, as he had assisted
David with contributions of wood for the erection of his palace, that he
must have reigned at least forty-five or fifty years; and therefore
that, even in the latter case, he cannot have begun to reign earlier
than the eighth year of David's reign over all Israel, or from six to
ten years after the conquest of the Jebusite citadel upon Mount Zion.
This is quite in harmony with the account given here; for it by no means
follows, that because the arrival of an embassy from Hiram, and the
erection of David's palace, are mentioned immediately after the conquest
of the citadel of Zion, they must have occurred directly afterwards. The
arrangement of the different events in the chapter before us is topical
rather than strictly chronological. Of the two battles fought by David
with the Philistines ([Sa2 5:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)),
the first at any rate took place before the erection of David's palace,
as it is distinctly stated in [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017) that the Philistines made war
upon David when they heard that he had been anointed king over Israel,
and therefore in all probability even before the conquest of the
fortress of the Jebusites, or at any rate immediately afterwards, and
before David had commenced the fortification of Jerusalem and the
erection of a palace. The historian, on the contrary, has not only
followed up the account of the capture of the fortress of Zion, and the
selection of it as David's palace, by a description of what David
gradually did to fortify and adorn the new capital, but has also added a
notice as to David's wives and the children that were born to him in
Jerusalem. Now, if this be correct, the object of Hiram's embassy cannot
have been "to congratulate David upon his ascent of the throne," as
Thenius maintains; but after he had ascended the throne, Hiram sent
ambassadors to form an alliance with this powerful monarch; and David
availed himself of the opportunity to establish an intimate friendship
with Hiram, and ask him for cedar-wood and builders for his palace.

(Note: The statements of Menander of Ephesus in Josephus (c. Ap. i. 18),
that after the death of Abibal his son Hirom (Εἴρωμος) succeeded him in
the government, and reigned thirty-four years, and died at the age of
fifty-three, are at variance with the biblical history. For, according
to these statements, as Hiram was still reigning "at the end of twenty
years" (according to [Kg1 9:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#010)),
when Solomon had built his palaces and the house of the Lord, i.e.,
twenty-four years after Solomon began to reign, he cannot have ascended
the throne before the sixty-first year of David's life, and the
thirty-first of his reign. But in that case the erection of David's
palace would fall somewhere within the last eight years of his life. And
to this we have to add the repeated statements made by Josephus (l.c.
and Ant. viii. 3, 1), to the effect that Solomon commenced the building
of the temple in Hiram's twelfth year, or after he had reigned eleven
years; so that Hiram could only have begun to reign seven years before
the death of David (in the sixty-third year of his life), and the
erection of the palace by David must have fallen later still, and his
determination to build the temple, which he did not form till he had
taken possession of his house of cedar, i.e., the newly erected palace
([Sa2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002)), would fall in the very
last years of his life, but a very short time before his death. As this
seems hardly credible, it has been assumed by some that Hiram's father,
Abibal, also bore the name of Hiram, or that Hiram is confounded with
Abibal in the account before us (Thenius), or that Abibal's father was
named Hiram, and it was he who formed the alliance with David (Ewald,
Gesch. iv. 287). But all these assumptions are overthrown by the fact
that the identity of the Hiram who was Solomon's friend with the
contemporary and friend of David is expressly affirmed not only in [Ch2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#002) (as Ewald supposes), but also in
[Kg1 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#015). For whilst Solomon writes
to Hiram in [Ch2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#003), "as thou didst
deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an
house to dwell therein," it is also stated [Kg1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001) that "Hiram king of Tyre sent his
servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king
in the room of his father: for Hiram was a lover of David all days (all
his life)." Movers (Phnizier ii. 1, p. 147ff.) has therefore attempted
to remove the discrepancy between the statements made in Josephus and
the biblical account of Hiram's friendship with David and Solomon, by
assuming that in the narrative contained in the books of Samuel we have
a topical and not a chronological arrangement, and that according to
this arrangement the conquest of Jerusalem by David is followed
immediately by the building of the city and palace, and this again by
the removal of the holy ark to Jerusalem, and lastly by David's
resolution to build a temple, which really belonged to the close of his
reign, and indeed, according to [Sa2
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002), to the period directly following
the completion of the cedar palace. There is a certain amount of truth
at the foundation of this, but it does not remove the discrepancy; for
even if David's resolution to build a temple did not fall within the
earlier years of his reign at Jerusalem, as some have inferred from the
position in which it stands in the account given in this book, it cannot
be pushed forward to the very last years of his life and reign. This is
decidedly precluded by the fact, that in the promise given to David by
God, his son and successor upon the throne is spoken of in such terms as
to necessitate the conclusion that he was not yet born. This difficulty
cannot be removed by the solution suggested by Movers (p. 149), "that
the historian necessarily adhered to the topical arrangement which he
had adopted for this section, because he had not said anything yet about
Solomon and his mother Bathsheba:" for the expression "which shall
proceed out of thy bowels" ([Sa2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012))
is not the only one of the kind; but in [Ch1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009), David says to his son Solomon,
"The word of the Lord came to me, saying, A son shall be born to thee -
Solomon - he shall build an house for my name;" from which it is very
obvious, that Solomon was not born at the time when David determined to
build the temple and received this promise from God in consequence of
his intention.

To this we have also to add [Sa2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002),
where David sees Bathsheba, who gave birth to Solomon a few years later,
from the roof of his palace. Now, even though the palace is simply
called "the king's house" in this passage, and not the "house of cedar,"
as in [Sa2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002), and therefore the
house intended might possibly be the house in which David lived before
the house of cedar was built, this is a very improbable supposition, and
there cannot be much doubt that the "king's house" is the palace ([Sa2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011); [Sa2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#001)) which he had erected for himself.
Lastly, not only is there not the slightest intimation in the whole of
the account given in 2 Samuel 7 that David was an old man when he
resolved to build the temple, but, on the contrary, the impression which
it makes throughout is, that it was the culminating point of his reign,
and that he was at an age when he might hope not only to commence this
magnificent building, but in all human probability to live to complete
it. The only other solution left, is the assumption that there are
errors in the chronological date of Josephus, and that Hiram lived
longer than Menander affirms. The assertion that Solomon commenced the
erection of the temple in the eleventh or twelfth year of Hiram's reign
was not derived by Josephus from Phoenician sources; for the fragments
which he gives from the works of Menander and Dius in the Antiquities
(viii. 5, 3) and c. Apion (i. 17, 18), contain nothing at all about the
building of the temple (vid., Movers, p. 141), but he has made it as the
result of certain chronological combinations of his own, just as in Ant.
viii. 3, 1, he calculates the year of the building of the temple in
relation both to the exodus and also to the departure of Abraham out of
Haran, but miscalculates, inasmuch as he places it in the 592nd year
after the exodus instead of the 480th, and the 1020th year from
Abraham's emigration to Canaan instead of the 1125th. And in the present
instance his calculation of the exact position of the same event in
relation to Hiram's reign was no doubt taken from Menander; but even in
this the numbers may be faulty, since the statements respecting
Balezorus and Myttonus in the very same extract from Menander, as to the
length of the reigns of the succeeding kings of Tyre, can be proved to
be erroneous, and have been corrected by Movers from Eusebius and
Syncellus; and, moreover, the seven years of Hiram's successor,
Baleazar, do not tally with Eusebius and Syncellus, who both give
seventeen years. Thus the proof which Movers adduces from the
synchronism of the Tyrian chronology with the biblical, the Egyptian,
and the Assyrian, to establish the correctness of Menander's statements
concerning Hiram's reign, is rendered very uncertain, to say nothing of
the fact that Movers has only succeeded in bringing out the synchronism
with the biblical chronology by a very arbitrary and demonstrably false
calculation of the years that the kings of Judah and Israel reigned.)

[Sa2 5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#012)

"And David perceived (sc., from the success of his enterprises) that
Jehovah had firmly established him king over Israel, and that He had
exalted his kingdom for His people Israel's sake," i.e., because He had
chosen Israel as His people, and had promised to make it great and
glorious.

To the building of David's palace, there is appended in [Sa2
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#013) the account of the increase of
his house by the multiplication of his wives and concubines, and of the
sons who were born to him at Jerusalem (as in [Ch1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#003).). Taking many wives was indeed
prohibited in the law of the king in [Deu
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017); but as a large harem was
considered from time immemorial as part of the court of an oriental
monarch, David suffered himself to be seduced by that custom to
disregard this prohibition, and suffered many a heartburn afterwards in
consequence, not to mention his fearful fall in consequence of his
passion for Bathsheba. The concubines are mentioned before the wives,
probably because David had taken many of them to Jerusalem, and earlier
than the wives. In the Chronicles the concubines and omitted, though not
"intentionally," as they are mentioned in [Ch1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#009); but as being of no essential
importance in relation to the list of sons which follows, because no
difference was made between those born of concubines and those born of
wives. "Out of Jerusalem," i.e., away from Jerusalem: not that the wives
were all born in Jerusalem, as the words which follow, "after he was
come from Hebron," clearly show. In the Chronicles, therefore, it is
explained as meaning "in Jerusalem." The sons are mentioned again both
in [Ch1 14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#005) and in the genealogy in
[Ch1 3:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005). Shammua is called Shimea
in [Ch1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005), according to a different
pronunciation. Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon were sons of
Bathsheba according to [Ch1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005).

[Sa2 5:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#015)

Elishua is written incorrectly in [Ch1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#006) as Elishama, because Elishama
follows afterwards. There are two names after Elishua in [Ch1
3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#006), and [Ch1
14:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#006), viz., Eliphalet and Nogah,
which have not crept into the text from oversight or from a wrong
spelling of other names, because the number of the names is given as
nine in [Ch1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#008), and the two names
must be included in order to bring out that number. And, on the other
hand, it is not by the mistake of a copyist that they have been omitted
from the text before us, but it has evidently been done deliberately on
account of their having died in infancy, or at a very early age. This
also furnishes a very simple explanation of the fact, that the name
Eliphalet occurs again at the end of the list, namely, because a son who
was born later received the name of his brother who had died young.
Eliada, the last but one, is called Beeliada in [Ch1
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#007), another form of the name,
compounded with Baal instead of El. David had therefore nineteen sons,
six of whom were born in Hebron ([Sa2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002).), and thirteen at Jerusalem.
Daughters are not mentioned in the genealogical accounts, because as a
rule only heiresses or women who acquired renown from special causes
were included in them. There is a daughter named Thamar mentioned
afterwards in [Sa2 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 5:17</span></span>

David gains two Victories over the Philistines (compare [Ch1
14:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#008)). - Both these victories
belong in all probability to the interval between the anointing of David
at Hebron over all Israel and the conquest of the citadel of Zion. This
is very evident, so far as the first is concerned, from the words, "When
the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel"
([Sa2 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)), not when David had
conquered the citadel of Zion. Moreover, when the Philistines
approached, David "went down to the hold," or mountain fortress, by
which we cannot possibly understand the citadel upon Zion, on account of
the expression "went down." If David had been living upon Zion at the
time, he would hardly have left this fortification when the Philistines
encamped in the valley of Rephaim on the west of Jerusalem, but would
rather have attacked and routed the enemy from the citadel itself. The
second victory followed very soon after the first, and must therefore be
assigned to the same period. The Philistines evidently resolved, as soon
as the tidings reached them of the union of all the tribes under the
sovereignty of David, that they would at once resist the growing power
of Israel, and smite David before he had consolidated his government.

[Sa2 5:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)

"The Philistines went up to seek David," i.e., to seek him out and smite
him. The expression לבקּשׁ presupposes that David had not yet taken up
his abode upon Zion. He had probably already left Hebron to make
preparations for his attack upon the Jebusites. When he heard of the
approach of the Philistines, he went down into the mountain fortress.
"The hold" cannot be the citadel of Zion (as in [Sa2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007) and [Sa2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009)), because this was so high that
they had to go up to it on every side; and it is impossible to sustain
the opinion advanced by Bertheau, that the verb ירד (to go down) is used
for falling back into a fortification. המּצוּדה (the hold), with the
definite article, is probably the mountain stronghold in the desert of
Judah, into which David withdrew for a long time to defend himself from
Saul (vid., [Sa2 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#014) and [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008)). In [Sa2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#018) the position of the Philistines
is more minutely defined. The verse contains a circumstantial clause:
"The Philistines had come and spread themselves out in the valley of
Rephaim," a valley on the west of Jerusalem, and only separated from the
valley of Ben-hinnom by a narrow ridge of land (see at [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008)). Instead of ינּטשׁוּ the
Chronicles have יפשׁטוּ, they had invaded, which is perfectly equivalent
so far as the sense is concerned.

[Sa2 5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#019)

David inquired of the Lord by the Urim whether he should go out against
the foe, and whether God would give them into his hand;

(Note: Through the express statement that David inquired of Jehovah
(viz., by the Urim) in both these conflicts with the Philistines ([Sa2
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#019) and [Sa2
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#023)), Diestel's assertion, that after
the death of Saul we do not read any more about the use of the holy lot,
is completely overthrown, as well as the conclusion which he draws from
it, namely, that "David probably employed it for the purpose of giving a
certain definiteness to his command over his followers, over whom he had
naturally but little authority ([Sa1
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002)?), rather than because he looked
upon it himself with any peculiar reverence.")

and when he had received an answer in the affirmative to both these
questions, he went to Baal-perazim (lit. into Baal-perazim), and smote
them there, and said ([Sa2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020)),
"Jehovah hath broken mine enemies before me like a water-breach," i.e.,
has smitten them before me, and broken their power as a flood breaks
through and carries away whatever opposes it. From these words of David,
the place where the battle was fought received the name of Baal-perazim,
i.e., "possessor of breaches" (equivalent to Bruch-hausen or
Brechendorf, Breach-ham or Break-thorpe). The only other passage in
which the place is mentioned is [Isa
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021), where this event is alluded to,
but it cannot have been far from the valley of Rephaim.

[Sa2 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#021)

The Philistines left their idols behind them there. They had probably
brought them to the war, as the Israelites once did their ark, as an
auxiliary force. "And David took them away." The Chronicles have "their
gods" instead of "their idols," and "they were burned with fire" instead
of ישּׂאם, "he took them away,"

(Note: This is the marginal reading in the English version, though the
text has "he burned them." - Tr.)

took them as booty. The reading in the Chronicles gives the true
explanation of the fact, as David would certainly dispose of the idols
in the manner prescribed in the law ([Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005), [Deu
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025)). The same reading was also most
probably to be found in the sources employed by our author, who omitted
it merely as being self-evident. In this way David fully avenged the
disgrace brought upon Israel by the Philistines, when they carried away
the ark in the time of Eli.

[Sa2 5:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#022)

Although thoroughly beaten, the Philistines soon appeared again to
repair the defeat which they had suffered. As David had not followed up
the victory, possibly because he was not sufficiently prepared, the
Philistines assembled again in the valley of Rephaim.

[Sa2 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#023)

David inquired once more of the Lord what he was to do, and received
this answer: "Thou shalt not go up (i.e., advance to meet the foe, and
attack them in front); turn round behind them, and come upon them
(attack them) opposite to the Baca-shrubs." בּכאים, a word which only
occurs here and in the parallel passage in [Ch1
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#014), is rendered ἀπίους, pear-trees,
by the lxx, and mulberry-trees by the Rabbins. But these are both of
them uncertain conjectures. Baca, according to Abulfadl, is the name
given in Arabic to a shrub which grows at Mecca and resembles the
balsam, except that it has longer leaves and larger and rounder fruit,
and from which, if a leaf be broken off, there flows a white pungent
sap, like a white tear, which is all probability gave rise to the name
בּכא = בּכה, to weep (vid., Celsii, Hierob. i. pp. 338ff., and Gesenius,
Thes. p. 205).

[Sa2 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024)

"And when thou hearest the rush of a going in the tops of the
baca-shrubs, then bestir thyself," or hasten; "for Jehovah has gone out
before thee, to smite the army of the Philistines." "The sound of a
going," i.e., of the advance of an army, was a significant sign of the
approach of an army of God, which would smite the enemies of Jehovah and
of His servant David; like the visions of Jacob ([Gen
32:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002)) and Elisha ([Kg2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017)). "Then thou shalt bestir
thyself," lit. be sharp, i.e., active, quick: this is paraphrased in the
Chronicles by "then thou shalt go out to battle."

[Sa2 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#025)

David did this, and smote the Philistines from Geba to the neighbourhood
of Gezer. In the Chronicles we find "from Gibeon" instead of from Geba.
The former is unquestionably the true reading, and Geba an error of the
pen: for Geba, the present Jeba, was to the north of Jerusalem, and on
the east of Ramah (see at [Jos 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024));
so that it is quite unsuitable here. But that is not the case with
Gibeon, the present el Jib, on the north-west of Jerusalem (see at [Jos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003)); for this was on the way to
Gezer, which was four Roman miles to the north of Amws, and is probably
to be sought for on the site of the present el Kubab (see at [Jos
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#033)).

(Note: There is no force in the objection brought by Bertheau against
this view, viz., that "it is a priori improbable that the Philistines
who were fighting against David and his forces, whose base of operations
was Jerusalem, should have taken possession of the whole line from
Gibeon to Gezer," as the improbability is by no means apparent, and has
not been pointed out by Bertheau, whilst the assumption that Jerusalem
was David's base of operations has no foundation whatever. Moreover,
Bertheau's opinion, that Geba was the same as Gibeah in the tribe of
Judah ([Jos 15:57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#057)), is decidedly
erroneous: for this Gibeah is not to be identified with the present
village of Jeba on the south side of the Wady Musurr, half-way between
Shocoh and Jerusalem, but was situated towards the desert of Judah (see
at [Jos 15:57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#057)); and besides, it is
impossible to see how the Philistines, who had invaded the plain of
Rephaim, could have been beaten from this Gibeah as far as to Gezer.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 6](sa2006)

</div>
