<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2015)  [Next](sa2017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 16:1</span></span>

Ziba's faithless conduct towards Mephibosheth. - [Sa2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001). When David had gone a little
over the height (of the Mount of Olives: הראשׁ points back to [Sa2
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#032)), Mephibosheth's servant Ziba
came to meet him, with a couple of asses saddled, and laden with two
hundred loaves, a hundred raisin-cakes, a hundred date or fig-cakes, and
a skin of wine. The word קיץ corresponds to the Greek ὀπώρα, as the lxx
have rendered it in [Jer 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#010), [Jer
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#012), and is used to signify summer
fruits, both here and in [Amo 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)
(Symm.). The early translators rendered it lumps of figs in the present
passage (παλάθαι; cf. Ges. Thes. p. 1209). The Septuagint only has
ἑκατὸν φοίνικες. The latter is certainly the more correct, as the dried
lumps of figs or fig-cakes were called דּבלים ([Sa1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018)); and even at the present day
ripe dates, pressed together in lumps like cakes, are used in journeys
through the desert, as a satisfying and refreshing food (vid., Winer,
bibl. Realwrterbuch, i. 253).

[Sa2 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#002)

When the king asked him, "What are these for thee?" i.e., what art thou
going to do with them? Ziba replied, "The asses are for the king's
family to ride upon (to ride upon in turn), the bread and summer fruits
for the young men (the king's servants) to eat, and the wine for those
that are faint in the desert to drink" (see at [Sa2
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#023)). The Chethib ולהלחם is
evidently a copyist's error for והלּחם.

[Sa2 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003)

To the further question put by the king, "Where is thy lord
(Mephibosheth)? Ziba replied, "Behold, he sits (is staying) in
Jerusalem; for he said, To-day will the house of Israel restore the
kingship (government) of my father." The "kingship of my father,"
inasmuch as the throne would have passed to Jonathan if he had outlived
Saul. It is obvious enough, apart altogether from [Sa2
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#025)., the Ziba was calumniating his
master Mephibosheth, in the hope of getting possession of the lands that
he was farming for him. A cripple like Mephibosheth, lame in both feet,
who had never put in any claim to the throne before, could not possibly
have got the idea now that the people of Israel, who had just chosen
Absalom as king, would give the throne of Saul to such a cripple as he
was. It is true that Ziba's calumny was very improbable; nevertheless,
in the general confusion of affairs, it was not altogether an
inconceivable thing that the oppressed party of Saul might avail
themselves of this opportunity to make an attempt to restore the power
of that house, which many greatly preferred to that of David, under the
name of Mephibosheth.

[Sa2 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#004)

And in the excited state in which David then was, he was weak enough to
give credence to Ziba's words, and to commit the injustice of promising
the calumniator all that belonged to Mephibosheth, - a promise for which
he most politely thanked him. השׁתּחויתי, "I bow myself," equivalent to,
I lay myself at thy feet. "May I find favour in the eyes of my lord the
king!" i.e., may the king grant me his favour (vid., [Sa1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#018)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 16:5</span></span>

Shimei's cursing. - [Sa2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005), [Sa2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#006). When the king had come to
Bahurim, on the other side of the Mount of Olives, but not far off (see
at [Sa2 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#016)), there came out of that
place a man of the family of the house of Saul, i.e., a distant relation
of Saul, cursing him; and he pelted David and all his servants with
stones, although all the people and all the heroes (the household troops
and body-guard: [Sa2 15:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#017)) were
(marking) on the right and left of the king. The words "all the people,"
etc., are a circumstantial clause.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 16:7</span></span>

Shimei cursed thus: "Out, out (away, away), thou man of blood, and
worthless man! Jehovah hath repaid thee (now) for all the blood of the
house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast become king, and hath given the
kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son. Behold, now thou art in thy
misfortune, for thou art a man of blood." דּמים אישׁ, a man of drops of
blood, i.e., one who has shed blood or committed murder. What Shimei
meant by "all the blood of the house of Saul," which David had shed, and
because of which he was a man of blood, it is impossible to determine
with certainty. He may possibly have attributed to David the murder of
Ishbosheth and Abner, notwithstanding the fact that David was innocent
of the death of both (see [Sa2 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#027).,
and [Sa2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#006).). By "in whose stead
thou hast reigned," he meant whose throne thou hast forcibly usurped;
and by בּרעתך הנּך, "it is for this that punishment hat overtaken thee
now."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 16:9</span></span>

Abishai wanted to put an end to this cursing (on the expression "dead
dog," see [Sa2 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008)). "Let me go," said
he to David, "and take away his head," i.e., chop off his head. But
David replied, "What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah?" Joab
probably joined with Abishai. The formula "what to me and you?"
signifies that a person did not wish to have anything in common with the
feelings and views of another (cf. [Kg1
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018); [Jos
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024); and τὶ ἐμοὶ καὶ σοί, [Joh
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004). For the thing itself, comp. [Luk
9:52-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#052)). "If he curses, and if
Jehovah hath said to him, Curse David, who shall then say, Wherefore
hast thou done so?" For יה וכי יקלּל כּי (Chethib), the Masoretes give
us the Keri, יה כּי יקלּל כּה, "so let him curse, for Jehovah," etc.
This thought lies at the foundation of the rendering adopted by the lxx,
who have inserted, by way of explanation, καὶ ἄφετε αὐτὸν καὶ: so let
him go, and so may he curse. The Vulgate is just the same: dimittite eum
ut maledicat. This interpolation is taken from [Sa2
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011), and, like the Keri, is nothing
more than a conjecture, which was adopted simply because כּי was taken
as a causal particle, and then offence was taken at וכי. But כּי
signifies if, quando, in this passage, and the ו before the following
וּמי introduces the apodosis.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 16:11</span></span>

David said still further to Abishai and all his servants: "Behold, my
own son seeketh after my life; how much more then the Benjaminite! (who
belongs to a hostile race.) Let him curse, for Jehovah hath bidden him.
Perhaps Jehovah will look upon my guilt, and Jehovah will requite me
good for the curse which befals me this day." בּעוני (Chethib) has been
altered by the Masoretes into בּעיני o, "upon mine eye," probably in the
sense of "upon my tears;" and קללתי into קללתו, - from pure
misapprehension. בּעוני does not mean "upon my misery," for עון never
has this meaning, but upon the guilt which really belongs to me, in
contrast with that with which Shimei charges me; and קללתי is the curse
that has come upon me. Although David had committed no murder upon the
house of Saul, and therefore Shimei's cursing was nothing but malicious
blasphemy, he felt that it came upon him because of his sins, though not
for the sin imputed to him. He therefore forbade their putting the
blasphemer to death, and said Jehovah had commanded him to curse;
regarding the cursing as the consequence of the wrath of God that was
bringing him low (comp. the remarks on [Sa1
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019)). But this consciousness of
guilt also excited the assurance that the Lord would look upon his sin.
When God looks upon the guilt of a humble sinner, He will also, as a
just and merciful God, avert the evil, and change the suffering into a
blessing. David founded upon this the hope, that the Lord would repay
him with good for the curse with which Shimei was pursuing him now.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 16:13</span></span>

"So David went with his men on the way, whilst Shimei went on the slope
of the hill opposite to him, cursing continually, and pelted with stones
over against him, and with earth." לעמּתו means over against him in both
instances. It is not expressly stated that Shimei threw stones and earth
at David, but this is implied in the context.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 16:14</span></span>

The king came with his train, pursued in this manner, to Ayephim, and
refreshed himself there. The context requires that Ayephim should be
taken as the name of a place. If it were an appellative, signifying
weary, there would be no information as to the place to which David
came, and to which the word שׁם (there) distinctly refers. Bahurim
cannot be the place alluded to, for the simple reason that, according to
[Sa2 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#018), the place where David
rested was a considerable distance beyond Bahurim, towards the Jordan,
as we may see from the fact that it is stated there that the priests'
sons, who were sent to carry information to David of what was occurring
in Jerusalem, hid themselves in a well at Bahurim from the officers who
were following them, and consequently had to go still further in order
to convey the news to David; so that it is out of the question to supply
this name from [Sa2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005). It is true
that we never meet with the name Ayephim again; but this applies to many
other places whose existence is not called in question.

(Note: The meaning of the word, wearied or weariness, does not warrant
any conjectures, even though they should be more felicitous than that of
Bttcher, who proposes to alter Ayephim into Ephraim, and assumes that
there was a place of this name near Mahanaim, though without reflecting
that the place where David rested was on this side of the Jordan, and
somewhere near to Gilgal or Jericho ([Sa2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016). and [Sa2
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#022)).)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 16:15</span></span>

When Absalom and "all the people, the men of Israel," i.e., the people
who had joined him out of all the tribes of Israel ([Sa2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#010)), came to Jerusalem, and
Ahithophel with him, Hushai the Archite also came and greeted him warmly
as king, by exclaiming again and again, "Long live the king!"

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 16:17</span></span>

Absalom, apparently astonished at this, said to him, "Is this thy love
to thy friend (David)? why wentest thou not with thy friend?" But Hushai
replied, "No; but whom Jehovah hath chosen, and this people (i.e., the
people who had entered Jerusalem with Absalom), and all the men of
Israel (i.e., the whole nation), to him (לא for לו, Keri) will I belong,
and will remain with him. And again, whom should I serve? Is it not
before his son? As I have served thy father, so will I be before thee"
(i.e., serve thee). With great craftiness, Hushai declared at the very
outset that Jehovah had chosen Absalom - at least he could not come to
any other conclusion, judging from the results. And under such
circumstances he could not have any doubt as to whom it was his duty to
serve. As he had formerly served the father, so now he would serve his
son Absalom. In this way he succeeded in completely deceiving Absalom,
so that he placed unbounded confidence in him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 16:20</span></span>

After taking possession of the capital of the kingdom, the next thing to
do was to form the resolution to take and keep the throne. Absalom
therefore turned to Ahithophel, and said, "Give ye counsel what we are
to do." The plural הבוּ (give ye) may be explained on the supposition
that the other persons present were addressed as well as Ahithophel, as
being capable of giving advice.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 16:21</span></span>

Ahithophel gave the following counsel: "Go to thy father's concubines,
whom he hath left behind to keep the house (i.e., lie with them: for אל
בּוא, compare [Sa2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007), etc.); so will
all Israel hear that thou hast made thyself stinking with thy father,
and the hands of all those who are with thee will strengthen
themselves." This advice was sagacious enough. Lying with the king's
concubines was an appropriation of the royal harem, and, as such, a
complete usurpation of the throne (see at [Sa2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007)), which would render any
reconciliation between Absalom and his father utterly impossible, and
therefore would of necessity instigate the followers of Absalom to
maintain his cause with all the greater firmness. This was what
Ahithophel hoped to attain through his advice. For unless the breach was
too great to be healed, with the affection of David towards his sons,
which might in reality be called weakness, it was always a possible
thing that he should forgive Absalom; and in that case Ahithophel would
be the one to suffer. But under the superintendence of God this advice
of Ahithophel was to effect the fulfilment, without any such intention
on his part, of the threat held over David in [Sa2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#008).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 16:22</span></span>

Absalom had a tent put up on the roof of the king's palace, that his
going in to the concubines might be done publicly in the sight of all
Israel. For (as the historian adds in [Sa2
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#023) by way of explanation) the
counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days, was like a
divine oracle both with David and with Absalom. The words from ועצת to
ההם are placed at the commencement absolutely: "and (as for) the counsel
of Ahithophel, ... as if one inquired the word of God, so was every
counsel of Ahithophel." The Masoretes have supplied אישׁ as the Keri to
ישׁאל. This is correct so far as the sense is concerned, but it is quite
unnecessary, as ישׁאל may be taken impersonally. האלהים בּדבר שׁאל is to
be explained from the formula בּעלהים שׁאל (see at [Jdg
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa2017)

</div>
