<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2022)  [Next](sa2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 23:1</span></span>

The psalm of thanksgiving, in which David praised the Lord for all the
deliverances and benefits that he had experienced throughout the whole
of his life, is followed by the prophetic will and testament of the
great king, unfolding the importance of his rule in relation to the
sacred history of the future. And whilst the psalm may be regarded (2
Samuel 22) as a great hallelujah, with which David passed away from the
stage of life, these "last words" contain the divine seal of all that he
has sung and prophesied in several psalms concerning the eternal
dominion of his seed, on the strength of the divine promise which he
received through the prophet Nathan, that his throne should be
established for ever (2 Samuel 7). These words are not merely a lyrical
expansion of that promise, but a prophetic declaration uttered by David
at the close of his life and by divine inspiration, concerning the true
King of the kingdom of God. "The aged monarch, who was not generally
endowed with the gift of prophecy, was moved by the Spirit of God at the
close of his life, and beheld a just Ruler in the fear of God, under
whose reign blessing and salvation sprang up for the righteous, and all
the wicked were overcome. The pledge of this was the eternal covenant
which God had concluded with him" (Tholuck: die Propheten and ihre
Weissagungen, p. 166). The heading "these are the last words of David"
serves to attach it to the preceding psalm of thanksgiving.

[Sa2 23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)

1 Divine saying of David the son of Jesse,

Divine saying of the man, the highly exalted,

Of the anointed of the God of Jacob,

And of the lovely one in the songs of praise of Israel.

2 The Spirit of Jehovah speaks through me,

And His word is upon my tongue.

This introduction to the prophetic announcement rests, both as to form
and substance, upon the last sayings of Balaam concerning the future
history of Israel ([Num 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#003), [Num
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#015)). This not only shows to what
extent David had occupied himself with the utterances of the earlier men
of God concerning Israel's future; but indicates, at the same time, that
his own prophetic utterance was intended to be a further expansion of
Balaam's prophecy concerning the Star out of Jacob and the Sceptre out
of Israel. Like Balaam, he calls his prophecy a נאם, i.e., a divine
saying or oracle, as a revelation which he had received directly from
God (see at [Num 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#003)). But the
recipient of this revelation was not, like Balaam the son of Beor, a man
with closed eye, whose eyes had been opened by a vision of the Almighty,
but "the man who was raised up on high" (על, adverbially "above," is,
strictly speaking, a substantive, "height," used in an adverbial sense,
as in [Hos 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#007), and probably also
[Sa2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016)), i.e., whom God had lifted
up out of humiliation to be the ruler of His people, yea, even to be the
head of the nations ([Sa2 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044)).
Luther's rendering, "who is assured of the Messiah of the God of Jacob,"
is based upon the Vulgate, "cui constitutum est de Christo Dei Jacob,"
and cannot be grammatically sustained. David was exalted on the one hand
as "the anointed of the God of Jacob," i.e., as the one whom the God of
Israel had anointed king over His people, and on the other hand as "the
lovely one in Israel's songs of praise," i.e., the man whom God had
enabled to sing lovely songs of praise in celebration of His grace and
glory. זמיר = זמרה does not mean a song generally, but a song of praise
in honour of God (see at [Exo 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)),
like מזמור in the headings to the psalms. As David on the one hand had
firmly established the kingdom of God in an earthly and political
respect as the anointed of Jehovah, i.e., as king, so had he on the
other, as the composer of Israel's songs of praise, promoted the
spiritual edification of that kingdom. The idea of נאם is explained in
[Sa2 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#002). The Spirit of Jehovah
speaks through him; his words are the inspiration of God. The preterite
דּבּר relates to the divine inspiration which preceded the utterance of
the divine saying. בּ דּבּר, literally to speak into a person, as in
[Hos 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002). The saying itself commences
with [Sa2 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003).

[Sa2 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#003)

3 The God of Israel saith,

The Rock of Israel speaketh to me:

A Ruler over men, just,

A Ruler in the fear of God.

4 And as light of the morning, when the sun rises,

As morning without clouds:

From shining out of rain (springeth) green out of the earth.

5 For is not my house thus with God?

For He hath made me an everlasting covenant,

Provided with all, and attested;

For all my salvation and all good pleasure,

Should He then not cause it to grow?

As the prophets generally preface their saying with "thus saith the
Lord," so David commences his prophetic saying with "the God of Israel
saith," for the purpose of describing it most emphatically as the word
of God. He designates God "the God" and "The Rock" (as in [Sa2
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#003)) of Israel, to indicate that the
contents of his prophecy relate to the salvation of the people of
Israel, and are guaranteed by the unchangeableness of God. The saying
which follows bears the impress of a divine oracle even in its
enigmatical brevity. The verbs are wanting in the different sentences of
[Sa2 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003) and [Sa2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004). "A ruler over men," sc., "will
arise," or there will be. בּאדם does not mean "among men," but "over
men;" for בּ is to be taken as with the verb משׁל, as denoting the
object ruled over (cf. [Gen 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016); [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007), etc.). האדם does not mean certain
men, but the human race, humanity. This ruler is "just" in the fullest
sense of the word, as in the passages founded upon this, viz., [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005); [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009), and [Psa
72:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#002). The justice of the ruler is
founded in his "fear of God." אלהים יראת is governed freely by מושׁל.
(On the fact itself, see [Isa 11:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002).)
The meaning is, "A ruler over the human race will arise, a just ruler,
and will exercise his dominion in the spirit of the fear of God."

[Sa2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004)

[Sa2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004) describes the blessing that
will proceed from this ruler. The idea that [Sa2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004) should be connected with [Sa2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003) so as to form one period, in the
sense of "when one rules justly over men (as I do), it is as when a
morning becomes clear," must be rejected, for the simple reason that it
overlooks Nathan's promise (2 Samuel 7) altogether, and weakens the
force of the saying so solemnly introduced as the word of God. The ruler
over men whom David sees in spirit, is not any one who rules righteously
over men; nor is the seed of David to be regarded as a collective
expression indicating a merely ideal personality, but, according to the
Chaldee rendering, the Messiah himself, the righteous Shoot whom the
Lord would raise up to David ([Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005)), and who would execute
righteousness and judgment upon earth ([Jer
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015)). [Sa2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004) is to be taken by itself as
containing an independent thought, and the connection between it and
[Sa2 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003) must be gathered from the
words themselves: the appearance (the rise) of this Ruler will be "as
light of the morning, when the sun rises." At the same time, the Messiah
is not to be regarded as the subject to בּקר אור (the light of the
morning), as though the ruler over men were compared with the morning
light; but the subject compared to the morning light is intentionally
left indefinite, according to the view adopted by Luther in his
exposition, "In the time of the Messiah it will be like the light of the
morning." We are precluded from regarding the Messiah as the subject, by
the fact that the comparison is instituted not with the sun, but with
the morning dawn at the rising of the sun, whose vivifying effects upon
nature are described in the second clause of the verse. The words שׁמשׁ
יזרח are to be taken relatively, as a more distinct definition of the
morning light. The clause which follows, "morning without clouds," is
parallel to the foregoing, and describes more fully the nature of the
morning. The light of the rising sun on a cloudless morning is an image
of the coming salvation. The rising sun awakens the germs of life in the
bosom of nature, which had been slumbering through the darkness of the
night. "The state of things before the coming of the ruler resembles the
darkness of the night" (Hengstenberg). The verb is also wanting in the
second hemistich. "From the shining from rain (is, comes) fresh green
out of the earth." נגהּ signifies the brightness of the rising sun; but,
so far as the actual meaning is concerned, it relates to the salvation
which attends the coming of the righteous ruler. ממּטר is either
subordinate to מנּגהּ, or co-ordinate with it. In the former case, we
should have to render the passage, "from the shining of the sun which
proceeds out of rain," or "from the shining after rain;" and the
allusion would be to a cloudless morning, when the shining of the sun
after a night's rain stimulates the growth of the plants. In the latter
case, we should have to render it "from the shining (and) from the
rain;" and the reference would be to a cloudless morning, on which the
vegetation springs up from the ground through sunshine followed by rain.
Grammatically considered, the first view (? the second) is the easier of
the two; nevertheless we regard the other (? the first) as the only
admissible one, inasmuch as rain is not to be expected when the sun has
risen with a cloudless sky. The rays of the sun, as it rises after a
night of rain, strengthen the fresh green of the plants. The rain is
therefore a figurative representation of blessing generally (cf. [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003)), and the green grass which
springs up from the earth after the rain is an image of the blessings of
the Messianic salvation ([Isa 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#004);
[Isa 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008)).

In [Psa 72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006), Solomon takes these
words of David as the basis of his comparison of the effects resulting
from the government of the true Prince of peace to the coming down of
the rain upon the mown grass.

[Sa2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005)

In [Sa2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005), the prophecy concerning
the coming of the just ruler is sustained by being raced back to the
original promise in 2 Samuel 7, in which David had received a pledge of
this. The first and last clauses of this verse can only be made to yield
a meaning in harmony with the context, by being taken interrogatively:
"for is not my house so with God?" The question is only indicated by the
tone (לא כּי = הלא כּי: [Sa2 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#023)),
as is frequently the case, even before clauses commencing with לּא
(e.g., [Hos 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#005); [Mal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015) : cf. Ewald, 324, a.). לא־כן (not
so) is explained by the following clause, though the כּי which follows
is not to be taken in the sense of "that." Each of the two clauses
contains a distinct thought. That of the first is, "Does not my house
stand in such a relation to God, that the righteous ruler will spring
from it?" This is then explained in the second: "for He hath made an
everlasting covenant with me." David calls the promise in [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)., that God would establish his
kingdom to his seed for ever, a covenant, because it involved a
reciprocal relation-namely, that Jehovah would first of all found for
David a permanent house, and then that the seed of David was to build
the house of the Lord. This covenant is בכּל ערוּכה, "equipped (or
provided) with all" that could help to establish it. This relates more
especially to the fact that all eventualities were foreseen, even the
falling away of the bearers of the covenant of God, so that such an
event as this would not annul the covenant ([Sa2
7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)). וּשׁמוּרה, "and preserved,"
i.e., established by the assurance that even in that case the Lord would
not withdraw His grace. David could found upon this the certainty, that
God would cause all the salvation to spring forth which had been pledged
to his house in the promise referred to. כּל־ישׁעי, "all my salvation,"
i.e., all the salvation promised to me and to my house. כּל־חפץ, not
"all my desire," but "all the good pleasure" of God, i.e., all the
saving counsel of God expressed in that covenant. The כּי before לא is
an energetic repetition of the כּי which introduces the explanatory
thought, in the sense of a firm assurance: "for all my salvation and all
good pleasure, yea, should He not cause it to spring forth?"

[Sa2 23:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#006)

6 But the worthless, as rejected thorns are they all;

For men do not take them in the hand.

7 And the man who touches them

Provides himself with iron and spear-shaft,

And they are utterly burned with fire where they dwell.

The development of salvation under the ruler in righteousness and the
fear of God is accompanied by judgment upon the ungodly. The abstract
בליּעל, worthlessness, is stronger than בליּעל אישׁ, the worthless man,
and depicts the godless as personified worthlessness. מנד, in the Keri
מנּד, the Hophal of נוּד or נדד, literally "scared" or hunted away. This
epithet does not apply to the thorns, so well as to the ungodly who are
compared to thorns. The reference is to thorns that men root out, not to
those which they avoid on account of their prickles. כּלּהם, an
antiquated form for כּלּם (see Ewald, 247, d.). To root them out, or
clean the ground of them, men do not lay hold of them with the bare
hand; but "whoever would touch them equips himself (ימּלא, sc., ידו, to
'fill the hand' with anything: [Kg2
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#024)) with iron, i.e., with iron
weapons, and spear-shaft" (vid., [Sa1
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007)). This expression also relates to
the godless rather than to the thorns. They are consumed בּשּׁבת, "at
the dwelling," i.e., as Kimchi explains, at the place of their dwelling,
the place where they grow. For בּשּׁבת cannot mean "on the spot" in the
sense of without delay. The burning of the thorns takes place at the
final judgment upon the ungodly ([Mat
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 23:8</span></span>

The following list of David's heroes we also find in 1 Chron 11:10-47,
and expanded at the end by sixteen names ([Ch1
11:41-47](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#041)), and attached in [Ch1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#010) to the account of the conquest
of the fortress of Zion by the introduction of a special heading.
According to this heading, the heroes named assisted David greatly in
his kingdom, along with all Israel, to make him king, from which it is
evident that the chronicler intended by this heading to justify his
appending the list to the account of the election of David as king over
all the tribes of Israel ([Ch1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)),
and of the conquest of Zion, which followed immediately afterwards. In
every other respect the two lists agree with one another, except that
there are a considerable number of errors of the text, more especially
in the names, which are frequently corrupt in both texts, to that the
true reading cannot be determined with certainty. The heroes enumerated
are divided into three classes. The first class consists of three, viz.,
Jashobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah, of whom certain brave deeds are
related, by which they reached the first rank among David's heroes ([Sa2
23:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)). They were followed by
Abishai and Benaiah, who were in the second class, and who had also
distinguished themselves above the rest by their brave deeds, though
they did not come up to the first three ([Sa2
23:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018)). The others all belonged to
the third class, which consisted of thirty-two men, of whom no
particular heroic deeds are mentioned (vv. 24-39). Twelve of these,
viz., the five belonging to the first two classes and seven of the
third, were appointed by David commanders of the twelve detachments into
which he divided the army, each detachment to serve for one month in the
year (1 Chron 27). These heroes, among whom we do not find Joab the
commander-in-chief of the whole of the forces, were the king's
aides-de-camp, and are called in this respect השּׁלשׁי ([Sa2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)), though the term השּׁלשׁים (the
thirty, [Sa2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013), [Sa2
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023), [Sa2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024)) was also a very customary one,
as their number amounted to thirty in a round sum. It is possible that
at first they may have numbered exactly thirty; for, from the very
nature of the case, we may be sure than in the many wars in which David
was engaged, other heroes must have arisen at different times, who would
be received into the corps already formed. This will explain the
addition of sixteen names in the Chronicles, whether the chronicler made
us of a different list from that employed by the author of the books
before us, and one belonging to a later age, or whether the author of
our books merely restricted himself to a description of the corps in its
earlier condition.

[Sa2 23:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)

Heroes of the first class. - The short heading to our text, with which
the list in the Chronicles also beings ([Ch1
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011)), simply gives the name of these
heroes. But instead of "the names of the mighty men," we have in the
Chronicles "the number of the mighty men." This variation is all the
more striking, from the fact that in the Chronicles the total number is
not given at the close of the list as it is in our text. At the same
time, it can hardly be a copyist's error for מבחר (selection), as
Bertheau supposes, but must be attributable to the fact that, according
to [Sa2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013), [Sa2
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023), and [Sa2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024), these heroes constituted a
corps which was named from the number of which it originally consisted.
The first, Jashobeam, is called "the chief of the thirty" in the
Chronicles. Instead of ישׁבעם (Jashobeam), the reading in the
Chronicles, we have here בּשּׁבת ישׁב (Josheb-basshebeth),
unquestionably a spurious reading, which probably arose, according to
Kennicott's conjecture, from the circumstance that the last two letters
of ישׁבעם were written in one MS under בּשּׁבת in the line above ([Sa2
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#007)), and a copyist took בשׁבת from
that line by mistake for עם. The correctness of the reading Jashobeam is
established by [Ch1 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#002). The word
תּחכּמני is also faulty, and should be corrected, according to the
Chronicles, into בּן־חכמוני (Ben-hachmoni); for the statement that
Jashobeam was a son (or descendant) of the family of Hachmon ([Ch1
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#032)) can easily be reconciled with
that in [Ch1 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#002), to the effect that
he was a son of Zabdiel. Instead of השּׁלשׁים ראשׁ (head of the thirty),
the reading in the Chronicles, we have here השּׁלשׁי ראשׁ (head of the
three). Bertheau would alter our text in accordance with the Chronicles,
whilst Thenius proposes to bring the text of the Chronicles into
accordance with ours. But although the many unquestionable corruptions
in the verse before us may appear to favour Bertheau's assumption, we
cannot regard either of the emendations as necessary, or even
warrantable. The proposed alteration of השּׁלשׁי is decidedly precluded
by the recurrence of השּׁלשׁי ראשׁ in [Sa2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018), and the alteration of השּׁלשׁים
in the Chronicles by the repeated allusion to the שׁלשׁים, not only in
[Sa2 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#015), 42; [Sa2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#004), and [Ch1
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#006) of the Chronicles, but also in
[Sa2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013), [Sa2
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023), and [Sa2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024) of the chapter before us. The
explanation given of שׁלשׁי and שׁלשׁים, as signifying chariot-warriors,
is decidedly erroneous;

(Note: This explanation, which we find in Gesenius (Thes. and Lex.) and
Bertheau, rests upon no other authority than the testimony of Origen, to
the effect that an obscure writer gives this interpretation of
τριστάτης, the rendering of שׁלישׁ, an authority which is completely
overthrown by the writer of the gloss in Octateuch. (Schleussner, Lex.
in lxx t. v. p. 338), who gives this explanation of τριστάτας: τοὺς παρὰ
χεῖρα τοῦ βασιλέως ἀριστερὰν τρίτης μοίρας ἄρχοντας. Suidas and
Hesychius give the same explanation (s. v. τριστάται). Jerome also
observes (ad Ezek 23): "It is the name of the second rank next to the
king.")

for the singular השּׁלישׁ is used in all the passages in which the word
occurs to signify the royal aide-de-camp ([Kg2
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#002), [Kg2
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#017), [Kg2
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#019); [Kg2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025); [Kg2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025)), and the plural שׁלישׁים the
royal body-guard, not only in [Kg2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025), but even in [Kg1
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#022), and [Exo
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007); [Exo
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004), from which the meaning
chariot-warriors has been derived. Consequently השּׁלשׁי ראשׁ is the
head of the king's aides-de-camp, and the interchange of השּׁלשׁי with
the השּׁלשׁים of the Chronicles may be explained on the simple ground
that David's thirty heroes formed his whole body of adjutants. The
singular שׁלשׁי is to be explained in the same manner as הכּרתי (see at
[Sa2 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018)). Luther expresses the
following opinion in his marginal gloss with regard to the words which
follow (העצנו עדינו הוּא עדינו): "We believe the text to have been
corrupted by a writer, probably from some book in an unknown character
and bad writing, so that orer should be substituted for adino, and
ha-eznib for eth hanitho:" that is to say, the reading in the
Chronicles, "he swung his spear," should be adopted (cf. [Sa2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018)). This supposition is certainly
to be preferred to the attempt made by Gesenius (Lex.) and v. Dietrich
(s. v. עדין) to find some sense in the words by assuming the existence
of a verb עדּן and a noun עצן, a spear, since these words do not occur
anywhere else in Hebrew; and in order to obtain any appropriate sense,
it is still necessary to resort to alterations of the text. "He swung
his spear over eight hundred slain at once." This is not to be
understood as signifying that he killed eight hundred men at one blow,
but that in a battle he threw his spear again and again at the foe,
until eight hundred men had been slain. The Chronicles give three
hundred instead of eight hundred; and as that number occurs again in
[Sa2 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018), in the case of Abishai, it
probably found its way from that verse into this in the book of
Chronicles.

[Sa2 23:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#009)

"After him (i.e., next to him in rank) was Eleazar the son of Dodai the
Ahohite, among the three heroes with David when they defied the
Philistines, who had assembled there, and the Israelites drew near." The
Chethib דדי is to be read דּודי, Dodai, according to [Ch1
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#004), and the form דּודו (Dodo) in the
parallel text ([Ch1 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#012)) is only a
variation in the form of the name. Instead of בּן־אחחי (the son of
Ahohi) we find העחחי (the Ahohite) in the Chronicles; but the בּן must
not be struck out on that account as spurious, for "the son of an
Ahohite" is the same as "the Ahohite." For גּבּרים בּשׁלשׁה we must read
הגּבּרים בּשׁלשׁה, according to the Keri and the Chronicles. שׁלשׁה is
not to be altered, since the numerals are sometimes attached to
substantives in the absolute state (see Ges. 120, 1). "The three heroes"
are Jashobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah ([Sa2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011)), who reached the first rank,
according to [Sa2 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#019), among the
heroes of David. Instead of בּפּלשׁתּים בּחרפם (when they defied the
Philistines), we find in the Chronicles והפּלשׁתּים דּמּים בּפּס, "at
Pas-dammim," i.e., most probably Ephes-dammim ([Sa1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001)), where the Philistines were
encamped when Goliath defied the Israelites. Thenius, Bertheau, and
Bttcher therefore propose to alter our text so as to make it correspond
to that of the Chronicles, and adduce as the reason the fact that in
other passages חרף is construed with the accusative, and that שׁם, which
follows, presupposes the previous mention of the place referred to. But
the reasons are neither of them decisive. חרף .evisiced is not construed
with the accusative alone, but also with ל ([Ch2
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#017)), so that the construction with
ב is quite a possible one, and is not at variance with the idea of the
word. שׁם again may also be understood as referring to the place, not
named, where the Philistines fought with the Israelites. The omission of
אשׁר before נעספוּ is more difficult to explain; and והפּלשׁתּים, which
we find in the Chronicles, has probably dropped out after בּפּלשׁתּים.
The reading in the Chronicles דּמּים בּפּס (בּאפס) is probably only a
more exact description of the locality, which is but obscurely indicated
in our text by בּפּלשׁתּים בּחרפם; for these words affirm that the
battle took place where the Israelites had once been defied by the
Philistines ([Sa1 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#010)), and where
they repaid them for this defiance in a subsequent conflict. The
Philistines are at any rate to be regarded as the subject to נעספוּ, and
these words are a circumstantial clause: the Philistines had assembled
together there to battle, and the Israelites had advanced to the attack.
The heroic act of Eleazar is introduced with "he arose." He arose and
smote the Philistines till his hand was weary and clave to his sword,
i.e., was so cramped as to be stiffened to the sword. Through this
Jehovah wrought a great salvation for Israel on that day, "and the
people (the soldiers) turned after him only to plunder," sc., because he
had put the enemy to flight by himself. אחריו שׁוּב does not mean to
turn back from flight after him, but is the opposite of מאחרי שׁוּב, to
turn away from a person ([Sa1 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011),
etc.), so that it signifies "to turn to a person and follow behind him."
Three lines have dropped out from the parallel text of the Chronicles,
in consequence of the eye of a copyist having wandered from נעספוּ
פלשׁתּים in [Sa2 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#009) to פלשׁתּים
ויּעספוּ in [Sa2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011).

[Sa2 23:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011)

The third leading hero was Shammah, the son of Age the Hararite (הררי is
probably contracted from ההררי, [Sa2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#033)). He also made himself renowned
by a great victory over the Philistines. The enemy had gathered together
לחיּה, "as a troop," or in a crowd. This meaning of היּה (here and [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013), and possibly also in [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011)) is thoroughly established by
the Arabic (see Ges. Thes. p. 470). But it seems to have fallen into
disuse afterwards, and in the Chronicles it is explained in [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013) by מלחמה, and in [Sa2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#015) by מחנה. "On a portion of a
field of lentils there," sc., where the Philistines had gathered
together, the people (of Israel) were smitten. Then Shammah stationed
himself in the midst of the field, and יצּילה, "wrested it," from the
foe, and smote the Philistines. Instead of עדשׁים, lentils, we find in
the Chronicles שׁלעורים, barley, a very inconsiderable difference.

[Sa2 23:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013)

To this deed there is appended a similar heroic feat performed by three
of the thirty heroes whose names are not given. The Chethib שׁלשׁים is
evidently a slip of the pen for שׁלשׁה (Keri and Chronicles). The thirty
chiefs are the heroes named afterwards. As שׁלשׁה has no article either
in our text or the Chronicles, the three intended are not the three
already mentioned (Jashobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah), but three others
out of the number mentioned in [Sa2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024). These three came to David in
the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam (see at [Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001)), when a troop of the Philistines
was encamped in the valley of Rephaim, and David was on the mountain
fortress, and a Philistian post was then in Bethlehem. And David longed
for water, and said, "Oh that one would bring me water to drink out of
the well of Bethlehem at the gate!" The encampment of the Philistines in
the valley of Rephaim, and the position of David on the mountain
fortress (בּמּצוּדה), render it probable that the feat mentioned here
took place in the war with the Philistines described in [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017). Robinson could not discover any
well in Bethlehem, "especially none 'by the gate,' except one connected
with the aqueduct on the south" (Palestine, vol. ii. p. 158). בּשּׁער
need not be understood, however, as signifying that the well was in or
under the gate; but the well referred to may have been at the gate
outside the city. The well to which tradition has given the name of
"David's well" (cisterna David), is about a quarter of an hour's walk to
the north-east of Bethlehem, and, according to Robinson's description,
is "merely a deep and wide cistern or cavern now dry, with three or four
narrow openings cut in the rock." But Ritter (Erdk. xvi. p. 286)
describes it as "deep with clear cool water, into which there are three
openings from above, which Tobler speaks of as bored;" and again as a
cistern "built with peculiar beauty, from seventeen to twenty-one feet
deep, whilst a house close by is pointed out to pilgrims as Jesse's
house."

[Sa2 23:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#016)

The three heroes then broke through the camp of the Philistines at
Bethlehem, i.e., the outpost that occupied the space before the gate,
fetched water out of the well, and brought it to David. He would not
drink it, however, but poured it out upon the ground to the Lord, as a
drink-offering for Jehovah. "He poured it out upon the earth, rendering
Him thanks for the return of the three brave men" (Clericus). And he
said, "Far be it from me, O Jehovah, to do this! The blood of the men
who went with their lives (i.e., at the risk of their lives)," sc.,
should I drink it? The verb אשׁתּה is wanting in our text, but is not to
be inserted according to the Chronicles as though it had fallen out; the
sentence is rather to be regarded as an aposiopesis. יהוה after לי חלילה
is a vocative, and is not to be altered into מיהוה according to the
מאלחי of the Chronicles. The fact that the vocative does not occur in
other passages after לי חלילה proves nothing. It is equivalent to the
oath יהוה חי ([Sa1 14:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#045)). The
chronicler has endeavoured to simplify David's exclamation by completing
the sentence. בּנפשׁותם, "for the price of their souls," i.e., at the
risk of their lives. The water drawn and fetched at the risk of their
lives is compared to the soul itself, and the soul is in the blood ([Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)). Drinking this water,
therefore, would be nothing else than drinking their blood.

[Sa2 23:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018)

Heroes of the second class. - [Sa2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018), [Sa2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#019). Abishai, Joab's brother (see
[Sa1 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#006)), was also chief of the
body-guard, like Jashobeam ([Sa2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)
: the Chethib השּׁלשׁי is correct; see at [Sa2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)). He swung his spear over three
hundred slain. "He had a name among the three," i.e., the three
principal heroes, Jashobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah. The following words,
מן־השּׁלשׁה, make no sense. השּׁלשׁה is an error in writing for
השּׁלשׁים, as [Sa2 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023) shows in both
the texts ([Sa2 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#025) of the
Chronicles): an error the origin of which may easily be explained from
the word שׁלשׁה, which stands immediately before. "He was certainly
honoured before the thirty (heroes of David), and became their chief,
but he did not come to the three," i.e., he was not equal to Jashobeam,
Eleazar, and Shammah. הכי has the force of an energetic assurance: "Is
it so that," i.e., it is certainly so (as in [Sa2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001); [Gen
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#036); [Gen
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#015)).

[Sa2 23:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020)

Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, "Jehoiada the priest" according to [Ch1
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#005), possibly the one who was "prince
for Aaron," i.e., of the family of Aaron, according to [Ch1
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#027), was captain of the Crethi and
Plethi according to [Sa2 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018) and [Sa2
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023). He was the son of a brave man,
rich in deeds (חי is evidently an error for חיל in the Chronicles), of
Kabzeel in the south of Judah ([Jos
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)). "He smote the two Ariels of
Moab." The Arabs and Persians call every remarkably brave man Ariel, or
lion of God (vid., Bochart, Hieroz. ii. pp. 7, 63). They were therefore
two celebrated Moabitish heroes. The supposition that they were sons of
the king of the Moabites is merely founded upon the conjecture of
Thenius and Bertheau, that the word בּני (sons of) has dropped out
before Ariel. "He also slew the lion in the well on the day of the
snow," i.e., a lion which had been driven into the neighbourhood of
human habitations by a heavy fall of snow, and had taken refuge in a
cistern. The Chethib האריה and בּאר are the earlier forms for the Keris
substituted by the Masoretes הארי and הבּור, and consequently are not to
be altered. He also slew an Egyptian of distinguished size. According to
the Keri we should read מראה אישׁ (instead of מראה fo daetsni( א אשׁר),
"a man of appearance," i.e., a distinguished man, or a man of great
size, ἄνδρα ὀρατόν (lxx); in the Chronicles it is simplified as מדּה
אישׁ, a man of measure, i.e., of great height. This man was armed with a
spear or javelin, whereas Benaiah was only armed with a stick;
nevertheless the latter smote him, took away his spear, and slew him
with his own weapon. According to the Chronicles the Egyptian was five
cubits high, and his spear like a weaver's beam. Through these feats
Benaiah acquired a name among the three, though he did not equal them
([Sa2 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#022), [Sa2
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023), as in [Sa2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018), [Sa2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#019)); and David made him a member of
his privy council (see at [Sa1 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#014)).

[Sa2 23:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024)

Heroes of the third class. - [Sa2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024). "Asahel, the brother of Joab,
among the thirty," i.e., belonging to them. This definition also applies
to the following names; we therefore find at the head of the list in the
Chronicles, החילים וגבּורי, "and brave heroes (were)." The names which
follow are for the most part not further known. Elhanan, the son of Dodo
of Bethlehem, is a different man from the Bethlehemite of that name
mentioned in [Sa2 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#019). Shammah the
Harodite also must not be confounded with the Shammahs mentioned in [Sa2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011) and [Sa2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#033). In the Chronicles we find
Shammoth, a different form of the name; whilst ההרורי is an error in
writing for החרדי, i.e., sprung from Harod ([Jdg
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#001)). This man is called Shamhut in
[Ch1 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#008); he was the leader of the
fifth division of David's army. Elika or Harod is omitted in the
Chronicles; it was probably dropped out in consequence of the
homoioteleuton החרדי.

[Sa2 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#026)

Helez the Paltite; i.e., sprung from Beth-pelet in the south of Judah
([Jos 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#027)). He was chief of the
seventh division of the army (compare [Ch1
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#010) with [Ch1
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#027), though in both passages הפּלטי
is misspelt הפּלני). Ira the son of Ikkesh of Tekoah in the desert of
Judah ([Sa2 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002)), chief of the sixth
division of the army ([Ch1 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#009)).

[Sa2 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#027)

Abiezer of Anathoth (Anata) in Benjamin (see at [Jos
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024)), chief of the ninth division of
the army ([Ch1 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#012)). Mebunnai is a
mistake in spelling for Sibbechai the Hushathite (compare [Sa2
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#018) and [Ch1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#029)). According to [Ch1
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#011), he was chief of the eighth
division of the army.

[Sa2 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#028)

Zalmon the Ahohite, i.e., sprung from the Benjaminite family of Ahoah,
is not further known. Instead of Zalmon we find Ilai in the Chronicles
([Sa2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#029)); but which of the two
names is the correct one it is impossible to decide. Maharai of
Netophah: according to [Ezr 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#022) and
[Neh 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#026), Netophah was a place in the
neighbourhood of Bethlehem, but it has not yet been discovered, as Beit
Nattif, which might be thought of, is too far from Bethlehem (vid., Rob.
Pal. ii. p. 344, and Tobler, Dritte Wanderung, pp. 117-8). According to
[Ch1 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#013), Maharai belonged to the
Judahite family of Serah, and was chief of the tenth division of the
army.

[Sa2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#029)

Cheleb, more correctly Cheled ([Ch1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#030); or Cheldai, [Ch1
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#015)), also of Netophah, was chief of
the twelfth division of the army. Ittai (Ithai in the Chronicles), the
son of Ribai of Gibeah of Benjamin, must be distinguished from Ittai the
Gathite ([Sa2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#019)). Like all that
follow, with the exception of Uriah, he is not further known.

[Sa2 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#030)

Benaiah of Phir'aton in the tribe of Ephraim, a place which has been
preserved in the village of Fer'ata, to the south-west of Nablus (see at
[Jdg 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#013)). Hiddai (wrongly spelt
Hudai in the Chronicles), out of the valleys of Gaash, in the tribe of
Ephraim by the mountain of Gaash, the situation of which has not yet
been discovered (see at [Jos 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030)).

[Sa2 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#031)

Abi-Albon (written incorrectly Abiel in the Chronicles) the Arbathite,
i.e., from the place called Beth-haarabah or Arabah ([Jos
15:61](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061) and [Jos
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#018), [Jos
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022)) in the desert of Judah, on the
site of the present Kasr Hajla (see at [Jos
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006)). Azmaveth of Bahurim: see at
[Sa2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005).

[Sa2 23:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#032)

Eliahba of Shaalbon or Shaalbin, which may possibly have been preserved
in the present Selbit (see at [Jos
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#042)). The next two names, יהונתן
ישׁן בּני and ההררי שׁמּה (Bneyashen Jehonathan and Shammah the
Hararite), are written thus in the Chronicles ([Sa2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#034)), ההררי בּן־שׁגא יונתן הגּזוני
השׁם בּני: "Bnehashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Sage the
Hararite," The text of the Chronicles is evidently the more correct of
the two, as Bne Jashen Jehonathan does not make any sense. The only
question is whether the form השׁם בּני is correct, or whether בּני has
not arisen merely through a misspelling. As the name does not occur
again, all that can be said is that Bne hashem must at any rate be
written as one word, and therefore should be pointed differently. The
place mentioned, Gizon, is unknown. שׁמּה for בּן־שׁגא probably arose
from [Sa2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011). Ahiam the son of
Sharar or Sacar (Chron.) the Ararite (in the Chronicles the Hararite).

[Sa2 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#034)

The names in [Sa2 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#034), Eliphelet
ben-Ahasbai ben-Hammaacathi, read thus in the Chronicles ([Sa2
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#035), [Sa2
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#036)): Eliphal ben-Ur; Hepher
hammecerathi. We see from this that in ben-Ahasbai ben two names have
been fused together; for the text as it lies before us is rendered
suspicious partly by the fact that the names of both father and
grandfather are given, which does not occur in connection with any other
name in the whole list, and partly by the circumstance that בּן cannot
properly be written with המּעכתי, which is a Gentile noun. Consequently
the following is probably the correct way of restoring the text, המּעכתי
חפר בּן־אוּר אליפלט, Eliphelet (a name which frequently occurs) the son
of Ur; Hepher the Maachathite, i.e., of Maacah in the north-east of
Gilead (see at [Sa2 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006) and [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)). Eliam the son of Ahithophel the
Gilonite, the clever but treacherous counsellor of David (see at [Sa2
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012)). This name is quite corrupt in
the Chronicles.

[Sa2 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#035)

Hezro the Carmelite, i.e., of Carmel in the mountains of Judah ([Sa1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002)). Paarai the Arbite, i.e., of
Arab, also in the mountains of Judah ([Jos
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#052)). In the Chronicles we find
Naarai ben-Ezbi: the latter is evidently an error in writing for
ha-Arbi; but it is impossible to decide which of the two forms, Paarai
and Naarai, is the correct one.

[Sa2 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#036)

Jigal the son of Nathan of Zoba (see at [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003)): in the Chronicles, Joel the
brother of Nathan. Bani the Gadite: in the Chronicles we have Mibhar the
son of Hagri. In all probability the names inf the Chronicles are
corrupt in this instance also.

[Sa2 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#037)

Zelek the Ammonite, Nacharai the Beerothite (of Beeroth: see at [Sa2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#002)), the armour-bearer of Joab.
Instead of נשׂאי, the Keri and the Chronicles have נשׂא: the latter
reading is favoured by the circumstance, that if more than one of the
persons named had been Joab's armour-bearers, their names would most
probably have been linked together by a copulative vav.

[Sa2 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#038)

Ira and Gareb, both of them Jithrites, i.e., sprung from a family in
Kirjath-jearim ([Ch1 2:53](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#053)). Ira is of
course a different man from the cohen of that name ([Sa2
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#026)).

[Sa2 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#039)

Uriah the Hittite is well known from [Sa2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#003). "Thirty and seven in all." This
number is correct, as there were three in the first class ([Sa2
23:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)), two in the second ([Sa2
23:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018)), and thirty-two in the third
(vv. 24-39), since [Sa2 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#034) contains
three names according to the amended text.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](sa2024)

</div>
