<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2002)  [Next](sa2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 3:1</span></span>

"And the war became long (was protracted) between the house of Saul and
the house of David; but David became stronger and stronger, and the
house of Saul weaker and weaker." הלך, when connected with another verb
or with an adjective, expresses the idea of the gradual progress of an
affair (vid., Ges. 131, 3, Anm. 3). The historian sums up in these words
the historical course of the two royal houses, as they stood opposed to
one another. "The war" does not mean continual fighting, but the state
of hostility or war in which they continued to stand towards one
another. They concluded no peace, so that David was not recognised by
Ishbosheth as king, any more than Ishbosheth by David. Not only is there
nothing said about any continuance of actual warfare by Abner or
Ishbosheth after the loss of the battle at Gibeon, but such a thing was
very improbable in itself, as Ishbosheth was too weak to be able to
carry on the war, whilst David waited with firm reliance upon the
promise of the Lord, until all Israel should come over to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 3:2</span></span>

Growth of the House of David. - Proof of the advance of the house of
David is furnished by the multiplication of his family at Hebron. The
account of the sons who were born to David at Hebron does not break the
thread, as Clericus, Thenius, and others suppose, but is very
appropriately introduced here, as a practical proof of the strengthening
of the house of David, in harmony with the custom of beginning the
history of the reign of every king with certain notices concerning his
family (vid., [Sa2 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#013).; [Kg1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#001); [Kg1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021); [Kg1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#002), [Kg1
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#009), etc.). We have a similar list of
the sons of David in [Ch1 3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#001). The
first two sons were born to him from the two wives whom he had brought
with him to Hebron ([Sa1 25:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#042)).
The Chethibh וילדו is probably only a copyist's error for ויּוּלדוּ,
which is the reading in many Codices. From Ahinoam - the first-born,
Amnon (called Aminon in [Sa2 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#020));
from Abigail - the second, Chileab. The latter is also called Daniel in
[Ch1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#001), and therefore had probably
two names. The lamed before Ahinoam and the following names serves as a
periphrasis for the genitive, like the German von, in consequence of the
word son being omitted (vid., Ewald, 292, a.). The other four were by
wives whom he had married in Hebron: Absalom by Maachah, the daughter of
Talmai king of Geshur, a small kingdom in the north-east of Bashan (see
at [Deu 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)); Adonijah by Haggith;
Shephatiah by Abital; and Ithream by Eglah. The origin of the last three
wives is unknown. The clause appended to Eglah's name, viz., "David's
wife," merely serves as a fitting conclusion to the whole list (Bertheau
on [Ch1 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#003)), and is not added to show
that Eglah was David's principal wife, which would necessitate the
conclusion drawn by the Rabbins, that Michal was the wife intended.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 3:6</span></span>

Decline of the House of Saul. - [Sa2
3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006). Abner's quarrel with
Ishbosheth. - During the war between the house of Saul and the house of
David, Abner adhered firmly to the house of Saul, but he appropriated
one of Saul's concubines to himself. When Ishbosheth charged him with
this, he fell into so violent a rage, that he at once announced to
Ishbosheth his intention to hand over the kingdom to David. Abner had
certainly perceived the utter incapacity of Ishbosheth for a very long
time, if not from the very outset, and had probably made him king after
the death of Saul, merely that he might save himself from the necessity
of submitting to David, and might be able to rule in Ishbosheth's name,
and possibly succeed in paving his own way to the throne. His
appropriation of the concubine of the deceased monarch was at any rate a
proof, according to Israelitish notions, and in fact those generally
prevalent in the East, that he was aiming at the throne (vid., [Sa2
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021); [Kg1
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#021)). But it may gradually have
become obvious to him, that the house of Saul could not possibly retain
the government in opposition to David; and this may have led to his
determination to persuade all the Israelites to acknowledge David, and
thereby to secure for himself an influential post under his government.
This will explain in a very simple manner Abner's falling away from
Ishbosheth and going over to David.

[Sa2 3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006)

[Sa2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006) and [Sa2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007) constitute one period, expanded by
the introduction of circumstantial clauses, the ויהי (it came to pass)
of the protasis being continued in the ויּאמר (he said) of [Sa2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007). "It came to pass, when there was
war between the house of Saul and the house of David, and Abner showed
himself strong for the house of Saul, and Saul had a concubine named
Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah, that he (Ishbosheth) said to Abner, Why
hast thou gone to my father's concubine?" The subject to "said" is
omitted in the apodosis; but it is evident from [Sa2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008), and the expression "my father,"
that Ishbosheth is to be supplied. Even in the second circumstantial
clause, "and Saul had a concubine," the reason why this is mentioned is
only to be gathered from Ishbosheth's words. בּ התחזק: to prove one's
self strong for, or with, a person, i.e., to render him powerful help.
אל בּוא means "to cohabit with." It was the exclusive right of the
successor to the throne to cohabit with the concubines of the deceased
king, who came down to him as part of the property which he inherited.

[Sa2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008)

Abner was so enraged at Ishbosheth's complaint, that he replied, "Am I a
dog's head, holding with Judah? To-day (i.e., at present) I show
affection to the house of Saul thy father, towards his brethren and his
friends, and did not let thee fall into the hand of David, and thou
reproachest me to-day with the fault with the woman?" "Dog's head" is
something thoroughly contemptible. ליהוּדה עשׁר, lit. which (belongs) to
Judah, i.e., holds with Judah.

[Sa2 3:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#009)

"God do so to Abner, ... as Jehovah hath sworn to David, so will I do to
him." The repetition of כּי serves to introduce the oath, as in [Sa2
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#027). "To take away the kingdom from
the house of Saul, and set up the throne of David over Israel and over
Judah, from Dan to Beersheba." We do not know of any oath with which God
had promised the kingdom to David; but the promise of God in itself is
equivalent to an oath, as God is the true God, who can neither lie nor
deceive ([Sa1 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029); [Num
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)). This promise was generally
known in Israel. "From Dan to Beersheba" (as in [Jdg
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)).

[Sa2 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#011)

Ishbosheth could make no reply to these words of Abner, "because he was
afraid of him."

[Sa2 3:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#012)

Abner goes over to David. - [Sa2 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#012).
Abner soon carried out his threat to Ishbosheth. He sent messengers to
David in his stead (not "on the spot," or immediately, a rendering
adopted by the Chaldee and Symmachus, but for which no support can be
found) with this message: "Whose is the land?" i.e., to whom does it
belong except to thee? and, "Make a covenant with me; behold, so is my
hand with thee (i.e., so will I stand by thee), to turn all Israel to
thee."

[Sa2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#013)

David assented to the proposal on this condition: "Only one thing do I
require of thee, namely, Thou shalt not see my face, unless thou first
of all bringest me Michal, the daughter of Saul, when thou comest to see
my face." הביאך אם־לפני כּי, "except before thy bringing," i.e., unless
when thou hast first of all brought or delivered "Michal to me." This
condition was imposed by David, not only because Michal had been
unjustly taken away from him by Saul, after he had rightfully acquired
her for his wife by paying the dowry demanded, and in spite of her love
to him ([Sa1 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#027); [Sa1
19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011)), and given to another man
([Sa1 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044)), so that he could demand
her back again with perfect justice, and Ishbosheth could not refuse to
give her up to him, but probably on political grounds also, namely,
because the renewal of his marriage to the king's daughter would show to
all Israel that he cherished no hatred in his heart towards the fallen
king.

[Sa2 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#014)

Thereupon, namely when Abner had assented to this condition, David sent
messengers to Ishbosheth with this demand: "Give (me) my wife Michal,
whom I espoused to me for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines" (see
[Sa1 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#025), [Sa1
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#027)). David sent to Ishbosheth to
demand the restoration of Michal, that her return might take place in a
duly legal form, "that it might be apparent that he had dealt justly
with Paltiel in the presence of his king, and that he had received his
wife back again, and had not taken her by force from her husband" (Seb.
Schmidt).

[Sa2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#015)

Ishbosheth probably sent Abner to Gallim ([Sa1
25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044)) to fetch Michal from her
husband Paltiel (see at [Sa1 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044)),
and take her back to David. The husband was obliged to consent to this
separation.

[Sa2 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#016)

When he went with his wife, weeping behind her, to Bahurim, Abner
commanded him to turn back; "and he returned." Bahurim, Shimei's home
([Sa2 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#017); [Kg1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#008)), was situated, according to [Sa2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001), [Sa2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005), and [Sa2
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#018), upon the road from Jerusalem to
Gilgal, in the valley of the Jordan, not far from the Mount of Olives,
and is supposed by v. Schubert (R. iii. p. 70) to have stood upon the
site of the present Abu Dis, though in all probability it is to be
sought for farther north (see Rob. Pal. ii. p. 103). Paltiel had
therefore followed his wife to the border of the tribe of Judah, or of
the kingdom of David.

[Sa2 3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#017)

But before Abner set out to go to David, he had spoken to the elders of
Israel (the tribes generally, with the exception of Benjamin see [Sa2
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#019) and Judah): "Both yesterday and
the day before yesterday (i.e., a long time ago), ye desired to have
David as king over you. Now carry out your wish: for Jehovah hath spoken
concerning David, Through my servant David will I save my people Israel
out of the power of the Philistines and all their enemies." הושׁיע is an
evident mistake in writing for אושׁיע, which is found in many MSS, and
rendered in all the ancient versions.

[Sa2 3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#019)

Abner had spoken in the same way in the ears of Benjamin. He spoke to
the Benjaminites more especially, because the existing royal family
belonged to that tribe, and they had reaped many advantages in
consequence (vid., [Sa1 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007)). The
verb היה in the circumstantial clause ([Sa2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#017)), and the verb וידבּר in [Sa2
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#019), which serves as a continuation
of the circumstantial clause, must be translated as pluperfects, since
Abner's interview with the elders of Israel and with Benjamin preceded
his interview with David at Hebron. We may see from Abner's address to
the elders, that even among the northern tribes the popular voice had
long since decided for David. In 1 Chron 12 we have historical proofs of
this. The word of Jehovah concerning David, which is mentioned in [Sa2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#018), is not met with anywhere in this
precise form in the history of David as it has come down to us. Abner
therefore had either some expression used by one of the prophets (Samuel
or Gad) in his mind, which he described as the word of Jehovah, or else
he regarded the anointing of David by Samuel in accordance with the
command of the Lord, and the marvellous success of all that David
attempted against the enemies of Israel, as a practical declaration on
the part of God, that David, as the appointed successor of Saul, would
perform what the Lord had spoken to Samuel concerning Saul ([Sa1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016)), but what Saul had not fulfilled
on account of his rebellion against the commandments of the Lord.

[Sa2 3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#019)

When Abner had gained over the elders of Israel and Benjamin to
recognise David as king, he went to Hebron to speak in the ears of David
"all that had pleased Israel and the whole house of Benjamin," i.e., to
make known to him their determination to acknowledge him as king. There
went with him twenty men as representatives of all Israel, to confirm
Abner's statements by their presence; and David prepared a meal for them
all.

[Sa2 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#021)

After the meal, Abner said to David, "I will raise and go and gather
together all Israel to my lord the king, that they may make a covenant
with thee (i.e., do homage to thee before God as king), and thou mayest
become king over all that thy soul desireth," i.e., over all the nation
of God; whereupon David took leave of him, and Abner went away in peace.
The expression "in peace" serves to prepare the way for what follows. It
is not stated, however, that David sent him away in peace (without
avenging himself upon him), but that "David sent him away, and he went
in peace." Apart altogether from the mildness of David's own character,
he had no reason whatever for treating Abner as an enemy, now that he
had given up all opposition to his reigning, and had brought all the
Israelites over to him. What Abner had done for Ishbosheth, including
his fighting against David, was indeed a sinful act of resistance to the
will of Jehovah, which was not unknown to him, and according to which
Samuel had both called and anointed David king over the nation; but for
all that, it was not an ordinary act of rebellion against the person of
David and his rightful claim to the throne, because Jehovah had not yet
caused David to be set before the nation as its king by Samuel or any
other prophet, and David had not yet asserted the right to reign over
all Israel, which had been secured to him by the Lord and guaranteed by
his anointing, as one which the nation was bound to recognise; but, like
a true servant of God, he waited patiently till the Lord should give him
the dominion over all His people.

[Sa2 3:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#022)

Abner assassinated by Joab. - [Sa2
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#022). After Abner's departure, the
servants of David returned with much booty from a marauding expedition,
and Joab at their head. The singular בּא may be explained from the fact
that Joab was the principal person in the estimation of the writer.
מהגּדוּד, lit. from the marauding host, i.e., from the work of a
marauding host, or from a raid, which they had been making upon one of
the tribes bordering upon Judah.

[Sa2 3:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#023)

When Joab learned. Lit. they told him) that Abner had been with David,
and he had sent him away again, he went to David to reproach him for
having done so. "What hast thou done? Behold, Abner came to thee; why
then hast thou sent him away, and he is gone quite away?" i.e., so that
he could go away again without being detained (for this meaning of the
inf. abs., see Ewald, 280, b.). "Thou knowest (or more correctly as a
question, Dost thou know?) Abner, the son of Ner, that he came to
persuade thee (i.e., to make thee certain of his intentions), and to
learn thy going out and in (i.e., all thine undertakings), and to learn
all that thou wilt do" (i.e., all thy plans). Joab hoped in this way to
prejudice David against Abner, to make him suspected as a traitor, that
he might then be able to gratify his own private revenge with perfect
impunity.

[Sa2 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#026)

For Abner had only just gone away from David, when Joab sent messengers
after him, no doubt in David's name, though without his knowledge, and
had him fetched back "from Bor-hasirah, i.e., the cistern of Sirah."
Sirah is a place which is quite unknown to us. According to Josephus
(Ant. vii. 1, 5), it was twenty stadia from Hebron, and called Βησιρά.

[Sa2 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#027)

When he came back, Joab "took him aside into the middle of the gate, to
talk with him in the stillness," i.e., in private, and there thrust him
through the body, so that he died "for the blood of Asahel his brother,"
i.e., for having put Asahel to death ([Sa2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023)).

[Sa2 3:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#028)

When David heard this, he said, "I and my kingdom are innocent before
Jehovah for ever of the blood of Abner. Let it turn (חוּל, to twist
one's self, to turn or fall, irruit) upon the head of Joab and all his
father's house (or so-called family)! Never shall there be wanting
(יכּרת אל, let there not be cut off, so that there shall not be, as in
[Jos 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#023)) in the house of Joab one
that hath an issue (vid., [Lev 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002)),
and a leper, and one who leans upon a stick (i.e., a lame person or
cripple; פּלך, according to the lxx σκυτάλη, a thick round staff), and
who falls by the sword, and who is in want of bread," The meaning is:
May God avenge the murder of Abner upon Joab and his family, by
punishing them continually with terrible diseases, violent death, and
poverty. To make the reason for this fearful curse perfectly clear, the
historian observes in [Sa2 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#030), that
Joab and his brother Abishai had murdered Abner, "because he had slain
their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle" ([Sa2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023)). This act of Joab, in which
Abishai must have been in some way concerned, was a treacherous act of
assassination, which could not even be defended as blood-revenge, since
Abner had slain Asahel in battle after repeated warnings, and only for
the purpose of saving his own life. The principal motive for Joab's act
was the most contemptible jealousy, or the fear lest Abner's
reconciliation to David should diminish his own influence with the king,
as was the case again at a later period with the murder of Amasa ([Sa2
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010)).

[Sa2 3:31-39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#031)

David's mourning for Abner's death. - [Sa2
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#031), [Sa2
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#032). To give a public proof of his
grief at this murder, and his displeasure at the crime in the sight of
all the nation, David commanded Joab, and all the people with him
(David), i.e., all his courtiers, and the warriors who returned with
Joab, to institute a public mourning for the deceased, by tearing their
clothes, putting on sackcloth, i.e., coarse hairy mourning and
penitential clothes, and by a funeral dirge for Abner; i.e., he
commanded them to walk in front of Abner's bier mourning and in funeral
costume, and to accompany the deceased to his resting-place, whilst
David as king followed the bier.

[Sa2 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#032)

Thus they buried Abner at Hebron; and David wept aloud at his grave, and
all the people with him.

[Sa2 3:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033)

Although the appointment of such a funeral by David, and his tears at
Abner's grave, could not fail to divest the minds of his opponents of
all suspicion that Joab had committed the murder with his cognizance
(see at [Sa2 3:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#037)), he gave a still
stronger proof of his innocence, and of the sincerity of his grief, by
the ode which he composed for Abner's death:

33 Like an ungodly man must Abner die!

34 Thy hands were not bound, and thy feet were not placed in fetters.

As one falls before sinners, so hast thou fallen!

[Sa2 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#034)

The first strophe ([Sa2 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033)) is an
expression of painful lamentation at the fact that Abner had died a
death which he did not deserve. "The fool" (nabal) is "the ungodly,"
according to Israelitish ideas (vid., [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)). The meaning of [Sa2
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#034) is: Thou hadst not made thyself
guilty of any crime, so as to have to die like a malefactor, in chains
and bonds; but thou hast been treacherously murdered. This dirge made
such an impression upon all the people (present), that they wept still
more for the dead.

[Sa2 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#035)

But David mourned so bitterly, that when all the people called upon him
to take some food during the day, he declared with an oath that he would
not taste bread or anything else before the setting of the sun. לחם
הברות does not mean, as in [Sa2 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#005),
to give to eat, on account of the expression "all the people," as it can
hardly be imagined that all the people, i.e., all who were present,
could have come to bring David food, but it signifies to make him eat,
i.e., call upon him to eat; whilst it is left uncertain whether David
was to eat with the people (cf. [Sa2
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#017)), i.e., to take part in the
funeral meal that was held after the burial, or whether the people
simply urged him to take some food, for the purpose of soothing his own
sorrow. אם כּי are to be taken separately: כּי, ὅτι, introducing the
oath, and אם being the particle used in an oath: "if," i.e., assuredly
not.

[Sa2 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#036)

"And all the people perceived it (i.e., his trouble), and it pleased
them, as everything that the king did pleased all the people."

[Sa2 3:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#037)

All the people (sc., who were with the king) and all Israel discerned on
that day (from David's deep and heartfelt trouble), that the death of
Abner had not happened (proceeded) from the king, as many may probably
at first have supposed, since Joab had no doubt fetched Abner back in
David's name.

[Sa2 3:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#038)

Finally, David said to his (confidential) servants: "Know ye not (i.e.,
surely perceive) that a prince and great man has this day fallen in
Israel?" This sentence shows how thoroughly David could recognise the
virtues possessed by his opponents, and how very far he was from looking
upon Abner as a traitor, because of his falling away from Ishbosheth and
coming over to him, that on the contrary he hoped to find in him an able
general and a faithful servant. He would at once have punished the
murderer of such a man, if he had only possessed the power. "But," he
adds, "I am this day (still) weak, and only anointed king; and these
men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too strong for me. The Lord reward the
doer of evil according to his wickedness." The expression "to-day" not
only applies to the word "weak," or tender, but also to "anointed"
(to-day, i.e., only just anointed). As David was still but a young
sovereign, and felt himself unable to punish a man like Joab according
to his deserts, he was obliged to restrict himself at first to the
utterance of a curse upon the deed ([Sa2
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029)), and to leave the retribution to
God. He could not and durst not forgive; and consequently, before he
died, he charged Solomon, his son and successor, to punish Joab for the
murder of Abner and Amasa ([Kg1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#005)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa2004)

</div>
