<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2010)  [Next](sa2012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 11:1</span></span>

(Cf. [Ch1 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)). Siege of Rabbah. -
"And it came to pass at the return of the year, at the time when the
kings marched out, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and
all Israel; and they destroyed the Ammonites and besieged Rabbah: but
David remained in Jerusalem." This verse is connected with [Sa2
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#014), where it was stated that after
Joab had put to flight the Aramaeans who came to the help of the
Ammonites, and when the Ammonites also had fallen back before Abishai in
consequence of this victory, and retreated into their fortified capital,
Joab himself returned to Jerusalem. He remained there during the winter
or rainy season, in which it was impossible that war should be carried
on. At the return of the year, i.e., at the commencement of spring, with
which the new years began in the month Abib (Nisan), the time when kings
who were engaged in war were accustomed to open their campaign, David
sent Joab his commander-in-chief with the whole of the Israelitish
forces to attack the Ammonites once more, for the purpose of chastising
them and conquering their capital. The Chethibh המּלאכים should be
changed into המּלכים, according to the Keri and the text of the
Chronicles. The א interpolated is a perfectly superfluous mater
lectionis, and probably crept into the text from a simple oversight. The
"servants" of David with Joab were not the men performing military
service, or soldiers, (in which case "all Israel" could only signify the
people called out to war in extraordinary circumstances), but the king's
military officers, the military commanders; and "all Israel," the whole
of the military forces of Israel. Instead of "the children of Ammon" we
find "the country of the children of Ammon," which explains the meaning
more fully. But there was no necessity to insert ארץ (the land or
country), as השׁחית is applied to men in other passages in the sense of
"cast to the ground," or destroy (e.g., [Sa1
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#015)). Rabbah was the capital of
Ammonitis (as in [Jos 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025)): the
fuller name was Rabbath of the children of Ammon. It has been preserved
in the ruins which still exist under the ancient name of Rabbat-Ammn, on
the Nahr Ammn, i.e., the upper Jabbok (see at [Deu
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)). The last clause, "but David sat
(remained) in Jerusalem," leads on to the account which follows of
David's adultery with Bathsheba (vv. 2-27 and 2 Samuel 12:1-25), which
took place at that time, and is therefore inserted here, so that the
conquest of Rabbah is not related till afterwards ([Sa2
12:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 11:2</span></span>

David's Adultery. - David's deep fall forms a turning-point not only in
the inner life of the great king, but also in the history of his reign.
Hitherto David had kept free from the grosser sins, and had only
exhibited such infirmities and failings as simulation, prevarication,
etc., which clung to all the saints of the Old Covenant, and were hardly
regarded as sins in the existing stage of religious culture at that
time, although God never left them unpunished, but invariably visited
them upon His servants with humiliations and chastisements of various
kinds. Among the unacknowledged sins which God tolerated because of the
hardness of Israel's heart was polygamy, which encouraged licentiousness
and the tendency to sensual excesses, and to which but a weak barrier
had been presented by the warning that had been given for the
Israelitish kings against taking many wives ([Deu
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017)), opposed as such a warning was
to the notion so prevalent in the East both in ancient and modern times,
that a well-filled harem is essential to the splendour of a princely
court. The custom to which this notion gave rise opened a dangerous
precipice in David's way, and led to a most grievous fall, that can only
be explained, as O. v. Gerlach has said, from the intoxication
consequent upon undisturbed prosperity and power, which grew with every
year of his reign, and occasioned a long series of most severe
humiliations and divine chastisements that marred the splendour of his
reign, notwithstanding the fact that the great sin was followed by deep
and sincere repentance.

[Sa2 11:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002)

Towards evening David walked upon the roof of his palace, after rising
from his couch, i.e., after taking his mid-day rest, and saw from the
roof a woman bathing, namely in the uncovered court of a neighbouring
house, where there was a spring with a pool of water, such as you still
frequently meet with in the East. "The woman was beautiful to look
upon." Her outward charms excited sensual desires.

[Sa2 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#003)

David ordered inquiry to be made about her, and found (ויּאמר, "he,
i.e., the messenger, said;" or indefinitely, "they said") that she was
Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah the Hethite. הלוא, nonne, is used, as it
frequently is, in the sense of an affirmation, "it is indeed so."
Instead of Bathsheba the daughter of Eliam, we find the name given in
the Chronicles ([Ch1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005)) as Bathshua
the daughter of Ammiel. The form בּת־שׁוּע may be derived from בּת־שׁוע,
in which ב is softened into ; for Bathsheba (with beth) is the correct
and original form, as we may see from [Kg1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#011), [Kg1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#015), [Kg1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#028). Eliam and Ammiel have the same
signification; the difference simply consists in the transposition of
the component parts of the name. It is impossible to determine, however,
which of the two forms was the original one.

[Sa2 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#004)

The information brought to him, that the beautiful woman was married,
was not enough to stifle the sensual desires which arose in David's
soul. "When lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin" ([Jam
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015)). David sent for the woman, and
lay with her. In the expression "he took her, and she came to him,"
there is no intimation whatever that David brought Bathsheba into his
palace through craft or violence, but rather that she came at his
request without any hesitation, and offered no resistance to his
desires. Consequently Bathsheba is not to be regarded as free from
blame. The very act of bathing in the uncovered court of a house in the
heart of the city, into which it was possible for any one to look down
from the roofs of the houses on higher ground, does not say much for her
feminine modesty, even if it was not done with an ulterior purpose, as
some commentators suppose. Nevertheless in any case the greatest guilt
rests upon David, that he, a man upon whom the Lord had bestowed such
grace, did not resist the temptation to the lust of the flesh, but sent
to fetch the woman. "When she had sanctified herself from her
uncleanness, she returned to her house." Defilement from sexual
intercourse rendered unclean till the evening ([Lev
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#018)). Bathsheba thought it her duty
to observe this statute most scrupulously, though she did not shrink
from committing the sin of adultery.

[Sa2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#005)

When she discovered that she was with child, she sent word to David.
This involved an appeal to him to take the necessary steps to avert the
evil consequences of the sin, inasmuch as the law required that both
adulterer and adulteress should be put to death ([Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010)).

[Sa2 11:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#006)

David had Uriah the husband of Bathsheba sent to him by Joab, under whom
he was serving in the army before Rabbah, upon some pretext or other,
and asked him as soon as he arrived how it fared with Joab and the
people (i.e., the army) and the war. This was probably the pretext under
which David had had him sent to him. According to [Sa2
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#039), Uriah was one of the gibborim
("mighty men") of David, and therefore held some post of command in the
army, although there is no historical foundation for the statement made
by Josephus, viz., that he was Joab's armour-bearer or aide-de-camp. The
king then said to him, "Go down to thy house (from the palace upon Mount
Zion down to the lower city, where Uriah's house was situated), and wash
thy feet;" and when he had gone out of the palace, he sent a royal
present after him. The Israelites were accustomed to wash their feet
when they returned home from work or from a journey, to take refreshment
and rest themselves. Consequently these words contained an intimation
that he was to go and refresh himself in his own home. David's wish was
that Uriah should spend a night at home with his wife, that he might
afterwards be regarded as the father of the child that had been begotten
in adultery. משּׂאת, a present, as in [Amo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011); [Jer
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004); [Est
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#018).

[Sa2 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#009)

But Uriah had his suspicions aroused. The connection between his wife
and David may not have remained altogether a secret, so that it may have
reached his ears as soon as he arrived in Jerusalem. "He lay down to
sleep before the king's house with all the servants of his lord (i.e.,
the retainers of the court), and went not down to his house." "Before,
or at, the door of the king's house," i.e., in the court of the palace,
or in a building adjoining the king's palace, where the court servants
lived.

[Sa2 11:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#010)

When this was told to David (the next morning), he said to Uriah, "Didst
thou not come from the way (i.e., from a journey)? why didst thou not go
down (as men generally do when they return from a journey)?" Uriah
replied ([Sa2 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#011)), "The ark (ark of
the covenant), and Israel, and Judah, dwell in the huts, and my lord
Joab and the servants of my lord encamp in the field; and should I go to
my house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? By thy life, and
by the life of thy soul, I do no such thing!" בּסּכּות ישׁב, to sit or
sojourn in huts, is the same practically as being encamped in the field.
Uriah meant to say: Whereas the ark, i.e., Jehovah with the ark, and all
Israel, were engaged in conflict with the enemies of God and of His
kingdom, and therefore encamped in the open country, it did not become a
warrior to seek rest and pleasure in his own home. This answer expressed
the feelings and the consciousness of duty which ought to animate one
who was fighting for the cause of God, in such plain and unmistakeable
terms, that it was well adapted to prick the king to the heart. But
David's soul was so beclouded by the wish to keep clear of the
consequences of his sin in the eyes of the world, that he did not feel
the sting, but simply made a still further attempt to attain his purpose
with Uriah. He commanded him to stop in Jerusalem all that day, as he
did not intend to send him away till the morrow.

[Sa2 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#013)

The next day he invited him to his table and made him drunken, with the
hope that when in this state he would give up his intention of not going
home to his wife. But Uriah lay down again the next night to sleep with
the king's servants, without going down to his house; for, according to
the counsel and providence of God, David's sin was to be brought to lift
to his deep humiliation.

[Sa2 11:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#014)

When the king saw that his plan was frustrated through Uriah's
obstinacy, he resolved upon a fresh and still greater crime. He wrote a
letter to Joab, with which he sent Uriah back to the army, and the
contents of which were these: "Set ye Uriah opposite to the strongest
contest, and then turn away behind him, that he may be slain, and die."

(Note: "We may see from this how deep a soul may fall when it turns away
from God, and from the guidance of His grace. This David, who in the
days of his persecution would not even resort to means that were really
plausible in order to defend himself, was now not ashamed to resort to
the greatest crimes in order to cover his sin. O God! how great is our
strength when we lay firm hold of Thee! And how weak we become as soon
as we turn away from Thee! The greatest saints would be ready for the
worst of deeds, if Thou shouldst but leave them for a single moment
without Thy protection. Whoever reflects upon this, will give up all
thought of self-security and spiritual pride." - Berleburg Bible.)

David was so sure that his orders would be executed, that he did not
think it necessary to specify any particular crime of which Uriah had
been guilty.

[Sa2 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#016)

The king's wishes were fully carried out by Joab. "When Joab watched
(i.e., blockaded) the city, he stationed Uriah just where he knew that
there were brave men" (in the city).

[Sa2 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#017)

"And the men of the city came out (i.e., made a sally) and fought with
Joab, and some of the people of the servants of David fell, and Uriah
the Hethite died also." The literal fulfilment of the king's command
does not warrant us in assuming that Joab suspected how the matter
stood, or had heard a rumour concerning it. As a general, who was not
accustomed to spare human life, he would be a faithful servant of his
lord in this point, in order that his own interests might be served
another time.

[Sa2 11:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#018)

Joab immediately despatched a messenger to the king, to give him a
report of the events of the war, and with these instructions: "When thou
hast told all the things of the war to the king to the end, in case the
anger of the king should be excited (תּעלה, ascend), and he should say
to thee, Why did ye advance so near to the city to fight? knew ye not
that they would shoot from the wall? Who smote Abimelech the son of
Jerubbosheth (i.e., Gideon, see at [Jdg
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#032))? did not a woman throw down a
millstone from the wall, that he died in Thebez ([Jdg
9:53](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#053))? why went ye so nigh to the
wall? then only say, Thy servant Uriah the Hethite has perished." Joab
assumed that David might possibly be angry at what had occurred, or at
any rate that he might express his displeasure at the fact that Joab had
sacrificed a number of warriors by imprudently approaching close to the
wall: he therefore instructed the messenger, if such should be the case,
to announce Uriah's death to the king, for the purpose of mitigating his
wrath. The messenger seems to have known that Uriah was in disgrace with
the king. At the same time, the words "thy servant Uriah is dead also"
might be understood or interpreted as meaning that it was without, or
even in opposition to, Joab's command, that Uriah went so far with his
men, and that he was therefore chargeable with his own death and that of
the other warriors who had fallen.

[Sa2 11:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#022)

The messenger brought to David all the information with which Joab had
charged him (שׁלח with a double accusative, to send or charge a person
with anything), but he so far condensed it as to mention Uriah's death
at the same time. "When the men (of Rabbah) became strong against us,
and came out to us into the field, and we prevailed against them even to
the gate, the archers shot at thy servants down from the wall, so that
some of the servants of the king died, and thy servant Uriah the Hethite
is dead also." The א in the forms המּוראים ויּראוּ instead of המּורים
ויּרוּ is an Aramaic mode of writing the words.

[Sa2 11:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#025)

David received with apparent composure the intelligence which he was
naturally so anxious to hear, and sent this message back to Joab: "Let
not this thing depress thee, for the sword devours thus and thus. Keep
on with the battle against the city, and destroy it." The construction
of אל־ירע with את obj. is analogous to the combination of a passive verb
with את: "Do not look upon this affair as evil" (disastrous). David then
sent the messenger away, saying, "Encourage thou him" (lit. strengthen
him, put courage into him), to show his entire confidence in the bravery
and stedfastness of Joab and the army, and their ultimate success in the
capture of Rabbah. - In [Sa2 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#026) the
account goes back to its starting-point. When Uriah's wife heard of her
husband's death, she mourned for her husband. When her mourning was
over, David took her home as his wife, after which she bore him a son
(the one begotten in adultery). The ordinary mourning of the Israelites
lasted seven days ([Gen 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#010); [Sa1
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013)). Whether widows mourned any
longer we do not know. In the case before us Bathsheba would hardly
prolong her mourning beyond the ordinary period, and David would
certainly not delay taking her as his wife, in order that she might be
married to the king as long as possible before the time of childbirth.
The account of these two grievous sins on the part of David is then
closed with the assurance that "the thing that David had done displeased
the Lord," which prepares the way for the following chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 12](sa2012)

</div>
