<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2017)  [Next](sa2019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 18:1</span></span>

Preparation for war. - [Sa2 18:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#001).
David mustered the people that were with him, and placed over them
captains of thousands and hundreds, and divided them into three
companies, under the generals Joab, Abishai, and Ittai the Gathite, who
had given such decided proofs, according to [Sa2
15:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#021), of his fidelity to David.
בּיד שׁלּח, to leave to the hand of a person, i.e., to his power, is
used here in the sense of placing under his direction. The people
opposed in the most decided manner the wish of the king to go with them
to the war, saying ([Sa2 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#003)), "Thou
shalt not go out: for if we flee, they will take no heed of us (i.e.,
attach no importance to this); and if half of us die, they will take no
heed of us: for thou art as ten thousand of us (we must evidently read
אתּה for עתּה, and עתּה has merely got into the text in consequence of
ועתּה following): and now it is good that thou be ready to give us help
from the city" (the Chethib לעזיר, inf. Hiphil for להעזיר, is not to be
disputed). David was to stay behind in the city with a reserve, that he
might be able to come to their relief in case of need.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 18:4</span></span>

The king gave his consent to these proposals, and went to the side of
the gate, whilst the people went out by hundreds and thousands; but in
the hearing of all he commanded the principal generals, "Mildly for me
(i.e., deal gently for my sake) with the boy Absalom." לאט is not the
imperative of לאט, to cover over, which would not suit the connection,
and could not be construed with ל, but an adverb from אט, as in [Isa
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006); [Kg1
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027); [Job
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#011).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 18:6</span></span>

Battle in the wood of Ephraim, and death of Absalom. - [Sa2
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#006), [Sa2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#007). When the people, i.e., David's
army, had advanced into the field against Israel (those who followed
Absalom), a battle was fought "in the wood of Ephraim," when Israel was
smitten by David's warriors and sustained a loss of 20,000 men. The
question, where the "wood of Ephraim" was situated, is a disputed one.
But both the name and the fact that, according to [Jos
17:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#015), the tribe-land of Ephraim
abounded in forests, favour the idea that it was a wood in the
inheritance of Ephraim, on this side of the Jordan; and this is in
perfect harmony with the statement in [Sa2
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#023), that Ahimaaz took the way of
the Jordan valley to bring the news of the victory to David, who was
staying behind in Mahanaim. Nevertheless the majority of commentators
have supposed that the place alluded to was a woody region on the other
side of the Jordan, which had received the name of "wood Ephraim"
probably after the defeat of the Ephraimites in the time of Jephthah
([Jdg 12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001)). The reasons assigned
are, first, that according to [Sa2
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#026), Absalom had encamped in Gilead,
and it is not stated that he had crossed the Jordan again; secondly,
that [Sa2 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#003) ("that thou succour us
out of the city") presupposes that the battle took place in the
neighbourhood of Mahanaim (Thenius); and thirdly, that after the victory
the army returned to Mahanaim; whereas if the battle had been fought on
this side of the Jordan, it would evidently have been much better for it
to remain there and occupy Jerusalem (Ewald, Gesch. iii. p. 237). But
neither of these reasons is decisive, and there is no force in the other
arguments employed by Thenius. There was no necessity for an immediate
occupation of Jerusalem by David's victorious army, since all Israel
fled to their tents after the fall of Absalom and the defeat of his army
([Sa2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017) and [Sa2
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#009)); that is to say, such of
Absalom's followers as had not fallen in or after the battle, broke up
and returned home, and therefore the revolution was at an end.
Consequently there was nothing left for David's army to do but to return
to its king at Mahanaim, and fetch him back to Jerusalem, and reinstate
him in his kingdom. The other two reasons might have some force in them,
if the history before us contained a complete account of the whole
course of the war. But even Ewald admits that it is restricted to a
notice of the principal battle, which completely crushed the rebellion.
There can be no doubt, however, that this was preceded, if not by other
battles, yet by such military operations as accompany every war. This is
clearly indicated in [Sa2 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#006), where
it is stated that the army advanced into the field against Israel ([Sa2
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#006)), which evidently refers to such
an advance on the part of David's army as might compel Absalom to draw
back from Gilead across the Jordan, until at length a decisive battle
was fought, which ended in the complete destruction of his army and his
own death. Ewald observes still further, that "it seems impossible, at
any rate so far as the name is concerned, to assume that the wood of
Ephraim was on the other side of the Jordan, whilst according to [Sa2
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#023), the messenger who reported the
victory went from the field of battle towards the Jordan valley in order
to get to David." But the way in which Ewald tries to set aside this
important point, as bearing upon the conclusion that the battle took
place on this side of the Jordan, - namely, by adopting this rendering
of [Sa2 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#023), "he ran after the
manner of Kikkar, running, and therefore overtook Kushi," - is far too
unnatural to meet with acceptance. Under all these circumstances,
therefore, we decide in favour of the assumption that the wood of
Ephraim is to be sought for in the tribe-territory of Ephraim.

The nature of the ground contributed a great deal to the utter defeat of
Absalom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 18:8</span></span>

The conflict extended over the surface of the whole land, i.e., the
whole of that region (the Chethib נפצות is not the plural נפצות, which
would be quite unsuitable, but is most probably a noun, נפצוּת ,nuon a,
signifying bursting asunder, or wild flight; the Keri נפצת is a Niphal
participle, fem. gen.); "and the wood devoured more of the people than
the sword ate on the same day." The woody region was most likely full of
ravines, precipices, and marches, into which the flying foe was pursued,
and where so many perished.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 18:9</span></span>

"And Absalom was lighted upon (יקּרא = יקּרה) by the servants of David,
riding upon the mule; and the mule had come under the thick branches of
the great terebinth, and his head fastened itself (remained hanging) on
the terebinth, so that he was held (hung) between heaven and earth, as
the mule under him went away." The imperfects, ויּבא, ויּחזק, and
ויּתּן, are only a combination of the circumstantial clause רכב ואבשׁ.
With regard to the fact itself, it is not clearly stated in the words
that Absalom hung only by his hair, but simply that his hair entangled
him in the thick branches, and his head was fastened in the terebinth,
namely, by being jammed between the strong boughs.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 18:10</span></span>

A man (one of David's men) saw him in this situation, and told Joab,
Joab replied ([Sa2 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#011)), "Behold,
thou hast seen it, and wherefore has thou not smitten him there to the
ground? and it was for me to give thee ten silverlings and a girdle;"
i.e., if thou hadst slain him, it would have been my duty to reward
thee.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 18:12</span></span>

But the man replied, "And I ... not weighing a thousand shekels in my
hand ... might not stretch out my hand to the king's son," i.e., I could
not do it for a reward of a thousand shekels. This is the meaning of the
Chethib ולא; the Masoretes, on the other hand, have substituted ולוּ,
which is the reading adopted in most of the ancient versions, and the
one preferred by the majority of expositors: "if I weighed ... I would
not," etc. But there is no necessity for this alteration, as the Chethib
is quite in accordance with the character of the words. "For before our
ears the king commanded" (cf. [Sa2
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#005)): מי שׁמרוּ, "take care whoever
(it be) of the boy Absalom." On this use of מי, see Ewald, 104, d., a.
The Keri לי is merely a conjecture, notwithstanding the fact that all
the versions follow it, and that one of the Codices in Kennicott has לי.
"or," continued the man ([Sa2 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#013)),
"should I have acted deceitfully towards his life (i.e., have slain him
secretly, which he calls שׁקר, cheating, because it was opposed to the
king's open command): and nothing remains hidden from the king; ... thou
wouldst have set thyself in opposition to me," i.e., have risen up
against me before the king. The middle clause is a circumstantial one,
as the fact that וכל־דּבר is placed first clearly shows; so that it
cannot be regarded as introducing the apodosis, which really follows in
the clause commencing with ואתּה.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 18:14</span></span>

Joab replied, "Not so will I wait before thee," i.e., I will not leave
the thing to thee. He then took three staffs in his hand, and thrust
them into Absalom's heart. שׁבטים is rendered by the lxx and Vulgate,
βέλη, lanceas; and Thenius would adopt שׁלחים accordingly, as an
emendation of the text. But in the earlier Hebrew שׁלח only occurs in
poetical writings in the sense of a missile or dart ([Job
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018); [Job
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#012); [Joe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#008)); and it is not till after the
captivity that we find it used to denote a weapon generally. There is no
necessity, however, for altering the text. Joab caught up in his hurry
the first thing that he found, namely pointed staff, and pierced Absalom
with them to the heart. This explains the reason for his taking three,
whereas one javelin or dart would have been sufficient, and also the
fact that Absalom was not slain, notwithstanding their being thrust at
his heart. The last clause of the verse belongs to what follows: "Still
living (i.e., as he was still alive) in the midst of the terebinth, ten
young men, Joab's armour-bearers, surrounded him, and smote him to
death."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 18:16</span></span>

Immediately afterwards Joab stopped any further pursuit, "for Joab
spared the people," i.e., he wanted to spare them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 18:17</span></span>

But Absalom they cast into a great pit in the wood, and threw up over
him a very large heap of stones, as an ignominious monument, like those
thrown up over Achan ([Jos 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#026)) and
the king of Air ([Jos 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#029)). This was
the end of Absalom and his rebellion. "All Israel (that had crowded
round him) had fled, every one to his tent" (i.e., home: see at [Deu
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#007)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 18:18</span></span>

Absalom had erected a monument to himself in the king's valley during
his lifetime; "for he said, I have no son to preserve the remembrance of
my name, and he called the monument by his own name; and so it was
called hand (memorial) of Absalom unto this day." The לקח before ויּצּב
is apparently pleonastic; but it belongs to the diffuse and
circumstantial character of the antiquated Hebrew diction (as in [Num
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)). מצּבת, a memorial of stone;
whether in the form of a column, or an obelisk, or a monolith, cannot be
determined (vid., [Gen 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#022); [Gen
31:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#052)). The king's valley, which
received its name from the event narrated in [Gen
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017), was two stadia from Jerusalem
according to Josephus (Ant. vii. 10, 3), and therefore not "close to the
Dead Sea," or in regione transjordanensi (Ges. Thes. pp. 1045, 1377), or
"in the Jordan valley in Ephraim" (Tuch and Winer). It was on the
eastern side of Jerusalem, in the Kidron valley; though Absalom's
pillar, which ecclesiastical tradition has transferred thither, a
monument about forty feet in height and pointed like a pyramid, is not
of early Hebrew, but of Grecian origin. On the words "I have no son,"
see at [Sa2 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#027).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 18:19</span></span>

David is informed of the victory, and of the death of Absalom. - [Sa2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019), [Sa2
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#020). Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok,
wanted to carry the news to David, that Jehovah had "procured the king
justice out of the hand of his enemies" (שׁפט with מן is a pregnant
expression signifying to procure justice and deliver out of); but Joab,
knowing how David would receive the tidings of the death of Absalom,
replied, "Thou art no man of good tidings to-day; thou shalt take the
news on another day, not on this, even because (על־כּן כּי, see at [Gen
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#005)) the king's son is dead." The
Keri על־כּן כּי is to be preferred to the Chethib כּי־על; and כּן has no
doubt been dropt out merely because of בּן which follows. The Chethib
does not give any suitable sense; for the absence of the article before
מת is decisive against the explanation proposed by Maurer, viz., "for
(tidings have to be carried) concerning the king's son dead." If מת were
to be construed as an adverb with בּן־מלך, it would of necessity have
the article.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 18:21</span></span>

Joab therefore entrusted the Cushite with the duty of conveying to David
the announcement of what had occurred. It cannot be decided with
certainty whether הכּוּשׁי or Cushi is the proper name of an Israelite,
or whether it signifies the "Cushite," i.e., a descendant of Cush. The
form of the name rather favours the latter view, in which case it would
suggest the idea of a Moorish slave in the service of Joab.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 18:22</span></span>

As Ahimaaz still expressed a wish to hasten to the king, even after
Cushi had been sent, and could not be induced to relinquish his purpose
by the repeated expostulations of Joab, the latter at length permitted
him to run. And he ran so fast, that he got before Cushi. מה ויהי: let
whatever will happen. וּלכה is the pronoun "to thee," as in [Gen
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#037), and not the imperative of הלך,
"thou mayest go." The meaning is, "and there is no striking message for
thee," no message that strikes the mark, or affects anything. We must
supply "he said" in thought before [Sa2
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#023). There was the less necessity to
write it here (as in [Sa1 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020)), since
it is perfectly obvious from the repetition of מה ויהי that it is
Ahimaaz who is speaking. Ahimaaz then ran by the way of the plain, i.e.,
the way which lies through or across the plain of the Jordan. Now he
could not possibly have taken this road, if the battle had been fought
in a wood on the eastern side of the Jordan, and he had wanted to hurry
from the scene of battle to Mahanaim; for in that case he would have
taken a circuitous route two or three times the distance of the straight
road, so that it would have been utterly impossible for him to get there
before the Cushite, however quickly he might run. This notice therefore
furnishes a decisive proof that the battle was fought upon the mountains
of Ephraim, in the land to the west of the Jordan, since the straight
road thence to Mahanaim would lie through the valley of the Jordan.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 18:24</span></span>

David was sitting between the two gates of Mahanaim waiting for tidings
of the result of the battle. The two gates are the outer and inner gate
of the fortified city wall, between which there was a small court, where
David was sitting. The watchman then went up to the roof of the gate by
the wall, probably the outer gate in the city wall, and as he looked he
saw a man running alone.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 18:25</span></span>

When he announced this to the king, he said, "If he (is or comes) alone,
there is good news in his mouth," namely, because several runners would
have shown themselves if it had been a flight. As the first messenger
came nearer and nearer, the watchman saw another man running, and
shouted this into the gate (השּׁער is wrongly pointed for השּׁער,
according to the lxx, Syr., and Vulgate); whereupon the king replied,
"This is also a good messenger."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 18:27</span></span>

When the watchman saw by the running of the first that it was Ahimaaz,
recognising him probably by the swiftness of his running, and announced
it to the king, he replied, "He is a good man, and cometh with good
tidings," because Joab would not have selected him to bring any other
than good news.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa2 18:28</span></span>

Ahimaaz then called out to the king, "Shalom," i.e., Hail! and fell down
before him to greet him reverentially, and said, "Blessed be Jehovah thy
God, who hath given up the men that lifted up their hand against my lord
the king."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 18:29</span></span>

In answer to the king's inquiry, "Is it well with the young man
Absalom?" Ahimaaz replied, "I saw the great tumult (that arose) when
Joab sent off the king's servant, and thy servant, and know not what"
(sc., had occurred). Ahimaaz spoke as if he had been sent off before
Absalom's fate had been decided or could be known. "The king's servant"
is the Cushite, whom Ahimaaz saw just approaching, so that he could
point to him. Joab is the subject, which is sometimes written after the
object in the case of an infinitive construction (vid., Gesenius, 133, 3
Anm.); and the expression "thy servant" is a conventional one for "me"
(viz., Ahimaaz).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 18:30</span></span>

And the king said, "Turn, and stand here," that he might hear the
further news from the Cushite, who had just arrived.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 18:31</span></span>

The Cushite said, "Let my lord the king receive good tidings, for
Jehovah hath procured thee justice to-day out of the hand of all who
have risen up against thee" (cf. [Sa2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 18:32</span></span>

When asked about the welfare of Absalom, the Cushite replied, "May it
happen to the enemies of my lord the king, and all who have risen up
against thee for evil (i.e., to do thee harm), as to the young man." The
death of Absalom was indicated clearly enough in these words.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 18:33</span></span>

The king understood the meaning of the words. He was agitated, and went
up to the balcony of the gate (the room above the entrance) and wept,
and said, walking about, "My son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Oh
that I had died for thee, Absalom, my son, my son!" To understand this
passionate utterance of anguish, we must bear in mind not only the
excessive tenderness, or rather weakness, of David's paternal affection
towards his son, but also his anger that Joab and his generals should
have paid so little regard to his command to deal gently with Absalom.
With the king's excitable temperament, this entirely prevented him from
taking a just and correct view of the crime of his rebel son, which
merited death, and of the penal justice of God which had been manifested
in his destruction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 19](sa2019)

</div>
