<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2020)  [Next](sa2022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 21:0</span></span>

IV\. Close of David's Reign - 2 Samuel 21-24

After the suppression of the rebellion headed by Sheba, David spent the
remaining years of his reign in establishing the kingdom upon a firmer
basis, partly by organizing the army, the administration of justice, and
the general government of the realm, and partly by making preparations
for the erection of the temple, and enacting rules for the service of
the Levites; that he might be able to hand over the government in a firm
and satisfactory state to his youthful son Solomon, whom the Lord had
appointed as his successor. The account of these regulations and
enactments fills up the whole of the last section of the history of
David's reign in the first book of Chronicles. But in the book before
us, several other things - (1) two divine punishments inflicted upon
Israel, with the expiation of the sins that occasioned them ([Sa2
21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001), and 2 Samuel 24); (2) David's
psalm of praise for deliverance out of the hand of all his enemies (2
Samuel 22), and his last prophetic words ([Sa2
23:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)); and (3) a few brief notices
of victorious acts performed in the wars with the Philistines ([Sa2
21:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015)), and a longer list of
David's heroes (2 Samuel 23:8-39) - form, as it were, a historical
framework for these poetical and prophetic portions. Of the two divine
visitations mentioned, the pestilence occasioned by the numbering of the
people (2 Samuel 24) occurred undoubtedly in the closing years of
David's reign; whereas the famine, and the expiation connected with it
([Sa2 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)), happened most probably
at an earlier period, and are merely introduced here because no fitting
opportunity had presented itself before. The kernel and centre of this
last section of the history of David is to be found unquestionably in
the psalm of thanksgiving in 2 Samuel 22, and the prophetic announcement
of an exalted and blessed king. In the psalm of thanksgiving David looks
back at the close of his life upon all the mercy and faithfulness which
he had experienced throughout his reign, and praises the Lord his God
for the whole. In his "last words" he looks forward into the time to
come, and on the strength of the promise which he has received, of the
eternal duration of the dominion of his house, sees in spirit the just
Ruler, who will one day arise from his seed, and take the throne of his
kingdom for ever. These two lyrical and prophetic productions of David,
the ripest spiritual fruit of his life, form a worthy conclusion to this
reign. To this there is appended the list of his heroes, in the form of
a supplement (2 Samuel 23:8-39); and finally in 2 Samuel 24 the account
of the numbering of the people, and the pestilence which fell upon
Israel, as a punishment for this fault on the part of David. This
account is placed at the close of the books of Samuel, merely because
the altar which was built to expiate the wrath of God, together with the
sacrifices offered upon it, served to consecrate the site for the
temple, which was to be erected after David's death, in accordance with
the divine promise ([Sa2 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013)), by his
son and successor Solomon.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 21:1</span></span>

Three Years' Famine. - A three years' famine in the land, the occasion
of which, as Jehovah declared to the king, was Saul's crime with regard
to the Gibeonites, was expiated by David's delivering up to the
Gibeonites, at their own request, seven of Saul's descendants, who were
then hung by them upon a mountain before Jehovah. This occurrence
certainly did not take place in the closing years of David's reign; on
the other hand, it is evident from the remark in [Sa2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#007), to the effect that Mephibosheth
was spared, that it happened after David had received tidings of
Mephibosheth, and had taken him to his own table ([Sa2
9:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)). This is mentioned here as a
practical illustration, on the one hand of the manner in which Jehovah
visited upon the house of Saul, even after the death of Saul himself, a
crime which had been committed by him; and, on the other hand, of the
way in which, even in such a case as this, when David had been obliged
to sacrifice the descendants of Saul to expiate the guilt of their
father, he showed his tenderness towards him by the honourable burial of
their bones.

[Sa2 21:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)

A famine, which lasted for three successive years, induced David to seek
the face of Jehovah, i.e., to approach God in prayer and ask the cause
of this judgment which had fallen upon the land. The Lord replied,
"Because of Saul, and because of the house of blood-guiltiness, because
he hath slain the Gibeonites." The expression "because of the house of
blood-guiltiness" is in apposition to "Saul," and determines the meaning
more precisely: "because of Saul, and indeed because of the
blood-guiltiness which rests upon his house." הדּמים בּית signifies the
house upon which blood that had been shed still rested as guilt, like
הדּמים עיר in [Eze 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#002); [Eze
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#006), [Eze
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#009), and דּמים אישׁ in [Psa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007); [Psa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#009), etc. Nothing further is known
about the fact itself. It is simply evident from the words of the
Gibeonites in [Sa2 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#005), that Saul, in
his pretended zeal for the children of Israel, had smitten the
Gibeonites, i.e., had put them to death. Probably some dissatisfaction
with them had furnished Saul with a pretext for exterminating these
Amoritish heathen from the midst of the people of God.

[Sa2 21:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#002)

In consequence of this answer from God, which merely indicated in a
general manner the cause of the visitation that had come upon the land,
David sent for the Gibeonites to ask them concerning the wrong that had
been done them by Saul. But before the historian communicates their
answer, he introduces an explanation respecting the Gibeonites, to the
effect that they were not Israelites, but remnants of the Amorites, to
whom Joshua had promised on oath that their lives should be preserved
(vid., [Jos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003).). They are called
Hivites in the book of Joshua ([Jos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007)); whereas here they are designated
Amorites, according to the more general name which is frequently used as
comprehending all the tribes of Canaan (see at [Gen
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#016) and [Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016)). David said to the Gibeonites,
"What shall I do for you, and wherewith shall I expiate" (sc., the wrong
done you), "that ye may bless the inheritance (i.e., the nation) of
Jehovah?" On the use of the imperative וּברכוּ to denote the certain
consequences, see Ewald, 347.

[Sa2 21:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#004)

The Gibeonites answered, "I have not to do with silver and gold
concerning Saul and his house" (lit. it is not, does not stand, to me at
silver and gold with Saul and his house), i.e., I have no money to
demand of Saul, require no pecuniary payment as compensation for the
blood which he shed among us (vid., [Num
35:31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#031)). The Chethib לי is not to be
touched, notwithstanding the לנוּ which follows. The use of the singular
may be explained on the simple ground that the speaker thought of the
Gibeonites as a corporation. "And it does not pertain to us to put any
one to death in Israel" (sc., of our own accord). When David inquired
still further, "What do you mean, then, that I should do to you?" they
replied, "(As for) the man who consumed us, and who thought against us,
that we should be destroyed (נשׁמדנוּ without כּי, subordinately to
דּמּה, like אעשׂה in the previous verse), so as not to continue in the
whole of the territory of Israel, let seven men of his sons be given us,
that we may crucify them to Jehovah at Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of
Jehovah." וגו אשׁר אישׁ is placed at the head absolutely (cf. Gesenius,
145, 2). On crucifixion as a capital punishment, see at [Num
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004), where it has already been
observed that criminals were not impaled or fastened to the cross alive,
but were first of all put to death. Consequently the Gibeonites desired
that the massacre, which had taken place among them by the command of
Saul, should be expiated by the execution of a number of his sons -
blood for blood, according to [Num
35:31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#031). They asked for the crucifixion
for Jehovah, i.e., that the persons executed might be impaled, as a
public exhibition of the punishment inflicted, before the face of the
Lord (vid., [Sa2 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#009)), as the
satisfaction required to expiate His wrath. Seven was a sacred number,
denoting the performance of a work of God. This was to take place in
Gibeah, the home and capital of Saul, who had brought the wrath of God
upon the land through his crime. There is a sacred irony in the epithet
applied to Saul, "chosen of the Lord." If Saul was the chosen of
Jehovah, his actions ought to have been in accordance with his divine
election.

[Sa2 21:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#006)

David granted the request, because, according to the law in [Num
35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033), blood-guiltiness when resting
upon the land could only be expiated by the blood of the criminal; but
in delivering up the members of Saul's house for whom they asked, he
spared Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan and grandson of Saul, for the
sake of the bond of friendship which he had formed with Jonathan on oath
([Sa1 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#003); [Sa1
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#008), [Sa1
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#016)), and gave up to the Gibeonites
two sons of Rizpah, a concubine of Saul (vid., [Sa2
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#011) and [Sa2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007)), and five sons of Merab the
daughter of Saul, whom she had borne to Adriel of Meholah. The name of
Michal, which stands in the text, is founded upon an error of memory or
a copyist's mistake; for it was not Michal, but Merab, Saul's eldest
daughter, who was given to Adriel the Meholathite as his wife ([Sa1
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#019)). The Gibeonites crucified those
who were delivered up to them upon the mountain at Gibeah before Jehovah
(see the remarks on [Sa2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#006)). "Thus
fell seven at once." The Chethib שׁבעתים, at which the Masoretes took
such offence that they wanted to change it into שׁבעתּם, is defended by
Bttcher very properly, on the ground that the dual of the numeral
denotes what is uniformly repeated as if by pairing; so that here it
expresses what was extraordinary in the even tin a more pictorial manner
than the Keri: "They fell sevenfold at once," i.e., seven in the same
way. The further remark, "they were slain in the first days of harvest,
at the beginning of the barley harvest," belongs to what follows, for
which it prepares the way. The two Keris, והמּה for והם, and בּתחלּת for
תּחלּת, are needless emendations. תּחלּת is an adverbial accusative
(vid., Ges. 118, 2). The harvest began with the barley harvest, about
the middle of Nisan, our April.

[Sa2 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#010)

And Rizpah took sackcloth, i.e., the coarse hairy cloth that was worn as
mourning, and spread it out for herself by the rock - not as a tent, as
Clericus supposes, still less as a covering over the corpses of those
who had been executed, according to the exegetical handbook, but for a
bed - "from the beginning of the harvest till water was poured out upon
them (the crucified) from heaven," i.e., till rain came as a sign that
the plague of drought that had rested upon the land was appeased; after
which the corpses could be openly taken down from the stakes and buried,
- a fact which is passed over in the account before us, where only the
principal points are given. This is the explanation which Josephus has
correctly adopted; but his assumption that the rain fell at once, and
before the ordinary early rain, has no foundation in the text of the
Bible. "And suffered not the birds of heaven to settle upon the corpses
by day, or the wild beasts by night." Leaving corpses without burial, to
be consumed by birds of prey and wild beasts, was regarded as the
greatest ignominy that could befal the dead (see at [Sa1
17:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#044)). According to [Deu
21:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022), persons executed were not to
remain hanging through the night upon the stake, but to be buried before
evening. This law, however, had no application whatever to the case
before us, where the expiation of guilt that rested upon the whole land
was concerned. In this instance the expiatory sacrifices were to remain
exposed before Jehovah, till the cessation of the plague showed that His
wrath had been appeased.

[Sa2 21:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#011)

When this touching care of Rizpah for the dead was told to David, he
took care that the bones of the whole of the fallen royal house should
be buried in the burial-place of Saul's family. He therefore sent for
the bones of Saul and Jonathan, which the men of Jabesh had taken away
secretly from the wall of Beisan, where the Philistines had fastened the
bodies, and which had been buried in Jabesh ([Sa1
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#010).), and had the bones of the sons
and grandsons of Saul who had been crucified at Gibeah collected
together, and interred all these bones at Zela in the land of Benjamin,
in the family grave of Kish the father of Saul. גּנּב, to take away
secretly. בּית־שׁן מּרחב, from the market-place of Bethshan, does not
present any contradiction to the statement in [Sa1
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#010), that the Philistines fastened
the body to the wall of Bethshan, as the rechob or market-place in
eastern towns is not in the middle of the town, but is an open place
against or in front of the gate (cf. [Ch2
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#006); [Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001), [Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003),[Neh
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016)). This place, as the common
meeting-place of the citizens, was the most suitable spot that the
Philistines could find for fastening the bodies to the wall. The Chethib
תּלוּם is the true Hebrew form from תּלה, whereas the Keri תּלאוּם is a
formation resembling the Aramaean (cf. Ewald, 252, a.). The Keri
פלשׁתּים שׁמּה is correct, however, as פלשׁתּים, being a proper name,
does not take any article. In הכּות בּיום the literal meaning of יום
(day) must not be strictly pressed, but the expression is to be taken in
the sense of "at the time of the smiting;" for the hanging up of the
bodies did not take place till the day after the battle ([Sa1
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008).). - In [Sa2
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#014) the account is abridged, and the
bones of the crucified persons are not mentioned again. The situation of
Zela is unknown (see at [Jos 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028)).
After this had been carried out in accordance with the king's command,
God suffered himself to be entreated for the land, so that the famine
ceased.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 21:15</span></span>

Heroic Acts Performed in the Wars with the Philistines. - The brief
accounts contained in these verses of different heroic feats were
probably taken from a history of David's wars drawn up in the form of
chronicles, and are introduced here as practical proofs of the gracious
deliverance of David out of the hand of all his foes, for which he
praises the Lord his God in the psalm of thanksgiving which follows, so
that the enumeration of these feats is to be regarded as supplying a
historical basis for the psalm.

[Sa2 21:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015)

The Philistines had war with Israel again. עוד (again) refers generally
to earlier wars with the Philistines, and has probably been taken
without alteration from the chronicles employed by our author, where the
account which follows was attached to notices of other wars. This may be
gathered from the books of the Chronicles, where three of the heroic
feats mentioned here are attached to the general survey of David's wars
(vid., [Ch1 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#004)). David was exhausted
in this fight, and a Philistian giant thought to slay him; but Abishai
came to his help and slew the giant. He was called Yishbo benob (Keri,
Yishbi), i.e., not Yishbo at Nob, but Yishbobenob, a proper name, the
meaning of which is probably "his dwelling is on the height," and which
may have been given to him because of his inaccessible castle. He was
one of the descendants of Raphah, i.e., one of the gigantic race of
Rephaim. Raphah was the tribe-father of the Rephaim, an ancient tribe of
gigantic stature, of whom only a few families were left even in Moses'
time (vid., [Deu 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#011); [Deu
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011), [Deu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013), and the commentary on [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005)). The weight of his lance, i.e.,
of the metal point to his lance, was three hundred shekels, or eight
pounds, of brass, half as much as the spear of Goliath ([Sa1
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007)); "and he was girded with new
armour." Bttcher has no doubt given the correct explanation of the word
חדשׁה; he supposes the feminine to be used in a collective sense, so
that the noun ("armour," כּליו) could be dispensed with. (For parallels
both to the words and facts, vid., [Jdg
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#011) and [Deu
1:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#041).) ויּאמר, he said (sc., to
himself), i.e., he thought.

[Sa2 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017)

The danger into which the king had been brought in this war, and out of
which he had been rescued solely by Abishai's timely help, induced his
attendants to make him swear that he would not go into battle any more
in person. לו נשׁבּע, administered an oath to him, i.e., fixed him by a
promise on oath. תכבּה ולא תכבּ, "and shalt not extinguish the light of
Israel." David had become the light of Israel from the fact that Jehovah
was his light ([Sa2 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#029)), or,
according to the parallel passage in [Psa
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#029), that Jehovah had lighted his
lamp and enlightened his darkness, i.e., had lifted him out of a state
of humiliation and obscurity into one of honour and glory. The light (or
lamp) is a figure used to represent the light of life as continually
burning, i.e., life in prosperity and honour. David's regal life and
actions were the light which the grace of God had kindled for the
benefit of Israel. This light he was not to extinguish, namely by going
into the midst of war and so exposing his valuable life to danger.

[Sa2 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#018)

(compare [Ch1 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#004)). In a second war,
Sibbechai and Hushathite slew Saph the Rephaite at Gob. According to
[Ch1 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#011), Sibbechai, one of the
gibborim of David ([Ch1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#029)), was
the leader of the eighth division of the army (see at [Sa2
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#027)). החשׁתי is a patronymic from
חוּשׁה in [Ch1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#004). The scene of
conflict is called Gob in our text, and Gezer in the Chronicles. As Gob
is entirely unknown. Thenius supposes it to be a slip of the pen for
Gezer; but this is improbable, for the simple reason that Gob occurs
again in [Sa2 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#019). It may possibly
have been a small place somewhere near to Gezer, which some suppose to
have stood on the site of el Kubab, on the road from Ramleh to Yalo (see
at [Jos 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#033)). The name Saph is
written Sippai in the Chronicles.

[Sa2 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#019)

(vid., [Ch1 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#005)). In another war with
the Philistines at Gob, Elhanan the son of Yaare-Orgim of Bethlehem
smote Goliath of Gath, whose spear was like a weaver's beam. In the
Chronicles, however, we find it stated that "Elhanan the son of Jair
smote Lahmi the brother of Goliath of Gath, whose spear," etc. The words
of our text are so similar to those of the Chronicles, if we only leave
out the word ארגים, which probably crept in from the next line through
oversight on the part of a copyist, that they presuppose the same
original text, so that the difference can only have arisen from an error
in copying. The majority of the expositors (e.g., Piscator, Clericus,
Michaelis, Movers, and Thenius) regard the text of the Chronicles as the
true and original one, and the text before us as simply corrupt. But
Bertheau and Bttcher maintain the opposite opinion, because it is
impossible to see how the reading in 2 Samuel. could grow out of that in
the Chronicles; whereas the reading in the Chronicles might have arisen
through conscious alteration originating in the offence taken by some
reader, who recalled the account of the conflict between David and
Goliath, at the statement that Elhanan smote a giant named Goliath, and
who therefore altered את הלחמי בית into אחי לחמי את. But apart from the
question whether there were two Goliaths, one of whom was slain by David
and the other by Elhanan, the fact that the conjecture of Bertheau and
Bttcher presupposes a deliberate alteration of the text, or rather, to
speak more correctly, an intentional falsification of the historical
account, is quite sufficient to overthrow it, as not a single example of
anything of the kind can be adduced from the whole of the Chronicles. On
the other hand, the recollection of David's celebrated officer Elhanan
of Bethlehem ([Sa2 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024); [Ch1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#026)) might easily lead to an
identification of the Elhanan mentioned here with that officer, and so
occasion the alteration of לחמי את into הלחמי בית. This alteration was
then followed by that of גלית אחי into גליה את, and all the more easily
from the fact that the description of Lahmi's spear corresponds word for
word with that of Goliath's spear in [Sa1
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007). Consequently we must regard the
reading in the Chronicles as the correct one, and alter our text
accordingly; since the assumption that there were two Goliaths is a very
improbable one, and there is nothing at all strange in the reference to
a brother of Goliath, who was also a powerful giant, and carried a spear
like Goliath. Elhanan the son of Jairi is of course a different person
from Elhanan the Bethlehemite, the son of Dodo ([Sa2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024)). The Chronicles have יעוּר,
instead of Jairi (the reading according to the Chethib), and the former
is probably the correct way of writing the name.

[Sa2 21:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#020)

(cf. [Ch1 20:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#006)). In another war at
Gath, a Philistian warrior, who had six fingers on each hand and six
toes on each foot,

(Note: Men with six fingers and six toes have been met with elsewhere.
Pliny (h. nat. xi. 43) speaks of certain sedigiti (six-fingered) Romans.
This peculiarity is even hereditary in some families. Other examples are
collected by Trusen (Sitten, Gebruche, und Krankheiten der alten Hebrer,
pp. 198-9, ed. 2) and Friedreich (zur Bible, i. 298-9).)

defied Israel, and was slain by Jonathan the son of Shimeah, the brother
of David (see at [Sa2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#003)). The
Chethib מדין is probably to be read מדּין, an archaic plural ("a man of
measures, or extensions:" de Dieu, etc.); in the Chronicles we find the
singular מדּה instead.

[Sa2 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#022)

(cf. [Ch1 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#008)). This verse contains a
postscript, in which the previous verses are summed up. The accusative
את־ארבּעת may be explained from a species of attraction, i.e., from the
fact that the historian had יכּהוּ ([Sa2
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#021)) still in his mind: "As for
these four, they were born to Rapha," i.e., they were descendants of the
Rephaite family at Gath, where remnants of the aboriginal Canaanitish
tribes of gigantic stature were still to be found, as in other towns of
the Philistines (vid., [Jos 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022)).
"They fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants." "By
the hand of David" refers to the fact that David had personally fought
with Yishbobenob ([Sa2 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#016)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 22](sa2022)

</div>
