<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac012)  [Next](zac014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001)

[Zechariah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 13:1</span></span>

The penitential supplication of Israel will lead to a thorough renewal
of the nation, since the Lord will open to the penitent the fountain of
His grace for the cleansing away of sin and the sanctifying of life.
[Zac 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001). "In that day will a
fountain be opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin and uncleanness." As the Lord Himself pours out the
spirit of supplication upon Israel, so does He also provide the means of
purification from sin. A fountain is opened, when its stream of water
bursts forth from the bosom of the earth (see [Isa
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018); [Isa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006)). The water, which flows from the
fountain opened by the Lord, is a water of sprinkling, with which sin
and uncleanness are removed. The figure is taken partly from the water
used for the purification of the Levites at their consecration, which is
called מי חטּאת, sin-water, or alter of absolution, in [Num
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007), and partly from the
sprinkling-water prepared from the sacrificial ashes of the red heifer
for purification from the defilement of death, which is called מי נדּה,
water of uncleanness, i.e., water which removed uncleanness, in [Num
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009). Just as bodily uncleanness is a
figure used to denote spiritual uncleanness, the defilement of sin (cf.
[Psa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009)), so is earthly
sprinkling-water a symbol of the spiritual water by which sin is
removed. By this water we have to understand not only grace in general,
but the spiritual sprinkling-water, which is prepared through the
sacrificial death of Christ, through the blood that He shed for sin, and
which is sprinkled upon us for the cleansing away of sin in the gracious
water of baptism. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin
([Jo1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007); compare [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006)).

[Zechariah 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 13:2</span></span>

The house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem represent the whole
nation here, as in [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010). This
cleansing will be following by a new life in fellowship with God, since
the Lord will remove everything that could hinder sanctification. This
renewal of life and sanctification is described in [Zac
12:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#002). [Zac
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#002). "And it will come to pass in
that day, is the saying of Jehovah of hosts, I will cut off the names of
the idols out of the land, they shall be remembered no more; and the
prophets also and the spirit of uncleanness will I remove out of the
land. [Zac 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#003). And it will come to
pass, if a man prophesies any more, his father and his mother, they that
begat him, will say to him, Thou must not live, for thou hast spoken
deceit in the name of Jehovah: and his father and his mother, they that
begat him, will pierce him through because of his prophesying. [Zac
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#004). And it will come to pass on that
day, the prophets will be ashamed every one of his vision, at his
prophesying, and will no more put on a hairy mantle to lie. [Zac
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#005). And he will say, I am no
prophet, I am a man who cultivates the land; for a man bought me from my
youth. [Zac 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#006). And if they shall
say to him, What scars are these between thy hands? he will say, These
were inflicted upon me in the house of my loves." The new life in
righteousness and holiness before God is depicted in an individualizing
form as the extermination of idols and false prophets out of the holy
land, because idolatry and false prophecy were the two principal forms
in which ungodliness manifested itself in Israel. The allusion to idols
and false prophets by no means points to the times before the captivity;
for even of gross idolatry, and therefore false prophecy, did not spread
any more among the Jews after the captivity, such passages as [Neh
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#010), where lying prophets rise up,
and even priests contract marriages with Canaanitish and other heathen
wives, from whom children sprang who could not even speak the Jewish
language ([Ezr 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002) ff.; [Neh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023)), show very clearly that the
danger of falling back into gross idolatry was not a very remote one.
Moreover, the more refined idolatry of pharisaic self-righteousness and
work-holiness took the place of the grosser idolatry, and the prophets
generally depict the future under the forms of the past. The cutting off
of the names of the idols denotes utter destruction (cf. [Hos
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019)). The prophets are false
prophets, who either uttered the thoughts of their hearts as divine
inspiration, or stood under the demoniacal influence of the spirit of
darkness. This is evident from the fact that they are associated not
only with idols, but with the "spirit of uncleanness." For this, the
opposite of the spirit of grace ([Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)), is the evil spirit which
culminates in Satan, and works in the false prophets as a lying spirit
([Kg1 22:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#021); [Rev
16:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013)).

The complete extermination of this unclean spirit is depicted thus in
[Zac 13:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#003), that not only will Israel
no longer tolerate any prophet in the midst of it ([Zac
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#003)), but even the prophets
themselves will be ashamed of their calling ([Zac
13:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004)). The first case is to be
explained from the law in [Deu 13:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006)
and [Deu 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#020), according to which a
prophet who leads astray to idolatry, and one who prophesies in his own
name or in the name of false gods, are to be put to death. This
commandment will be carried out by the parents upon any one who shall
prophesy in the future. They will pronounce him worthy of death as
speaking lies, and inflict the punishment of death upon him (dâqar, used
for putting to death, as in c. [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)). This case, that a man is
regarded as a false prophet and punished in consequence, simply because
he prophesies, rests upon the assumption that at that time there will be
no more prophets, and that God will not raise them up or send them any
more. This assumption agrees both with the promise, that when God
concludes a new covenant with His people and forgives their sins, no one
will teach another any more to know the Lord, but all, both great and
small, will know Him, and all will be taught of God ([Jer
31:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033); [Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)); and also with the teaching of
the Scriptures, that the Old Testament prophecy reached to John the
Baptist, and attained its completion and its end in Christ ([Mat
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013); [Luk
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016), cf. [Mat
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)). At that time will those who
have had to do with false prophecy no longer pretend to be prophets, or
assume the appearance of prophets, or put on the hairy garment of the
ancient prophets, of Elias for example, but rather give themselves out
as farm-servants, and declare that the marks of wound inflicted upon
themselves when prophesying in the worship of heathen gods are the scars
of wounds which they have received ([Zac
13:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004)). בּושׁ מן, to be ashamed on
account of (cf. [Isa 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)), not to
desist with shame. The form הנּבאתו in [Zac
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004) instead of הנּבאו ([Zac
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#003)) may be explained from the fact
that the verbs לא and לה frequently borrow forms from one another (Ges.
75, Anm. 20-22). On אדּרת שׂער, see at [Kg2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008). למען כּחשׁ, to lie, i.e., to give
themselves the appearance of prophets, and thereby to deceive the
people. The subject to ואמר in [Zac
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#005) is אישׁ from [Zac
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004); and the explanation given by the
man is not to be taken as an answer to a question asked by another
concerning his circumstances, for it has not been preceded by any
question, but as a confession made by his own spontaneous impulse, in
which he would repudiate his former calling. The verb הקנה is not a
denom. of מקנה, servum facere, servo uti (Maurer, Koehler, and others),
for miqneh does not mean slave, but that which has been acquired, or an
acquisition. It is a simple hiphil of qânâh in the sense of acquiring,
or acquiring by purchase, not of selling. That the statement is an
untruthful assertion is evident from [Zac
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#006), the two clauses of which are to
be taken as speech and reply, or question and answer. Some one asks the
prophet, who has given himself out as a farm-servant, where the stripes
(makkōth, strokes, marks of strokes) between his hands have come from,
and he replies that he received them in the house of his lovers. אשׁר
הכּיתי, ἅς (sc., πληγάς) ἐπλήγην: cf. Ges. 143, 1. The questioner
regards the stripes or wounds as marks of wounds inflicted upon himself,
which the person addressed had made when prophesying, as is related of
the prophets of Baal in [Kg1 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#028)
(see the comm.). The expression "between the hands" can hardly be
understood in any other way than as relating to the palms of the hands
and their continuation up; the arms, since, according to the testimony
of ancient writers (Movers, Phniz. i. p. 682), in the self-mutilations
connected with the Phrygian, Syrian, and Cappadocian forms of worship,
the arms were mostly cut with swords or knives. The meaning of the
answer given by the person addressed depends upon the view we take of
the word מאהבים. As this word is generally applied to paramours,
Hengstenberg retains this meaning here, and gives the following
explanation of the passage: namely, that the person addressed confesses
that he has received the wounds in the temples of the idols, which he
had followed with adulterous love, so that he admits his former folly
with the deepest shame. But the context appears rather to indicate that
this answer is also nothing more than an evasion, and that he simply
pretends that the marks were scars left by the chastisements which he
received when a boy in the house of either loving parents or some other
loving relations.

[Zechariah 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 13:7</span></span>

[Zac 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007). "Arise, O sword, over my
shepherd, and over the man who is my neighbour, is the saying of Jehovah
of hosts: smite the shepherd, that the sheep may be scattered; and I
will bring back my hand over the little ones. [Zac
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#008). And it will come to pass in all
the land, is the saying of Jehovah; two parts therein shall be cut off,
shall die, and the third remains therein. [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009). And the third will I bring into
the fire, and melt them as silver is melted, and will refine them as
gold is refined: it will call upon my name, and I will answer it; I say,
It is my people; and it will say, Jehovah my God." The summons addressed
to the sword, to awake and smite, is a poetical turn to express the
thought that the smiting takes place with or according to the will of
God. For similar personification of the sword, see [Jer
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006). רעי is the shepherd of Jehovah,
since the summons comes from Jehovah. In what sense the person to be
smitten is called the shepherd of Jehovah, we may see from the clause
על־גּבר עמיתי. The word עמית, which only occurs in the Pentateuch and in
Zechariah, who has taken it thence, is only used as a synonym of אח (cf.
[Lev 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#015)) in the concrete sense of
the nearest one. And this is the meaning which it has in the passage
before us, where the construct state expresses the relation of
apposition, as for example in אישׁ חסידך ([Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008); cf. Ewald, 287, e), the man who
is my nearest one. The shepherd of Jehovah, whom Jehovah describes as a
man who is His next one (neighbour), cannot of course be a bad shepherd,
who is displeasing to Jehovah, and destroys the flock, or the foolish
shepherd mentioned in [Zac 11:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015),
as Grotius, Umbr., Ebrard, Ewald, Hitzig, and others suppose; for the
expression "man who is my nearest one" implies much more than unity or
community of vocation, or that he had to feed the flock like Jehovah. No
owner of a flock or lord of a flock would call a hired or purchased
shepherd his ‛âmı̄th. And so God would not apply this epithet to any
godly or ungodly man whom He might have appointed shepherd over a
nation. The idea of nearest one (or fellow) involves not only similarity
in vocation, but community of physical or spiritual descent, according
to which he whom God calls His neighbour cannot be a mere man, but can
only be one who participates in the divine nature, or is essentially
divine. The shepherd of Jehovah, whom the sword is to smite, is
therefore no other than the Messiah, who is also identified with Jehovah
in [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010); or the good shepherd,
who says of Himself, "I and my Father are one" ([Joh
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)). The masculine form הך in the
summons addressed to the sword, although חרב itself is feminine, may be
accounted for from the personification of the sword; compare [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007), where sin (חטּאת, fem.) is
personified as a wild beast, and construed as a masculine. The sword is
merely introduced as a weapon used for killing, without there being any
intention of defining the mode of death more precisely. The smiting of
the shepherd is also mentioned here simply for the purpose of depicting
the consequences that would follow with regard to the flock. The thought
is therefore merely this: Jehovah will scatter Israel or His nation by
smiting the shepherd; that is to say, He will give it up to the misery
and destruction to which a flock without a shepherd is exposed. We
cannot infer from this that the shepherd himself is to blame; nor does
the circumstance that the smiting of the shepherd is represented as the
execution of a divine command, necessarily imply that the death of the
shepherd proceeds directly from God. According to the biblical view, God
also works, and does that which is done by man in accordance with His
counsel and will, and even that which is effected through the sin of
men. Thus in [Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010) the mortal
sufferings of the Messiah are described as inflicted upon Him by God,
although He had given up His soul to death to bear the sin of the
people. In the prophecy before us, the slaying of the shepherd is only
referred to so far as it brings a grievous calamity upon Israel; and the
fact is passed over, that Israel has brought this calamity upon itself
by its ingratitude towards the shepherd (cf. [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008), [Zac
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)). The flock, which will be
dispersed in consequence of the slaying of the shepherd, is the covenant
nation, i.e., neither the human race nor the Christian church as such,
but the flock which the shepherd in [Zac
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004). had to feed. At the same time,
Jehovah will not entirely withdraw His hand from the scattered flock,
but "bring it back over the small ones." The phrase השׁיב יד על, to
bring back the hand over a person (see at [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003)), i.e., make him the object of his
active care once more, is used to express the employment of the hand
upon a person either for judgment or salvation. It occurs in the latter
sense in [Isa 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025) in relation to the
grace which the Lord will manifest towards Jerusalem, by purifying it
from its dross; and it is used here in the same sense, as [Zac
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#008), [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009) clearly show, according to which
the dispersion to be inflicted upon Israel will only be the cause of
ruin to the greater portion of the nation, whereas it will bring
salvation to the remnant.

[Zac 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#008) and [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009) add the real explanation of the
bringing back of the hand over the small ones. צערים (lit., a participle
of צער, which only occurs here) is synonymous with צעיר or צעור ([Jer
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#003); [Jer
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004), chethib), the small ones in a
figurative sense, the miserable ones, those who are called עניּי הצּאן
in [Zac 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007). It naturally follows
from this, that the צערים are not identical with the whole flock, but
simply form a small portion of it, viz., "the poor and righteous in the
nation, who suffer injustice" (Hitzig). "The assertion that the flock is
to be scattered, but that God will bring back His hand to the small
ones, evidently implies that the small ones are included as one portion
of the entire flock, for which God will prepare a different fate from
that of the larger whole which is about to be dispersed" (Kliefoth).

On the fulfilment of this verse, we read in [Mat
26:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031), and [Mar
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#027), that the bringing back of the
hand of the Lord over the small ones was realized first of all in the
case of the apostles. After the institution of the Lord's Supper, Christ
told His disciples that that same night they would all be offended
because of Him; for it was written, "I will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. But after I am risen
again, I will go before you into Galilee." The quotation is made freely
from the original text, the address to the sword being resolved into its
actual meaning, "I will smite." The offending of the disciples took
place when Jesus was taken prisoner, and they all fled. This flight was
a prelude to the dispersion of the flock at the death of the shepherd.
But the Lord soon brought back His hand over the disciples. The promise,
"But after my resurrection I will go before you into Galilee," is a
practical exposition of the bringing back of the hand over the small
ones, which shows that the expression is to be understood here in a good
sense, and that it began to be fulfilled in the whole of the nation of
Israel, to which we shall afterwards return. This more general sense of
the words is placed beyond the reach of doubt by [Zac
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#008) and [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009); for [Zac
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#008) depicts the misery which the
dispersion of the flock brings upon Israel, and [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009) shows how the bringing back of
the hand upon the small ones will be realized in the remnant of the
nation. The dispersion of the flock will deliver two-thirds of the
nation in the whole land to death, so that only one-third will remain
alive. כּל־הארץ is not the whole earth, but the whole of the holy land,
as in [Zac 14:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009); and הארץ, in [Zac
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#012), the land in which the flock,
fed by the shepherds of the Lord, i.e., the nation of Israel, dwells.
פּי־שׁנים is taken from [Deu 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017), as
in [Kg2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#009); it is used there for the
double portion inherited by the first-born. That it is used here to
signify two-thirds, is evident from the remaining השּׁלישׁית. "The whole
of the Jewish nation," says Hengstenberg, "is introduced here, as an
inheritance left by the shepherd who has been put to death, which
inheritance is divided into three parts, death claiming the privileges
of the first-born, and so receiving two portions, and life one, - a
division similar to that which David made in the case of the Moabites
([Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002))." יגועוּ is added to
יכּרתוּ, to define יכּרת more precisely, as signifying not merely a
cutting off from the land by transportation (cf. [Zac
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002)), but a cutting off from life
(Koehler). גּוע, exspirare, is applied both to natural and violent death
(for the latter meaning, compare [Gen
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021); [Jos
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020)). The remaining third is also to
be refined through severe afflictions, to purify it from everything of a
sinful nature, and make it into a truly holy nation of God. For the
figure of melting and refining, compare [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025); [Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010); [Jer
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#006); [Mal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003); [Psa
66:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010). For the expression in [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009), compare [Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024); and for the thought of the
whole verse, [Zac 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#008), [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023), [Jer
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007); [Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022). The cutting off of the
two-thirds of Israel commenced in the Jewish war under Vespasian and
Titus, and in the war for the suppression of the rebellion led by the
pseudo-Messiah Bar Cochba. It is not to be restricted to these events,
however, but was continued in the persecutions of the Jews with fire and
sword in the following centuries. The refinement of the remaining third
cannot be taken as referring to the sufferings of the Jewish nation
during the whole period of its present dispersion, as C. B. Michaelis
supposes, nor generally to the tribulations which are necessary in order
to enter into the kingdom of God, to the seven conflicts which the true
Israel existing in the Christian church has to sustain, first with the
two-thirds, and then and more especially with the heathen ([Zac
12:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001), [Zac
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#014)). For whilst Hengstenberg very
properly objects to the view of Michaelis, on the ground that in that
case the unbelieving portion of Judaism would be regarded as the
legitimate and sole continuation of Israel; it may also be argued, in
opposition to the exclusive reference in the third to the Christian
church, that it is irreconcilable with the perpetuation of the Jews, and
the unanimous entrance of all Israel into the kingdom of Christ, as
taught by the Apostle Paul. Both views contain elements of truth, which
must be combined, as we shall presently show.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 14](zac014)

</div>
