<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac001)  [Next](zac003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)

[Zechariah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 2:1</span></span>

Whilst the second vision sets forth the destruction of the powers that
were hostile to Israel, the third ([Zac
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)) with the prophetic explanation
([Zac 2:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006)) shows the development of
the people and kingdom of God till the time of its final glory. The
vision itself appears very simple, only a few of the principal features
being indicated; but in this very brevity it presents many difficulties
so far as the exposition is concerned. It is as follows: [Zac
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001). "And I lifted up my eyes, and
saw, and behold a man, and in his hand a measuring line. [Zac
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#002). Then I said, Whither goest thou?
And he said to me, To measure Jerusalem, to see how great its breadth,
and how great its length. [Zac 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#003).
And, behold, the angel that talked with me went out, and another angel
went out to meet him. [Zac 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004). And he
said to him, Run, speak to his young man thus: Jerusalem shall lie as an
open land for the multitude of men and cattle in the midst of it. [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005). And I shall be to it, is the
saying of Jehovah, a fiery wall round about; and I shall be for glory in
the midst of it." The man with the measuring line in his hand is not the
interpreting angel (C. B. Mich., Ros., Maurer, etc.); for it was not his
duty to place the events upon the stage, but simply to explain to the
prophet the things which he saw. Moreover, this angel is clearly
distinguished from the man, inasmuch as he does not go out ([Zac
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#003)) till after the latter has gone to
measure Jerusalem ([Zac 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#002)). At the
same time, we cannot regard the measuring man as merely "a figure in the
vision," since all the persons occurring in these visions are
significant; but we agree with those who conjecture that he is the angel
of Jehovah, although this conjecture cannot be distinctly proved. The
task which he is preparing to perform - namely, to measure Jerusalem -
leads unquestionably to the conclusion that he is something more than a
figure. The measuring of the breadth and length of Jerusalem presupposes
that the city is already in existence; and this expression must not be
identified with the phrase, to draw the measure over Jerusalem, in [Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015). Drawing the measure over a place
is done for the purpose of sketching a plan for its general arrangement
or the rebuilding of it. But the length and breadth of a city can only
be measured when it is already in existence; and the object of the
measuring is not to see how long and how broad it is to be, but what the
length and breadth actually are. It is true that it by no means follows
from this that the city to be measured was the Jerusalem of that time;
on the contrary, the vision shows the future Jerusalem, but it exhibits
it as a city in actual existence, and visible to the spiritual eye.
While the man goes away to measure the city, the interpreting angel goes
out: not out of the myrtle thicket, for this only occurs in the first
vision; but he goes away from the presence of the prophet, where we have
to think of him as his interpreter, in the direction of the man with the
measuring line, to find out what he is going to do, and bring back word
to the prophet. At the very same time another angel comes out to meet
him, viz., the angelus interpres, not the man with the measuring line.
For one person can only come to meet another when the latter is going in
the direction from which the former comes. Having come to meet him, he
(the second angel) says to him (the angelus interpres), "Run, say to
this young man," etc. The subject to ויּאמר can only be the second
angel; for if, on grammatical grounds, the angelus interpres might be
regarded as speaking to the young man, such an assumption is proved to
be untenable, by the fact that it was no part of the office of the
angelus interpres to give orders or commissions to another angel. On the
other hand, there is nothing at all to preclude another angel from
revealing a decree of God to the angelus interpres for him to
communicate to the prophet; inasmuch as this does not bring the angelus
interpres into action any further than his function requires, so that
there is no ground for the objection that this is at variance with his
standing elsewhere (Kliefoth). But the other angel could not give the
instructions mentioned in [Zac 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004) to
the angelus interpres, unless he were either himself a superior angel,
viz., the angel of Jehovah, or had been directed to do so by the man
with the measuring line, in which case this "man" would be the angel of
Jehovah. Of these two possibilities we prefer the latter on two grounds:
(1) because it is impossible to think of any reason why the "other
angel" should not be simply called מלאך יהוה, if he really were the
angel of the Lord; and (2) because, according to the analogy of [Eze
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003), the man with the measuring line
most probably was the angel of Jehovah, with whose dignity it would be
quite in keeping that he should explain his purpose to the angelus
interpres through the medium of another (inferior) angel. And if this be
established, so far as the brevity of the account will allow, we cannot
understand by the "young man" the man with the measuring line, as
Hitzig, Maurer, and Kliefoth do. The only way in which such an
assumption as this could be rendered tenable or in harmony with the
rest, would be by supposing that the design of the message was to tell
the man with the measuring line that "he might desist from his useless
enterprise" (Hitzig), as Jerusalem could not be measured at all, on
account of the number of its inhabitants and its vast size (Theod.
Mops., Theodoret, Ewald, Umbreit, etc.); but Kliefoth has very justly
replied to this, that "if a city be ever so great, inasmuch as it is a
city, it can always be measured, and also have walls."

If, then, the symbolical act of measuring, as Kliefoth also admits,
expresses the question how large and how broad Jerusalem will eventually
be, and if the words of [Zac 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004), [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005) contain the answer to this
question, viz., Jerusalem will in the first place ([Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004)) contain such a multitude of men
and cattle that it will dwell like perâzōth; this answer, which gives
the meaning of the measuring, must be addressed not to the measuring
man, but simply to the prophet, that he may announce to the people the
future magnitude and glory of the city. The measuring man was able to
satisfy himself of this by the measuring itself. We must therefore
follow the majority of both the earlier and later expositors, and take
the "young man" as being the prophet himself, who is so designated on
account of his youthful age, and without any allusion whatever to "human
inexperience and dim short-sightedness" (Hengstenberg), since such an
allusion would be very remote from the context, and even old men of
experience could not possibly know anything concerning the future glory
of Jerusalem without a revelation from above. Hallâz, as in [Jdg
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#020) and [Kg2
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#025), is a contraction of hallâzeh,
and formed from lâzeh, there, thither, and the article hal, in the sense
of the (young man) there, or that young man (cf. Ewald, 103, a, and 183,
b; Ges. 34, Anm. 1). He is to make haste and bring this message, because
it is good news, the realization of which will soon commence. The
message contains a double and most joyful promise. (1) Jerusalem will in
future dwell, i.e., to be built, as perâzōth. This word means neither
"without walls," nor loca aperta, but strictly speaking the plains, and
is only used in the plural to denote the open, level ground, as
contrasted with the fortified cities surrounded by walls: thus ‛ārē
perâzōth, cities of the plain, in [Est
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#019), as distinguished from the
capital Susa; and 'erets perâzōth in [Eze
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011), the land where men dwell
"without walls, bolts, and gates;" hence perâzı̄, inhabitant of the
plain, in contrast with the inhabitants of fortified cities with high
walls ([Deu 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005); [Sa1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018)). The thought is therefore the
following: Jerusalem is in future to resemble an open country covered
with unwalled cities and villages; it will no longer be a city closely
encircled with walls; hence it will be extraordinarily enlarged, on
account of the multitude of men and cattle with which it will be blessed
(cf. [Isa 49:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#019); [Eze
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011)). Moreover, (2) Jerusalem will
then have no protecting wall surrounding it, because it will enjoy a
superior protection. Jehovah will be to it a wall of fire round about,
that is to say, a defence of fire which will consume every one who
ventures to attack it (cf. [Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005);
[Deu 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)). Jehovah will also be the
glory in the midst of Jerusalem, that is to say, will fill the city with
His glory (cf. [Isa 60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)). This
promise is explained in the following prophetic words which are uttered
by the angel of Jehovah, as [Zac 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008),
[Zac 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009), and [Zac
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011) clearly show. According to these
verses, for example, the speaker is sent by Jehovah, and according to
[Zac 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008) to the nations which have
plundered Israel, "after glory," i.e., to smite these nations and make
them servants to the Israelites. From this shall Israel learn that
Jehovah has sent him. The fact that, according to [Zac
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#003), [Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004), another angel speaks to the
prophet, may be easily reconciled with this. For since this angel, as we
have seen above, was sent by the angel of Jehovah, he speaks according
to his instructions, and that in such a manner that his words pass
imperceptibly into the words of the sender, just as we very frequently
find the words of a prophet passing suddenly into the words of God, and
carried on as such. For the purpose of escaping from this simple
conclusion, Koehler has forcibly broken up this continuous address, and
has separated the words of [Zac 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008),
[Zac 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009), and [Zac
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011), in which the angel says that
Jehovah has sent him, from the words of Jehovah proclaimed by the angel,
as being interpolations, but without succeeding in explaining them
either simply or naturally.

[Zechariah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 2:6</span></span>

The prophecy commences thus in [Zac
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006) : [Zac
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006). "Ho, ho, flee out of the land of
the north, is the saying of Jehovah; for I spread you out as the four
winds of heaven, is the saying of Jehovah. [Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007). Ho, Zion, save thyself, thou that
dwellest with the daughter Babel. [Zac
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008). For thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
After glory hath he sent me to the nations that have plundered you; for
whoever toucheth you, toucheth the apple of His eye. [Zac
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009). For, behold, I swing my hand over
them, and they become a spoil to those who served them; and ye will see
that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me." The summons to flee out of Babylon,
in [Zac 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006) and [Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007), is addressed to the Israelites,
who are all included in the one name Zion in [Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007); and shows that the address which
follows is not a simple continuation of the promise in [Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004) and [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005), but is intended both to explain
it, and to assign the reason for it. The summons contains so far a
reason for it, that the Israelites are directed to flee out of Babylon,
because the judgment is about to burst upon this oppressor of the people
of God. The words nūsū, flee, and himmâletı̄, save thyself or escape,
both point to the judgment, and in [Zac
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009) the judgment itself is clearly
spoken of. the land of the north is Babylon (cf. [Jer
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014); [Jer
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022); [Jer
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022); and for the fact itself, [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020)). The reason for the exclamation
"Flee" is first of all given in the clause, "for like the four winds
have I spread you out," not "dispersed you" (Vulg., C. B. Mich.,
Koehler). For apart from the fact that pērēs almost always means to
spread out, and has the meaning to disperse at the most in [Psa
68:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015) and [Eze
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#021), this meaning is altogether
unsuitable here. For if Israel had been scattered like the four winds,
it would of necessity have been summoned to return, not only from the
north, but from all quarters of the globe (Hitzig, Kliefoth). Moreover,
we should then have לארבּע, into the four winds; and the method
suggested by Koehler for reconciling כּארבּע with his view, viz., by
assuming that "like the four winds" is equivalent to "as chaff is
pounded and driven away from its place by the four winds," according to
which the winds would be mentioned in the place of the chaff, will
hardly meet with approval. The explanation is rather that the perfect
pērastı̄ is used prophetically to denote the purpose of God, which had
already been formed, even if its realization was still in the future. To
spread out like the four winds is the same as to spread out just as the
four winds spread out to all quarters of the globe. Because God has
resolved upon spreading out His people in this manner, they are to flee
out of Babel, that they may not suffer the fate of Babel. That this
thought lies at the foundation of the motive assigned, is evident from
the further reasons assigned for the summons in [Zac
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008) and [Zac
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009).

Zion stands for the inhabitants of Zion, namely the people of God, who
are for the time being still yōshebheth bath Bâbel, dwelling with the
daughter Babel. As Zion does not mean the city or fortress of Jerusalem,
but the inhabitants, so the "daughter Babel" is not the city of Babylon
or country of Babylonia personified, but the inhabitants of Babel; and
ישׁב is construed with the accusative of the person, as in [Psa
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#004) and [Sa2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002). What Jehovah states in
explanation of the twofold call to flee out of Babel, does not commence
with [Zac 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009) (Ewald), or with כּי
הנּגע in [Zac 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008) (Koehler), but with
אחר כּבוד וגו. The incorrectness of the two former explanations is seen
first of all in the fact that כּי only introduces a speech in the same
manner as ὅτι, when it follows directly upon the introductory formula;
but not, as is here assumed, when a long parenthesis is inserted
between, without the introduction being resumed by לאמר. And secondly,
neither of these explanations furnishes a suitable meaning. If the words
of God only followed in [Zac 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009),
עליהם in the first clause would be left without any noun to which to
refer; and if they commenced with כּי הנּגע (for he that toucheth), the
thought "he that toucheth you," etc., would assign no reason for the
call to flee and save themselves. For if Israel is defended or valued by
God as a pupil of the eye, there can be no necessity for it to flee. And
lastly, it is impossible to see what can be the meaning or object of the
parenthesis, "After glory hath He sent me," etc. If it treated "of the
execution of the threat of punishment upon the heathen" (Koehler), it
would be inserted in an unsuitable place, since the threat of punishment
would not follow till afterwards. All these difficulties vanish if
Jehovah's words commence with 'achar kâbhōd (after glory), in which case
shelâchanı̄ (He hath sent me) may be very simply explained from the fact
that the address is introduced, not in a direct form, but indirectly:
Jehovah says, He has sent me after glory. The sender is Jehovah, and the
person sent is not the prophet, but the angel of the Lord. Achar kâbhōd:
behind glory, after glory; not however "after the glory of success"
(Hitzig, Ewald, etc.), still less "with a glorious commission," but to
get glory upon the heathen, i.e., to display the glory of God upon the
heathen through the judgment by which their power is broken, and the
heathen world is made to serve the people of God. The manner in which
the next two clauses, commencing with kı̄ (for), are attached, is the
following: The first assigns the subjective motive; that is to say,
states the reason why God has sent him to the heathen, namely, because
they have plundered His people, and have thereby touched the apple of
His eye. בּבת עין, the apple of the eye (lit., the gate, the opening in
which the eye is placed, or more probably the pupil of the eye, pupilla,
as being the object most carefully preserved), is a figure used to
denote the dearest possession or good, and in this sense is applied to
the nation of Israel as early as [Deu
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010). The second explanatory clause
in [Zac 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009) adds the practical ground
for this sending after glory. The speaker is still the angel of the
Lord; and his acting is identical with the acting of God. Like Jehovah,
he swings his hand over the heathen nations which plundered Israel (cf.
[Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015); [Isa
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016)), and they become (והיוּ
expressing the consequence), i.e., so that they become, booty to the
Israelites, who had previously been obliged to serve them (cf. [Isa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#002)). In what way the heathen would
serve Israel is stated in [Zac 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011).
By the execution of this judgment Israel would learn that Jehovah had
sent His angel, namely to execute upon the heathen His saving purposes
for Israel. This is the meaning of these words, not only here and in
[Zac 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011), but also in [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009) and [Zac
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015), where this formula is repeated,
not however in the sense imagined by Koehler, namely that he had spoken
these words in consequence of a command from Jehovah, and not of his own
accord, by which the "sending" is changed into "speaking."

[Zechariah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 2:10</span></span>

The daughter Zion is to rejoice at this sending of the angel of the
Lord. [Zac 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010). "Exult and rejoice, O
daughter Zion: for, behold, I come, and dwell in the midst of thee, is
the saying of Jehovah. [Zac 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011). And
many nations will attach themselves to Jehovah in that day, and become a
people to me: and I dwell in the midst of thee; and thou wilt know that
Jehovah of hosts hath sent me to thee." The daughter Zion, or the church
of the Lord, delivered out of Babel, is to rejoice with joy, because her
glorification is commencing now. The Lord comes to her in His angel, in
whom are His name ([Exo 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021)), and
His face ([Exo 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#014)), i.e., the angel
of His face ([Isa 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009)), who reveals
His nature, to dwell in the midst of her. This dwelling of Jehovah, or
of His angel, in the midst of Zion, is essentially different from the
dwelling of Jehovah in the Most Holy Place of His temple. It commences
with the coming of the Son of God in the flesh, and is completed by His
return in glory ([Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014) and [Rev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003)). Then will many, or powerful,
nations, attach themselves to Jehovah, and become His people (cf. [Zac
8:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#020); [Isa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001)). This kingdom of God, which has
hitherto been restricted to Israel, will be spread out and glorified by
the reception of the heathen nations which are seeking God ([Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)). The repetition of the
expression, "I dwell in the midst of thee," merely serves as a stronger
asseveration of this brilliant promise; and the same remark applies to
the repetition of וידעתּ וגו (and thou shalt now): see at [Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013). Jerusalem will thereby receive
the expansion shown to the prophet in [Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004); and through the dwelling of God
in the midst of her, the promise in [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005) will also be fulfilled. The next
verse refers to this.

[Zechariah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 2:12</span></span>

"And Jehovah will take possession of Judah as His portion in the holy
land, and will yet choose Jerusalem. [Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013). Be still, all flesh, before
Jehovah; for He has risen up out of His holy habitation." The first
hemistich of [Zac 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#012) rests upon [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009), where Israel, as the chosen
nation, is called the chēleq and nachălâh of Jehovah. This appointment
of Israel to be the possession of Jehovah will become perfect truth and
reality in the future, through the coming of the Lord. Yehūdâh is Judah
as delivered, i.e., the remnant of the whole of the covenant nation.
This remnant, after being gathered out of Babel, will dwell upon holy
ground, or in a holy land, as the possession of the Lord. The holy land
is the land of Jehovah ([Hos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003)); but
this is not to be set down without reserve as identical with Palestine.
On the contrary, every place where Jehovah may be is holy ground (cf.
[Exo 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)); so that even Palestine is
only holy when the Lord dwells there. And we must not limit the idea of
the holy land in this passage to Palestine, because the idea of the
people of God will be so expanded by the addition of nation nations,
that it will not have room enough within the limits of Palestine; and
according to [Deu 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), even Jerusalem
will no longer be a city with limited boundaries. The holy land reaches
just as far as the nations, which have become the people of Jehovah by
attaching themselves to Judah, spread themselves out over the surface of
the earth. The words "choose Jerusalem again" round off the promise,
just as in [Zac 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017); but in [Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013) the admonition is added, to wait
in reverential silence for the coming of the Lord to judgment, after
[Hab 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020); and the reason assigned is,
that the judgment will soon begin. נעור, niphal of עוּר (compare Ewald,
140, a; Ges. 72, Anm. 9), to wake up, or rise up from His rest (cf. [Psa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024)). מעון קדשׁו, the holy
habitation of God, is heaven, as in [Deu
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#015); [Jer
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030). The judgment upon the heathen
world-power began to burst in a very short time. When Babylon revolted
against the king of Persia, under the reign of Darius, a great massacre
took place within the city after its re-capture, and its walls were
destroyed, so that the city could not rise again to its ancient grandeur
and importance. Compare with this the remark made in the comm. on
Haggai, concerning the overthrow of the Persian empire and those which
followed it. We have already shown, what a groundless hypothesis the
opinion is, that the fulfilment was interrupted in consequence of
Israel's guilt; and that as the result of this, the completion of it has
been deferred for centuries, or even thousands of years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 3](zac003)

</div>
