<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac002)  [Next](zac004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)

[Zechariah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 3:1</span></span>

In this and the following visions the prophet is shown the future
glorification of the church of the Lord. [Zac
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001). "And he showed me Joshua the high
priest standing before the angel of Jehovah, and Satan stood at his
right hand to oppose him. [Zac 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002).
And Jehovah said to Satan, Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan; and Jehovah who
chooseth Jerusalem rebuke thee. Is not this a brand saved out of the
fire? [Zac 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#003). And Joshua was clothed
with filthy garments, and stood before the angel. [Zac
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004). And he answered and spake to
those who stood before him thus: Take away the filthy garments from him.
And he said to him, Behold, I have taken away thy guilt from thee, and
clothe thee in festal raiment. [Zac
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005). And I said, Let them put a clean
mitre upon his head. Then they put the clean mitre upon his head, and
clothed him with garments. And the angel of Jehovah stood by." The
subject to ויּראני is Jehovah, and not the mediating angel, for his work
was to explain the visions to the prophet, and not to introduce them;
nor the angel of Jehovah, because he appears in the course of the
vision, although in these visions he is sometimes identified with
Jehovah, and sometimes distinguished from Him. The scene is the
following: Joshua stands as high priest before the angel of the Lord,
and Satan stands at his (Joshua's) right hand as accuser. Satan
(hassâtân) is the evil spirit so well known from the book of Job, and
the constant accuser of men before God ([Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)), and not Sanballat and his
comrades (Kimchi, Drus., Ewald). He comes forward here as the enemy and
accuser of Joshua, to accuse him in his capacity of high priest. The
scene is therefore a judicial one, and the high priest is not in the
sanctuary, the building of which had commenced, or engaged in
supplicating the mercy of the angel of the Lord for himself and the
people, as Theodoret and Hengstenberg suppose. The expression עמד לפני
furnishes no tenable proof of this, since it cannot be shown that this
expression would be an inappropriate one to denote the standing of an
accused person before the judge, or that the Hebrew language had any
other expression for this. Satan stands on the right side of Joshua,
because the accuser was accustomed to stand at the right hand of the
accused (cf. [Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006)). Joshua is
opposed by Satan, however, not on account of any personal offences
either in his private or his domestic life, but in his official capacity
as high priest, and for sins which were connected with his office, or
for offences which would involve the nation ([Lev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003)); though not as the bearer of the
sins of the people before the Lord, but as laden with his own and his
people's sins. The dirty clothes, which he had one, point to this ([Zac
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#003)).

But Jehovah, i.e., the angel of Jehovah, repels the accuser with the
words, "Jehovah rebuke thee;... Jehovah who chooseth Jerusalem."

(Note: The application made in the Epistle of Jude ([Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009)) of the formula "Jehovah rebuke
thee," namely, that Michael the archangel did not venture to execute
upon Satan the κρίσις βλασφημίας, does not warrant the conclusion that
the angel of the Lord places himself below Jehovah by these words. The
words "Jehovah rebuke thee" are a standing formula for the utterance of
the threat of a divine judgment, from which no conclusion can be drawn
as to the relation in which the person using it stood to God. Moreover,
Jude had not our vision in his mind, but another event, which has not
been preserved in the canonical Scriptures.)

The words are repeated for the sake of emphasis, and with the repetition
the motive which led Jehovah to reject the accuser is added. Because
Jehovah has chosen Jerusalem, and maintains His choice in its integrity
(this is implied in the participle bōchēr). He must rebuke Satan, who
hopes that his accusation will have the effect of repealing the choice
of Jerusalem, by deposing the high priest. For if any sin of the high
priest, which inculpated the nation, had been sufficient to secure his
removal or deposition, the office of high priest would have ceased
altogether, because no man is without sin. גּער, to rebuke, does not
mean merely to nonsuit, but to reprove for a thing; and when used of
God, to reprove by action, signifying to sweep both him and his
accusation entirely away. The motive for the repulse of the accuser is
strengthened by the clause which follows: Is he (Joshua) not a brand
plucked out of the fire? i.e., one who has narrowly escaped the
threatening destruction (for the figure, see [Amo
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#011)). These words, again, we most not
take as referring to the high priest as an individual; nor must we
restrict their meaning to the fact that Joshua had been brought back
from captivity, and reinstated in the office of high priest. Just as the
accusation does not apply to the individual, but to the office which
Joshua filled, so do these words also apply to the supporter of the
official dignity. The fire, out of which Joshua had been rescued as a
brand, was neither the evil which had come upon Joshua through
neglecting the building of the temple (Koehler), nor the guilt of
allowing his sons to marry foreign wives (Targ., Jerome, Rashi, Kimchi):
for in the former case the accusation would have come too late, since
the building of the temple had been resumed five months before ([Hag
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#015), compared with [Zac
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007)); and in the latter it would have
been much too early, since these misalliances did not take place till
fifty years afterwards. And, in general, guilt which might possibly lead
to ruin could not be called a fire; still less could the cessation or
removal of this sin be called deliverance out of the fire. Fire is a
figurative expression for punishment, not for sin. The fire out of which
Joshua had been saved like a brand was the captivity, in which both
Joshua and the nation had been brought to the verge of destruction. Out
of this fire Joshua the high priest had been rescued. But, as Kliefoth
has aptly observed, "the priesthood of Israel was concentrated in the
high priest, just as the character of Israel as the holy nation was
concentrated in the priesthood. The high priest represented the holiness
and priestliness of Israel, and that not merely in certain official acts
and functions, but so that as a particular Levite and Aaronite, and as
the head for the time being of the house of Aaron, he represented in his
own person that character of holiness and priestliness which had been
graciously bestowed by God upon the nation of Israel." This serves to
explain how the hope that God must rebuke the accuser could be made to
rest upon the election of Jerusalem, i.e., upon the love of the Lord to
the whole of His nation. The pardon and the promise do not apply to
Joshua personally any more than the accusation; but they refer to him in
his official position, and to the whole nation, and that with regard to
the special attributes set forth in the high priesthood - namely, its
priestliness and holiness. We cannot, therefore, find any better words
with which to explain the meaning of this vision than those of Kliefoth.
"The character of Israel," he says, "as the holy and priestly nation of
God, was violated - violated by the general sin and guilt of the nation,
which God had been obliged to punish with exile. This guilt of the
nation, which neutralized the priestliness and holiness of Israel, is
pleaded by Satan in the accusation which he brings before the Maleach of
Jehovah against the high priest, who was its representative. A nation so
guilty and so punished could no longer be the holy and priestly nation:
its priests could no longer be priests; nor could its high priests be
high priests any more. But the Maleach of Jehovah sweeps away the
accusation with the assurance that Jehovah, from His grace, and for the
sake of its election, will still give validity to Israel's priesthood,
and has already practically manifested this purpose of His by bringing
it out of its penal condition of exile."

After the repulse of the accuser, Joshua is cleansed from the guilt
attaching to him. When he stood before the angel of the Lord he had
dirty clothes on. The dirty clothes are not the costume of an accused
person (Drus., Ewald); for this Roman custom was unknown to the Hebrews.
Dirt is a figurative representation of sin; so that dirty clothes
represent defilement with sin and guilt (cf. [Isa
64:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#005); [Isa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004); [Pro
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#012); [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)). The Lord had indeed refined His
nation in its exile, and in His grace had preserved it from destruction;
but its sin was not thereby wiped away. The place of grosser idolatry
had been taken by the more refined idolatry of self-righteousness,
selfishness, and conformity to the world. And the representative of the
nation before the Lord was affected with the dirt of these sins, which
gave Satan a handle for his accusation. But the Lord would cleanse His
chosen people from this, and make it a holy and glorious nation. This is
symbolized by what takes place in [Zac
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004) and [Zac
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005). The angel of the Lord commands
those who stand before Him, i.e., the angels who serve Him, to take off
the dirty clothes from the high priest, and put on festal clothing; and
then adds, by way of explanation to Joshua, Behold, I have caused thy
guilt to pass away from thee, that is to say, I have forgiven thy sin,
and justified thee (cf. [Sa2 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013);
[Sa2 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010)), and clothe thee with
festal raiment. The inf. abs. halbēsh stands, as it frequently does, for
the finite verb, and has its norm in העברתּי (see at [Hag
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006)). The last words are either spoken
to the attendant angels as well, or else, what is more likely, they are
simply passed over in the command given to them, and mentioned for the
first time here. Machălâtsōth, costly clothes, which were only worn on
festal occasions (see at [Isa 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#022)).;
They are not symbols of innocence and righteousness (Chald.), which are
symbolized by clean or white raiment ([Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009)); nor are they figurative
representations of joy (Koehler), but are rather symbolical of glory.
The high priest, and the nation in him, are not only to be cleansed from
sin, and justified, but to be sanctified and glorified as well.

[Zechariah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 3:5</span></span>

At this moment the prophet feels compelled to utter the prayer that they
may also put a clean mitre upon Joshua's head, which prayer is
immediately granted. The prayer appears at first to be superfluous,
inasmuch as the mitre would certainly not be forgotten when the dirty
clothes were taken away and the festal dress was put on. Nevertheless,
the fact that it is granted shows that it was not superfluous. The
meaning of the prayer was hardly that the high priest might be newly
attired from head to foot, as Hengstenberg supposes, but is rather
connected with the significance of the mitre. Tsânı̄ph is not a turban,
such as might be worn by anybody (Koehler), but the headdress of
princely persons and kings ([Job
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#014); [Isa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#003)), and is synonymous with
mitsnepheth, the technical word for the tiara prescribed for the high
priest in the law (Ex. and Lev.), as we may see from [Eze
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#031), where the regal diadem, which
is called tsânı̄ph in [Isa 62:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#003), is
spoken of under the name of mitsnepheth. The turban of the high priest
was that portion of his dress in which he carried his office, so to
speak, upon his forehead; and the clean turban was the substratum for
the golden plate that was fastened upon it, and by which he was
described as holy to the Lord, and called to bear the guilt of the
children of Israel ([Exo 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038)). The
prayer for a clean mitre to be put upon his head, may therefore be
accounted for from the wish that Joshua should not only be splendidly
decorated, but should be shown to be holy, and qualified to accomplish
the expiation of the people. Purity, as the earthly type of holiness,
forms the foundation for glory. In the actual performance of the matter,
therefore, the putting on of the clean mitre is mentioned first, and
then the clothing with festal robes. This took place in the presence of
the angel of the Lord. That is the meaning of the circumstantial clause,
"and the angel of the Lord stood" (ritum tanquam herus imperans, probans
et praesentia sua ornans, C. B. Mich.), and not merely that the angel of
the Lord, who had hitherto been sitting in the judge's seat, rose up
from his seat for the purpose of speaking while the robing was going on
(Hofmann, Koehler). עמד does not mean to stand up, but simply to remain
standing.

[Zechariah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 3:6</span></span>

In these verses there follows a prophetic address, in which the angel of
the Lord describes the symbolical action of the re-clothing of the high
priest, according to its typical significance in relation to the
continuance and the future of the kingdom of God. [Zac
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#006). "And the angel of the Lord
testified to Joshua, and said, [Zac
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#007). Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, If
thou shalt walk in my ways, and keep my charge, thou shalt both judge my
house and keep my courts, and I will give thee ways among these standing
here. [Zac 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008). Hear then, thou high
priest Joshua, thou, and thy comrades who sit before thee: yea, men of
wonder are they: for, behold, I bring my servant Zemach (Sprout). [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009). For behold the stone which I have
laid before Joshua; upon one stone are seven eyes: behold I engrave its
carving, is the saying of Jehovah of hosts, and I clear away the
iniquity of this land in one day. [Zac
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#010). In that day, is the saying of
Jehovah of hosts, ye will invite one another under the vine and under
the fig-tree." In [Zac 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#007) not only is
the high priest confirmed in his office, but the perpetuation and
glorification of his official labours are promised. As Joshua appears in
this vision as the supporter of the office, this promise does not apply
to Joshua himself so much as to the office, the continuance of which is
indeed bound up with the fidelity of those who sustain it. The promise
in [Zac 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#007) therefore begins by giving
prominence to this condition: If thou wilt walk in my ways, etc. Walking
in the ways of the Lord refers to the personal attitude of the priests
towards the Lord, or to fidelity in their personal relation to God; and
keeping the charge of Jehovah, to the faithful performance of their
official duties (shâmar mishmartı̄, noticing what has to be observed in
relation to Jehovah; see at [Lev
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035)). The apodosis begins with וגם
אתּה, and not with ונתתּי. This is required not only by the emphatic
'attâh, but also by the clauses commencing with vegam; whereas the
circumstance, that the tense only changes with venâthattı̄, and that
tâdı̄n and tishmōr are still imperfects, has its simple explanation in
the fact, that on account of the gam, the verbs could not be linked
together with Vav, and placed at the head of the clauses. Taken by
themselves, the clauses vegam tâdı̄n and vegam tishmōr might express a
duty of the high priest quite as well as a privilege. If they were taken
as apodoses, they would express an obligation; but in that case they
would appear somewhat superfluous, because the obligations of the high
priest are fully explained in the two previous clauses. If, on the other
hand, the apodosis commences with them, they contain, in the form of a
promise, a privilege which is set before the high priest as awaiting him
in the future - namely, the privilege of still further attending to the
service of the house of God, which had been called in question by
Satan's accusation. דּין את־בּיתי, to judge the house of God, i.e., to
administer right in relation to the house of God, namely, in relation to
the duties devolving upon the high priest in the sanctuary as such;
hence the right administration of the service in the holy place and the
holy of holies. This limitation is obvious from the parallel clause, to
keep the courts, in which the care of the ordinary performance of
worship in the courts, and the keeping of everything of an idolatrous
nature from the house of God, are transferred to him. And to this a new
and important promise is added in the last clause (ונהתּי וגו). The
meaning of this depends upon the explanation given to the word מהלכים.
Many commentators regard his as a Chaldaic form of the hiphil participle
(after [Dan 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025); [Dan
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)), and take it either in the
intransitive sense of "those walking" (lxx, Pesh., Vulg., Luth., Hofm.,
etc.), or in the transitive sense of those conducting the leaders (Ges.,
Hengst., etc.). But apart from the fact that the hiphil of הלך in Hebrew
is always written either הוליך or היליך, and has never anything but a
transitive meaning, this view is precluded by the בּין, for which we
should expect מבּין or מן, since the meaning could only be, "I give thee
walkers or leaders between those standing here," i.e., such as walk to
and fro between those standing here (Hofmann), or, "I will give thee
leaders among (from) these angels who are standing here" (Hengstenberg).
In the former case, the high priest would receive a promise that he
should always have angels to go to and fro between himself and Jehovah,
to carry up his prayers, and bring down revelations from God, and
supplies of help ([Joh 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051); Hofmann).
This thought would be quite a suitable one; but it is not contained in
the words, "since the angels, even if they walk between the standing
angels and in the midst of them, do not go to and fro between Jehovah
and Joshua" (Kliefoth). In the latter case the high priest would merely
receive a general assurance of the assistance of superior angels; and
for such a thought as this the expression would be an extremely
marvellous one, and theבּין would be used incorrectly. We must therefore
follow Calvin and others, who take מהלכין as a substantive, from a
singular מהלך, formed after מחצב, מסמר, מזלג, or else as a plural of
מהלך, to be pointed מהלכים (Ros., Hitzig, Kliefoth). The words then add
to the promise, which ensured to the people the continuance of the
priesthood and of the blessings which it conveyed, this new feature,
that the high priest would also receive a free access to God, which had
not yet been conferred upon him by his office. This points to a time
when the restrictions of the Old Testament will be swept away. The
further address, in [Zac 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008) and [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009), announces how God will bring
about this new time or future.

To show the importance of what follows, Joshua is called upon to "hear."
It is doubtful where what he is to hear commences; for the idea, that
after the summons to attend, the successive, chain-like explanation of
the reason for this summons passes imperceptibly into that to which he
is to give heed, is hardly admissible, and has only been adopted because
it was found difficult to discover the true commencement of the address.
The earlier theologians (Chald., Jerome, Theod. Mops., Theodoret, and
Calvin), and even Hitzig and Ewald, take כּי הנני מביא (for behold I
will bring forth). But these words are evidently explanatory of אנשׁי
מופת המּה (men of wonder, etc.). Nor can it commence with ūmashtı̄ (and I
remove), as Hofmann supposes (Weiss. u. Erfll. i. 339), or with [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009), "for behold the stone," as he
also maintains in his Schriftbeweis (ii. 1, pp. 292-3, 508-9). The first
of these is precluded not only by the fact that the address would be cut
far too short, but also by the cop. Vav before mashtı̄; and the second by
the fact that the words, "for behold the stone," etc., in [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009), are unmistakeably a continuation
and further explanation of the words, "for behold I will bring forth my
servant Zemach," in [Zac 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009). The
address begins with "thou and thy fellows," since the priests could not
be called upon to hear, inasmuch as they were not present. Joshua's
comrades who sit before him are the priests who sat in the priestly
meetings in front of the high priest, the president of the assembly, so
that yōshēbh liphnē corresponds to our "assessors." The following kı̄
introduces the substance of the address; and when the subject is placed
at the head absolutely, it is used in the sense of an asseveration,
"yea, truly" (cf. [Gen 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020); [Psa
118:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010); [Psa
128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002); and Ewald, 330, b). 'Anshē
mōphēth, men of miracle, or of a miraculous sign, as mōphēth, τὸ τέρας,
portentum, miraculum, embraces the idea of אות, σημεῖον (cf. [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)), are men who attract attention
to themselves by something striking, and are types of what is to come,
so that mōphēth really corresponds to τύπος τῶν μελλόντων (see at [Exo
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021); [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)). המּה stands for אתּם, the words
passing over from the second person to the third on the resuming of the
subject, which is placed at the head absolutely, just as in [Zep
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012), and refers not only to רעיך, but
to Joshua and his comrades. They are men of typical sign, but not simply
on account of the office which they hold, viz., because their
mediatorial priesthood points to the mediatorial office and atoning work
of the Messiah, as most of the commentators assume. For "this applies,
in the first place, not only to Joshua and his priests, but to the Old
Testament priesthood generally; and secondly, there was nothing
miraculous in this mediatorial work of the priesthood, which must have
been the case if they were to be mōphēth. The miracle, which is to be
seen in Joshua and his priests, consists rather in the fact that the
priesthood of Israel is laden with guilt, but by the grace of God it has
been absolved, and accepted by God again, as the deliverance from exile
shows," and Joshua and his priests are therefore brands plucked by the
omnipotence of grace from the fire of merited judgment (Kliefoth). This
miracle of grace which has been wrought for them, points beyond itself
to an incomparably greater and better act of the sin-absolving grace of
God, which is still in the future.

This is the way in which the next clause, "for I bring my servant
Zemach," which is explanatory of 'anshē mōphēth (men of miracle),
attaches itself. The word Tsemach is used by Zechariah simply as a
proper name of the Messiah; and the combination ‛abhdı̄ Tsemach (my
servant Tsemach) is precisely the same as ‛abhdı̄ Dâvid (my servant
David) in [Eze 34:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023); [Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024), or "my servant Job" in [Job
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008); [Job
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003), etc. The objection raised by
Koehler - namely, that if tsemach, as a more precise definition of
‛abhdı̄ (my servant), or as an announcement what servant of Jehovah is
intended, were used as a proper name, it would either be construed with
the article (הצּמח), or else we should have עבדּי צמח שׁמו as in [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012) - is quite groundless. For "if
poets or prophets form new proper names at pleasure, such names, even
when deprived of the article, easily assume the distinguishing sign of
most proper names, like bâgōdâh and meshūbhâh in Jeremiah 3" (Ewald,
277, c). It is different with שׁמו in [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012); there shemō is needed for the
sake of the sense, as in [Sa1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001) and
[Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001), and does not serve to
designate the preceding word as a proper name, but simply to define the
person spoken of more precisely by mentioning his name. Zechariah has
formed the name Tsemach, Sprout, or Shoot, primarily from [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005) and [Jer
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015), where the promise is given that
a righteous Sprout (tsemach tsaddı̄q), or a Sprout of righteousness,
shall be raised up to Jacob. And Jeremiah took the figurative
description of the great descendant of David, who will create
righteousness upon the earth, as a tsemach which Jehovah will raise up,
or cause to shoot up to David, from [Isa
11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001); [Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002), according to which the Messiah
is to spring up as a rod out of the stem of Jesse that has been hewn
down, or as a root-shoot out of dry ground. Tsemach, therefore, denotes
the Messiah in His origin from the family of David that has fallen into
humiliation, as a sprout which will grow up from its original state of
humiliation to exaltation and glory, and answers therefore to the train
of thought in this passage, in which the deeply humiliated priesthood is
exalted by the grace of the Lord into a type of the Messiah. Whether the
designation of the sprout as "my servant" is taken from [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013) and [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011) (cf. [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001); [Isa
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003)), or formed after "my servant
David" in [Eze 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024); [Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024), is a point which cannot be
decided, and is of no importance to the matter in hand. The circumstance
that the removal of iniquity, which is the peculiar work of the Messiah,
is mentioned in [Eze 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#009), furnishes
no satisfactory reason for deducing ‛abhdı̄ tsemach pre-eminently from
[Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001). For in [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009) the removal of iniquity is only
mentioned in the second rank, in the explanation of Jehovah's purpose to
bring His servant Tsemach. The first rank is assigned to the stone,
which Jehovah has laid before Joshua, etc.

The answer to the question, what this stone signifies, or who is to be
understood by it, depends upon the view we take of the words עינים ...
על אבן. Most of the commentators admit that these words do not form a
parenthesis (Hitzig, Ewald), but introduce a statement concerning הנּה
האבן. Accordingly, הנּה האבן וגו is placed at the head absolutely, and
resumed in על אבן אחת. This statement may mean, either upon one stone
are seven eyes (visible or to be found), or seven eyes are directed upon
one stone. For although, in the latter case, we should expect אל instead
of על (according to [Psa 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018); [Psa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)), שׂים עין על does occur in the
sense of the exercise of loving care ([Gen
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#021); [Jer
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#012); [Jer
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#004)). But if the seven eyes were to
be seen upon the stone, they could only be engraved or drawn upon it.
And what follows, הנני מפתּח וגו, does not agree with this, inasmuch as,
according to this, the engraving upon the stone had now first to take
place instead of having been done already, since hinnēh followed by a
participle never expresses what has already occurred, but always what is
to take place in the future. For this reason we must decide that the
seven eyes are directed towards the stone, or watch over it with
protecting care. But this overthrows the view held by the expositors of
the early church, and defended by Kliefoth, namely, that the stone
signifies the Messiah, after [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016) and [Psa
118:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002), - a view with which the
expression nâthattı̄, "given, laid before Joshua," can hardly be
reconciled, even if this meant that Joshua was to see with his own eyes,
as something actually present, that God was laying the foundation-stone.
Still less can we think of the foundation-stone of the temple (Ros.,
Hitz.), since this had been laid long ago, and we cannot see for what
purpose it was to be engraved; or of the stone which, according to the
Rabbins, occupied the empty place of the ark of the covenant in the most
holy place of the second temple (Hofmann); or of a precious stone in the
breastplate of the high priest. The stone is the symbol of the kingdom
of God, and is laid by Jehovah before Joshua, by God's transferring to
him the regulation of His house and the keeping of His courts (before,
liphnē, in a spiritual sense, as in [Kg1
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#006), for example). The seven eyes,
which watch with protecting care over this stone, are not a figurative
representation of the all-embracing providence of God; but, in harmony
with the seven eyes of the Lamb, which are the seven Spirits of God
([Rev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)), and with the seven eyes of
Jehovah ([Zac 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010)), they are the
sevenfold radiations of the Spirit of Jehovah (after [Isa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)), which show themselves in
vigorous action upon this stone, to prepare it for its destination. This
preparation is called pittēăch pittuchâh in harmony with the figure of
the stone (cf. [Eze 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#009), [Eze
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#011)). "I will engrave the engraving
thereof," i.e., engrave it so as to prepare it for a beautiful and
costly stone. The preparation of this stone, i.e., the preparation of
the kingdom of God established in Israel, by the powers of the Spirit of
the Lord, is one feature in which the bringing of the tsemach will show
itself. The other consists in the wiping away of the iniquity of this
land. Mūsh is used here in a transitive sense, to cause to depart, to
wipe away. הארץ ההיא (that land) is the land of Canaan or Judah, which
will extend in the Messianic times over the whole earth. The definition
of the time, beyōm 'echâd, cannot of course mean "on one and the same
day," so as to affirm that the communication of the true nature to
Israel, namely, of one well pleasing to God, and the removal of guilt
from the land, would take place simultaneously (Hofmann, Koehler); but
the expression "in one day" is substantially the same as ἐφάπαξ in [Heb
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027); [Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012); [Heb
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010), and affirms that the wiping
away of sin to be effected by the Messiah (tsemach) will not resemble
that effected by the typical priesthood, which had to be continually
repeated, but will be all finished at once. This one day is the day of
Golgotha. Accordingly, the thought of this verse is the following:
Jehovah will cause His servant Tsemach to come, because He will prepare
His kingdom gloriously, and exterminate all the sins of His people and
land at once. By the wiping away of all guilt and iniquity, not only of
that which rests upon the land (Koehler), but also of that of the
inhabitants of the land, i.e., of the whole nation, all the discontent
and all the misery which flow from sin will be swept away, and a state
of blessed peace will ensue for the purified church of God. This is the
thought of the tenth verse, which is formed after [Mic
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004) and [Kg1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#005), and with which the vision closes.
The next vision shows the glory of the purified church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 4](zac004)

</div>
