<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac000)  [Next](zac002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

[Zechariah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 1:1</span></span>

The first word of the Lord was addressed to the prophet Zechariah in the
eighth month of the second year of the reign of Darius, and therefore
about two months after Haggai's first prophecy and the commencement of
the rebuilding of the temple, which that prophecy was intended to
promote (compare [Zac 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001) with [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001) and [Hag
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#015)), and a few weeks after Haggai's
prophecy of the great glory which the new temple would receive ([Hag
2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001)). Just as Haggai encouraged the
chiefs and the people of Judah to continue vigorously the building that
had been commenced by this announcement of salvation, so Zechariah opens
his prophetic labours with the admonition to turn with sincerity to the
Lord, and with the warning not to bring the same punishment upon
themselves by falling back into the sins of the fathers. This
exhortation to repentance, although it was communicated to the prophet
in the form of a special revelation from God, is actually only the
introduction to the prophecies which follow, requiring thorough
repentance as the condition of obtaining the desired salvation, and at
the same time setting before the impenitent and ungodly still further
heavy judgments.

(Note: "The prophet is thus instructed by God, that, before exhibiting
to the nation the rich blessings of God for them to look at under the
form of symbolical images, he is to declare the duty of His people, or
the condition upon which it will be becoming in God to grant them an
abundant supply of these good things." - Vitringa, Comm. in Sach. p.
76.)

[Zac 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001). Bachōdesh hasshemı̄nı̄ does
not mean "on the eighth new moon" (Kimchi, Chr. B. Mich., Koehl.); for
chōdesh is never used in chronological notices for the new moon, or the
first new moon's day (see at [Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)). The day of the eighth month is
left indefinite, because this was of no importance whatever to the
contents of this particular address. The word of the Lord was as
follows: [Zac 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002). "Jehovah was angry
with wrath concerning your fathers. [Zac
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003). And thou shalt say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, Return ye to me, is the saying of Jehovah of
hosts, so will I return to you, saith Jehovah of hosts. [Zac
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004). Be not like your fathers, to whom
the former prophets cried, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, Turn now from
your evil ways, and from your evil actions! But they hearkened not, and
paid no attention to me, is the saying of Jehovah." The statement in
[Zac 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002) contains the ground for the
summons to turn, which the prophet is to address to the people, and is
therefore placed before ואמרתּ in [Zac
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003), by which this summons is
introduced. Because the Lord was very angry concerning the fathers,
those who are living now are to repent with sincerity of heart. The noun
qetseph is added as the object to the verb, to give it greater force.
The nation had experienced the severe anger of God at the destruction of
the kingdom of Judah, and of Jerusalem and the temple, and also in
exile. The statement in [Zac 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015),
that Jehovah was angry מעט, is not at variance with this; for מעט does
not refer to the strength of the anger, but to its duration. ואמרתּ is
the perf. with Vav consec., and is used for the imperative, because the
summons to repentance follows as a necessary consequence from the fact
stated in [Zac 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002) (cf. Ewald, 342, b
and c). אלהם does not refer to the fathers, which might appear to be
grammatically the simplest interpretation, but to the contemporaries of
the prophet, addressed in the pronoun your fathers, the existing
generation of Judah. שׁוּבוּ אלי does not presuppose that the people had
just fallen away from the Lord again, or had lost all their pleasure in
the continuance of the work of building the temple, but simply that the
return to the Lord was not a perfect one, not a thorough conversion of
heart. So had Jehovah also turned to the people again, and had not only
put an end to the sufferings of exile, but had also promised His aid to
those who had returned (compare אני אתּכם in [Hag
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013)); but the more earnestly and the
more thoroughly the people turned to Him, the more faithfully and the
more gloriously would He bestow upon them His grace and the promised
salvation. This admonition is shown to be extremely important by the
threefold "saith the Lord of Zebaoth," and strengthened still further in
[Zac 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004) by the negative turn not to
do like the fathers, who cast the admonitions of the prophets to the
winds. The "earlier prophets" are those before the captivity (cf. [Zac
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#007), [Zac
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#012)). The predicate ראשׁנים points to
the fact that there was a gap between Zechariah and his predecessors,
namely the period of the exile, so that Daniel and Ezekiel, who lived in
exile, are overlooked; the former because his prophecies are not
admonitions addressed to the people, the latter because the greater part
of his ministry fell in the very commencement of the exile. Moreover,
when alluding to the admonitions of the earlier prophets, Zechariah has
not only such utterances in his mind as those in which the prophets
summoned the people to repentance with the words שׁוּבוּ וגו (e.g., [Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013); [Hos
14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002); [Isa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006); [Jer
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)., [Zac
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#013), etc.), but the admonitions,
threatenings, and reproofs of the earlier prophets generally (compare
[Kg2 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013).). The chethib מעליליכם is
to be read מעליליכם, a plural form עלילים from עלילה, and is to be
retained, since the preposition min is wanting in the keri; and this
reading has probably only arisen from the offence taken at the use of
the plural form ‛ălı̄lı̄m, which does not occur elsewhere, in the place of
‛ălı̄lōth, although there are many analogies to such a formation, and
feminine forms frequently have plurals in ־ים, either instead of those
in ־ות or in addition to them.

[Zechariah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 1:5</span></span>

A reason for the warning not to resist the words of the Lord, like the
fathers, is given in [Zac 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005), [Zac
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#006), by an allusion to the fate which
they brought upon themselves through their disobedience. [Zac
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005). "Your fathers, where are they?
And the prophets, can they live for ever? [Zac
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#006). Nevertheless my words and my
statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, did they not
overtake your fathers, so that they turned and said, As Jehovah purposed
to do to us according to our ways and our actions, so has He done to
us?" The two questions in [Zac 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005) are
meant as denials, and are intended to anticipate the objection which the
people might have raised to the admonitions in [Zac
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004), to the effect that not only the
fathers, but also the earlier prophets, had died long ago; and therefore
an allusion to things that had long since passed by could have no force
at all for the present generation. Zechariah neutralizes this objection
by saying: Your fathers have indeed been long dead, and even the
prophets do not, or cannot, live for ever; but notwithstanding this, the
words of the earlier prophets were fulfilled in the case of the fathers.
The words and decrees of God uttered by the prophets did reach the
fathers, so that they were obliged to confess that God had really done
to them what He threatened, i.e., had carried out the threatened
punishment. אך, only, in the sense of a limitation of the thing stated:
yet, nevertheless (cf. Ewald, 105, d). דּברי and חקּי are not the words
of [Zac 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004), which call to repentance,
but the threats and judicial decrees which the earlier prophets
announced in case of impenitence. דּברי as in [Eze
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#028); [Jer
39:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#016). חקּי, the judicial decrees of
God, like chōq in [Zep 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#002). Hissı̄g, to
reach, applied to the threatened punishments which pursue the sinner,
like messengers sent after him, and overtake him (cf. [Deu
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015), [Deu
28:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#045)). Biblical proofs that even the
fathers themselves did acknowledge that the Lord had fulfilled His
threatenings in their experience, are to be found in the mournful psalms
written in captivity (though not exactly in [Psa
126:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001) and [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), as Koehler supposes), in [Lam
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#017) (עשׂה יהוה אשׁר זמם, upon which
Zechariah seems to play), and in the penitential prayers of Daniel ([Dan
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#004).) and of Ezra ([Ezr
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006).), so far as they express the
feeling which prevailed in the congregation.

[Zechariah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 1:7</span></span>

Three months after his call to be a prophet through the first word of
God that was addressed to him, Zechariah received a comprehensive
revelation concerning the future fate of the people and kingdom of God,
in a series of visions, which were given him to behold in a single
night, and were interpreted by an angel. This took place, according to
[Zac 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007), "on the twenty-fourth day of
the eleventh month, i.e., the month Shebat, in the second year of
Darius," that is to say, exactly five months after the building of the
temple had been resumed ([Hag 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#015)),
with which fact the choice of the day for the divine revelation was
evidently connected, and two months after the last promise issued
through Haggai to the people, that the Lord would from henceforth bless
His nation, and would glorify it in the future ([Hag
2:10-23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010)). To set forth in imagery this
blessing and glorification, and to exhibit the leading features of the
future conformation of the kingdom of God, was the object of these
visions, which are designated in the introduction as "word of Jehovah,"
because the pictures seen in the spirit, together with their
interpretation, had the significance of verbal revelations, and are to
some extent still further explained by the addition of words of God (cf.
[Zac 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014)., [Zac
2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010)). As they were shown to the
prophet one after another in a single night, so that in all probability
only short pauses intervened between the different views; so did they
present a substantially connected picture of the future of Israel, which
was linked on to the then existing time, and closed with the prospect of
the ultimate completion of the kingdom of God.

[Zechariah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 1:8</span></span>

[Zac 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008). "I saw by night, and behold
a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtles which were
in the hollow; and behind him red, speckled, and white horses. [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009). And I said, What are these, my
lord? Then the angel that talked with me said to me, I will show thee
what these are. [Zac 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010). And the man
who stood among the myrtles answered and said, These are they whom
Jehovah hath sent to go through the earth. [Zac
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011). And they answered the angel of
Jehovah who stood among the myrtles, and said, We have gone through the
earth, and, behold, the whole earth sits still, and at rest. [Zac
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012). Then the angel of Jehovah
answered and said, Jehovah of hosts, how long wilt Thou not have
compassion upon Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, with whom Thou hast
been angry these seventy years? [Zac
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#013). And Jehovah answered the angel
that talked with me good words, comforting words. [Zac
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014). And the angel that talked with
me said to me, Preach, and say, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, I have been
jealous for Jerusalem and Zion with great jealousy, [Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015) and with great wrath I am angry
against the nations at rest: for I had been angry for a little, but they
helped for harm. [Zac 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016). Therefore
thus saith Jehovah, I turn again to Jerusalem with compassion: my house
shall be built in it, is the saying of Jehovah of hosts, and the
measuring line shall be drawn over Jerusalem. [Zac
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017). Preach as yet, and say, Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, My cities shall yet swell over with good, and
Jehovah will yet comfort Zion, and will yet choose Jerusalem." The
prophet sees, during the night of the day described in [Zac
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007) (הלּילה is the accusative of
duration), in an ecstatic vision, not in a dream but in a waking
condition, a rider upon a red horse in a myrtle-bush, stopping in a deep
hollow, and behind him a number of riders upon red, speckled, and white
horses (sūsı̄m are horses with riders, and the reason why the latter are
not specially mentioned is that they do not appear during the course of
the vision as taking any active part, whilst the colour of their horses
is the only significant feature). At the same time he also sees, in
direct proximity to himself, an angel who interprets the vision, and
farther off ([Zac 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011)) the angel of
Jehovah also standing or stopping among the myrtle-bushes, and therefore
in front of the man upon a red horse, to whom the riders bring a report,
that they have gone through the earth by Jehovah's command and have
found the whole earth quiet and at rest; whereupon the angel of Jehovah
addresses a prayer to Jehovah for pity upon Jerusalem and the cities of
Judah, and receives a good consolatory answer, which the interpreting
angel conveys to the prophet, and the latter publicly proclaims in [Zac
1:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014).

The rider upon the red horse is not to be identified with the angel of
Jehovah, nor the latter with the angelus interpres. It is true that the
identity of the rider and the angel of Jehovah, which many commentators
assume, is apparently favoured by the circumstance that they are both
standing among the myrtles (‛ōmēd, stood; see [Zac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008), [Zac
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010), and [Zac
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011)); but all that follows from this
is that the rider stopped at the place where the angel of Jehovah was
standing, i.e., in front of him, to present a report to him of the state
of the earth, which he had gone through with his retinue. This very
circumstance rather favours the diversity of the two, inasmuch as it is
evident from this that the rider upon the red horse was simply the front
one, or leader of the whole company, who is brought prominently forward
as the spokesman and reporter. If the man upon the red horse had been
the angel of Jehovah Himself, and the troop of horsemen had merely come
to bring information to the man upon the red horse, the troop of
horsemen could not have stood behind him, but would have stood either
opposite to him or in front of him. And the different epithets applied
to the two furnish a decisive proof that the angel of the Lord and "the
angel that talked with me" are not one and the same. The angel, who
gives or conveys to the prophet the interpretation of the vision, is
constantly called "the angel that talked with me," not only in [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009), where it is preceded by an
address on the part of the prophet to this same angel, but also in [Zac
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#013) and [Zac
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014), and in the visions which follow
([Zac 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#002), [Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007); [Zac
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001), [Zac
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#004); [Zac
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005), [Zac
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#010); [Zac
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#004)), from which it is perfectly
obvious that הדּבר בּי denotes the function which this angel performs in
these visions (dibber be, signifying the speaking of God or of an angel
within a man, as in [Hos 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002); [Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001); [Num
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006), [Num
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008)). His occupation, therefore, was
to interpret the visions to the prophet, and convey the divine
revelations, so that he was only an angelus interpres or collocutor.
This angel appears in the other visions in company with other angels,
and receives instructions from them ([Zac
2:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005)); and his whole activity is
restricted to the duty of conveying higher instructions to the prophet,
and giving him an insight into the meaning of the visions, whereas the
angel of Jehovah stands on an equality with God, being sometimes
identified with Jehovah, and at other times distinguished from Him.
(Compare the remarks upon this subject in the comm. on Genesis, Pent.
pp. 118ff.) In the face of these facts, it is impossible to establish
the identity of the two by the arguments that have been adduced in
support of it. It by no means follows from [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009), where the prophet addresses the
mediator as "my lord," that the words are addressed to the angel of the
Lord; for neither he nor the angelus interpres has been mentioned
before; and in the visions persons are frequently introduced as
speaking, according to their dramatic character, without having been
mentioned before, so that it is only from what they say or do that it is
possible to discover who they are. Again, the circumstance that in [Zac
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012) the angel of the Lord presents a
petition to the Supreme God on behalf of the covenant nation, and that
according to [Zac 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#013) Jehovah answers
the angelus interpres in good, comforting words, does not prove that he
who receives the answer must be the same person as the intercessor: for
it might be stated in reply to this, as it has been by Vitringa, that
Zechariah has simply omitted to mention that the answer was first of all
addressed to the angel of the Lord, and that it was through him that it
reached the mediating angel; or we might assume, as Hengstenberg has
done, that "Jehovah addressed the answer directly to the mediating
angel, because the angel of the Lord had asked the question, not for his
own sake, but simply for the purpose of conveying consolation and hope
through the mediator to the prophet, and through him to the nation
generally."

There is no doubt that, in this vision, both the locality in which the
rider upon the red horse, with his troop, and the angel of the Lord had
taken up their position, and also the colour of the horses, are
significant. But they are neither of them easy to interpret. Even the
meaning of metsullâh is questionable. Some explain it as signifying a
"shady place," from צל, a shadow; but in that case we should expect the
form metsillâh. There is more authority for the assumption that
metsullâh is only another form for metsūlâh, which is the reading in
many codd., and which ordinarily stands for the depth of the sea, just
as in [Exo 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010) tsâlal signifies to
sink into the deep. The Vulgate adopts this rendering: in profundo. Here
it signifies, in all probability, a deep hollow, possibly with water in
it, as myrtles flourish particularly well in damp soils and by the side
of rivers (see Virgil, Georg. ii. 112, iv. 124). The article in
bammetsullâh defines the hollow as the one which the prophet saw in the
vision, not the ravine of the fountain of Siloah, as Hofmann supposes
(Weissagung u. Erfllung, i. p. 333). The hollow here is not a symbol of
the power of the world, or the abyss-like power of the kingdoms of the
world (Hengstenberg and M. Baumgarten), as the author of the Chaldee
paraphrase in Babele evidently thought; for this cannot be proved from
such passages as [Zac 10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) :16,
[Isa 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#027), and [Psa
107:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#024). In the myrtle-bushes, or
myrtle grove, we have no doubt a symbol of the theocracy, or of the land
of Judah as a land that was dear and lovely in the estimation of the
Lord (cf. [Dan 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009); [Dan
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016)), for the myrtle is a lovely
ornamental plant. Hence the hollow in which the myrtle grove was
situated, can only be a figurative representation of the deep
degradation into which the land and people of God had fallen at that
time. There is a great diversity of opinion as to the significance of
the colour of the horses, although all the commentators agree that the
colour is significant, as in [Zac 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#002).
and [Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002)., and that this is the
only reason why the horses are described according to their colours, and
the riders are not mentioned at all. About two of the colours there is
no dispute. אדום, red, the colour of the blood; and לבן, white,
brilliant white, the reflection of heavenly and divine glory ([Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002); [Mat
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#003); [Act
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#010)), hence the symbol of a glorious
victory ([Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002)). The meaning of
seruqqı̄m is a disputed one. The lxx have rendered it ψαροὶ καὶ ποικίλοι,
like בּרדּים אמצּים in [Zac 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003); the
Itala and Vulgate, varii; the Peshito, versicolores. Hence sūsı̄m
seruqqı̄m would correspond to the ἵππος χλωρός of [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008). The word seruqqı̄m only occurs
again in the Old Testament in [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008), where it is applied to the
tendrils or branches of the vine, for which sōrēq ([Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002); [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)) or serēqâh ([Gen
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011)) is used elsewhere. On the other
hand, Gesenius (Thes. s.v.) and others defend the meaning red, after the
Arabic ašqaru, the red horse, the fox, from šaqira, to be bright red;
and Koehler understands by sūsı̄m seruqqı̄m, bright red, fire-coloured, or
bay horses. But this meaning cannot be shown to be in accordance with
Hebrew usage: for it is a groundless conjecture that the vine branch is
called sōrēq from the dark-red grapes (Hitzig on [Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)); and the incorrectness of it is
evident from the fact, that even the Arabic šaqira does not denote
dark-red, but bright, fiery red. The Arabic translator has therefore
rendered the Greek πυῤῥός by Arab. ašqaru in [Sol
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009); but πυῤῥός answers to the Hebrew
אדום, and the lxx have expressed sūsı̄m 'ădummı̄m by ἵπποι πυῤῥοί both
here and in [Zac 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#002). If we compare
this with ch. [Zac 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#002), where the
chariots are drawn by red ('ădummı̄m, πυῤῥοί), black (shechōrı̄m,
μέλανες), white (lebhânı̄m, λευκοί), and speckled (beruddı̄m, ψαροί)
horses, and with Revelation 6, where the first rider has a white horse
(λευκός), the second a red one (πυῥῥός), the third a black one (μέλας),
the fourth a pale horse (χλωρός), there can be no further doubt that
three of the colours of the horses mentioned here occur again in the two
passages quoted, and that the black horse is simply added as a fourth;
so that the seruqqı̄m correspond to the beruddı̄m of [Zac
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003), and the ἵππος χλωρός of [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008), and consequently sârōq denotes
that starling kind of grey in which the black ground is mixed with
white, so that it is not essentially different from bârōd, speckled, or
black covered with white spots ([Gen
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#010), [Gen
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#012)).

By comparing these passages with one another, we obtain so much as
certain with regard to the meaning of the different colours, - namely,
that the colours neither denote the lands and nations to which the
riders had been sent, as Hvernick, Maurer, Hitzig, Ewald, and others
suppose; nor the three imperial kingdoms, as Jerome, Cyril, and others
have attempted to prove. For, apart from the fact that there is no
foundation whatever for the combination proposed, of the red colour with
the south as the place of light, or of the white with the west, the
fourth quarter of the heavens would be altogether wanting. Moreover, the
riders mentioned here have unquestionably gone through the earth in
company, according to [Zac 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008) and
[Zac 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011), or at any rate there is no
intimation whatever of their having gone through the different countries
separately, according to the colour of their respective horses; and,
according to [Zac 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006), not only the
chariot with the black horses, but that with the white horses also, goes
into the land of the south. Consequently the colour of the horses can
only be connected with the mission which the riders had to perform. This
is confirmed by Revelation 6, inasmuch as a great sword is there given
to the rider upon the red horse, to take away peace from the earth, that
they may kill one another, and a crown to the rider upon the white
horse, who goes forth conquering and to conquer ([Rev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002)), whilst the one upon the pale
horse receives the name of Death, and has power given to him to slay the
fourth part of the earth with sword, famine, and pestilence ([Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008)). It is true that no such effects
as these are attributed to the riders in the vision before us, but this
constitutes no essential difference. To the prophet's question,
mâh-'ēlleh, what are these? i.e., what do they mean? the angelus
interpres, whom he addresses as "my lord" ('ădōnı̄), answers, "I will
show thee what these be;" whereupon the man upon the red horse, as the
leader of the company, gives this reply: "These are they whom Jehovah
hath sent to go through the earth;" and then proceeds to give the angel
of the Lord the report of their mission, viz., "We have been through the
earth, and behold all the earth sitteth still and at rest." The man's
answer (vayya‛an, [Zac 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010)) is not
addressed to the prophet or to the angelus interpres, but to the angel
of the Lord mentioned in [Zac 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011), to
whom the former, with his horsemen (hence the plural, "they answered,"
in [Zac 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011)), had given a report of
the result of their mission. The verb ‛ânâh, to answer, refers not to
any definite question, but to the request for an explanation contained
in the conversation between the prophet and the interpreting angel.
חארץ, in [Zac 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010) and [Zac
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011), is not the land of Judah, or any
other land, but the earth. The answer, that the whole earth sits still
and at rest (ישׁבת ושׁקטת denotes the peaceful and secure condition of a
land and its inhabitants, undisturbed by any foe; cf. [Zac
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#007); [Ch1
4:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#040), and [Jdg
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#027)), points back to [Hag
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007), [Hag
2:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#022). God had there announced that
for a little He would shake heaven and earth, the whole world and all
nations, that the nations would come and fill His temple with glory. The
riders sent out by God now return and report that the earth is by no
means shaken and in motion, but the whole world sits quiet and at rest.
We must not, indeed, infer from this account that the riders were all
sent for the simple and exclusive purpose of obtaining information
concerning the state of the earth, and communicating it to the Lord. For
it would have been quite superfluous and unmeaning to send out an entire
troop, on horses of different colours, for this purpose alone. Their
mission was rather to take an active part in the agitation of the
nations, if any such existed, and guide it to the divinely appointed
end, and that in the manner indicated by the colour of their horses;
viz., according to Revelation 6, those upon the red horses by war and
bloodshed; those upon the starling-grey, or speckled horses, by famine,
pestilence, and other plagues; and lastly, those upon the white horses,
by victory and the conquest of the world.

In the second year of Darius there prevailed universal peace; all the
nations of the earlier Chaldaean empire were at rest, and lived in
undisturbed prosperity. Only Judaea, the home of the nation of God, was
still for the most part lying waste, and Jerusalem was still without
walls, and exposed in the most defenceless manner to all the insults of
the opponents of the Jews. Such a state of things as this necessarily
tended to produce great conflicts in the minds of the more godly men,
and to confirm the frivolous in their indifference towards the Lord. As
long as the nations of the world enjoyed undisturbed peace, Judah could
not expect any essential improvement in its condition. Even though
Darius had granted permission for the building of the temple to be
continued, the people were still under the bondage of the power of the
world, without any prospect of the realization of the glory predicted by
the earlier prophets (Jer. 31; Isaiah 40), which was to dawn upon the
nation of God when redeemed from Babylon. Hence the angel of the Lord
addresses the intercessory prayer to Jehovah in [Zac
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012) : How long wilt Thou not have
compassion upon Jerusalem, etc.? For the very fact that the angel of the
Lord, through whom Jehovah had formerly led His people and brought them
into the promised land and smitten all the enemies before Israel, now
appears again, contains in itself one source of consolation. His coming
was a sign that Jehovah had not forsaken His people, and His
intercession could not fail to remove every doubt as to the fulfilment
of the divine promises. The circumstance that the angel of Jehovah
addresses an intercessory prayer to Jehovah on behalf of Judah, is no
more a disproof of his essential unity with Jehovah, than the
intercessory prayer of Christ in John 17 is a disproof of His divinity.
The words, "over which Thou hast now been angry for seventy years," do
not imply that the seventy years of the Babylonian captivity predicted
by Jeremiah ([Jer 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011) and [Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)) were only just drawing to a
close. They had already expired in the first year of the reign of Cyrus
([Ch2 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022); [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)). At the same time, the remark
made by Vitringa, Hengstenberg, and others, must not be overlooked, -
namely, that these seventy years were completed twice, inasmuch as there
were also (not perhaps quite, but nearly) seventy years between the
destruction of Jerusalem and of the temple, and the second year of
Darius. Now, since the temple was still lying in ruins in the second
year of Darius, notwithstanding the command to rebuild it that had been
issued by Cyrus ([Hag 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004)), it might
very well appear as though the troubles of the captivity would never
come to an end. Under such circumstances, the longing for an end to be
put to the mournful condition of Judah could not fail to become greater
and greater; and the prayer, "Put an end, O Lord, put an end to all our
distress," more importunate than ever.

Jehovah replied to the intercession of the angel of the Lord with good
and comforting words. Debhârı̄m tōbhı̄m are words which promise good,
i.e., salvation (cf. [Jos 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#014); [Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)). So far as they set before the
people the prospect of the mitigation of their distress, they are
nichummı̄m, consolations. The word nichummı̄m is a substantive, and in
apposition to debhârı̄m. Instead of the form nichummı̄m, the keri has the
form nichumı̄m, which is grammatically the more correct of the two, and
which is written still more accurately nichūmı̄m in some of the codd. in
Kennicott. The contents of these words, which are addressed to the
interpreting angel either directly or through the medium of the angel of
Jehovah, follow in the announcement which the latter orders the prophet
to make in [Zac 1:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014). קרא ([Zac
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014)) as in [Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006). The word of the Lord contains
two things: (1) the assurance of energetic love on the part of God
towards Jerusalem ([Zac 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014), [Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015)); and (2) the promise that this
love will show itself in the restoration and prosperity of Jerusalem
([Zac 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016), [Zac
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017)). קנּא, to be jealous, applied to
the jealousy of love as in [Joe 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#018);
[Num 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011), [Num
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013), etc., is strengthened by קנאה
גדולה. Observe, too, the use of the perfect קנּאתי, as distinguished
from the participle קצף. The perfect is not merely used in the sense of
"I have become jealous," expressing the fact that Jehovah was inspired
with burning jealousy, to take Jerusalem to Himself (Koehler), but
includes the thought that God has already manifested this zeal, or begun
to put it in action, namely by liberating His people from exile. Zion,
namely the mountain of Zion, is mentioned along with Jerusalem as being
the site on which the temple stood, so that Jerusalem only comes into
consideration as the capital of the kingdom. Jehovah is also angry with
the self-secure and peaceful nations. The participle qōtsēph designates
the wrath as lasting. Sha'ănân, quiet and careless in their confidence
in their own power and prosperity, which they regard as secured for
ever. The following word, אשׁר, quod, introduces the reason why God is
angry, viz., because, whereas He was only a little angry with Israel,
they assisted for evil. מעט refers to the duration, not to the greatness
of the anger (cf. [Isa 54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)). עזרוּ
לרעה, they helped, so that evil was the result (לרעה as in [Jer
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#011)), i.e., they assisted not only
as the instruments of God for the chastisement of Judah, but so that
harm arose from it, inasmuch as they endeavoured to destroy Israel
altogether (cf. [Isa 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006)). It is no
ground of objection to this definition of the meaning of the words, that
לרעה in that case does not form an appropriate antithesis to מעט, which
relates to time (Koehler); for the fact that the anger only lasted a
short time, was in itself a proof that God did not intend to destroy His
people. To understand עזרוּ לרעה as only referring to the prolonged
oppression and captivity, does not sufficiently answer to the words.
Therefore (lâkhēn, [Zac 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016)), because
Jehovah is jealous with love for His people, and very angry with the
heathen, He has now turned with compassion towards Jerusalem. The
perfect שׁבתּי is not purely prophetic, but describes the event as
having already commenced, and as still continuing. This compassion will
show itself in the fact that the house of God is to be built in
Jerusalem, and the city itself restored, and all the obstacles to this
are to be cleared out of the way. The measuring line is drawn over a
city, to mark off the space it is to occupy, and the plan upon which it
is to be arranged. The chethib קוה bihtehc , probably to be read קוה, is
the obsolete form, which occurs again in [Kg1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#023) and [Jer
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039), and was displaced by the
contracted form קו (keri). But the compassion of God will not be
restricted to this. The prophet is to proclaim still more ("cry yet,"
[Zac 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017), referring to the "cry" in
[Zac 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014)). The cities of Jehovah,
i.e., of the land of the Lord, are still to overflow with good, or with
prosperity. Pūts, to overflow, as in [Pro
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016); and תּפוּצנּה for תּפוּצינה
(vid., Ewald, 196, c). The last two clauses round off the promise. When
the Lord shall restore the temple and city, then will Zion and Jerusalem
learn that He is comforting her, and has chosen her still. The last
thought is repeated in [Zac 2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001) :16
and [Zac 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002).

In this vision it is shown to the prophet, and through him to the
people, that although the immediate condition of things presents no
prospect of the fulfilment of the promised restoration and glorification
of Israel, the Lord has nevertheless already appointed the instruments
of His judgment, and sent them out to overthrow the nations of the
world, that are still living at rest and in security, and to perfect His
Zion. The fulfilment of this consolatory promise is neither to be
transferred to the end of the present course of this world, as is
supposed by Hofmann (Weiss. u. Erfll. i. 335), who refers to [Zac
14:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#018) in support of this, nor to be
restricted to what was done in the immediate future for the rebuilding
of the temple and of the city of Jerusalem. The promise embraces the
whole of the future of the kingdom of God; so that whilst the
commencement of the fulfilment is to be seen in the fact that the
building of the temple was finished in the sixth year of Darius, and
Jerusalem itself was also restored by Nehemiah in the reign of
Artaxerxes, these commencements of the fulfilment simply furnished a
pledge that the glorification of the nation and kingdom of God predicted
by the earlier prophets would quite as assuredly follow.

[Zechariah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zac 1:18</span></span>

The second vision is closely connected with the first, and shows how God
will discharge the fierceness of His wrath upon the heathen nations in
their self-security ([Zac 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015)). [Zac
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018). "And I lifted up mine eyes, and
saw, and behold four horns. [Zac 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#019).
And I said to the angel that talked with me, What are these? And he said
to me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and
Jerusalem. [Zac 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#020). And Jehovah
showed me four smiths. [Zac 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#021). And
I said, What come these to do? And He spake to me thus: These are the
horns which have scattered Judah, so that no one lifted up his head;
these are now come to terrify them, to cast down the horns of the
nations which have lifted up the horn against the land of Judah to
scatter it." The mediating angel interprets the four horns to the
prophet first of all as the horns which have scattered Judah; then
literally, as the nations which have lifted up the horn against the land
of Judah to scatter it. The horn is a symbol of power (cf. [Amo
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#013)). The horns therefore symbolize
the powers of the world, which rise up in hostility against Judah and
hurt it. The number four does not point to the four quarters of the
heaven, denoting the heathen foes of Israel in all the countries of the
world (Hitzig, Maurer, Koehler, and others). This view cannot be
established from [Zac 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010), for there
is no reference to any dispersion of Israel to the four winds there. Nor
does it follow from the perfect זרוּ that only such nations are to be
thought of, as had already risen up in hostility to Israel and Judah in
the time of Zechariah; for it cannot be shown that there were four such
nations. At that time all the nations round about Judah were subject to
the Persian empire, as they had been in Nebuchadnezzar's time to the
Babylonian. Both the number four and the perfect zērū belong to the
sphere of inward intuition, in which the objects are combined together
so as to form one complete picture, without any regard to the time of
their appearing in historical reality. Just as the prophet in [Zac
6:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001) sees the four chariots all
together, although they follow one another in action, so may the four
horns which are seen simultaneously represent nations which succeeded
one another. This is shown still more clearly by the visions in Daniel 2
and 7, in which not only the colossal image seen in a dream by
Nebuchadnezzar (ch. 2), but also the four beasts which are seen by
Daniel to ascend simultaneously from the sea, symbolize the four
empires, which rose up in succession one after the other. It is to these
four empires that the four horns of our vision refer, as Jerome, Abarb.,
Hengstenberg, and others have correctly pointed out, since even the
picturing of nations or empires as horns points back to [Dan
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), and [Dan
8:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003). Zechariah sees these in all the
full development of their power, in which they have oppressed and
crushed the people of God (hence the perfect zērū), and for which they
are to be destroyed themselves. Zârâh, to scatter, denotes the
dissolution of the united condition and independence of the nation of
God. In this sense all four empires destroyed Judah, although the
Persian and Grecian empires did not carry Judah out of their own land.

The striking combination, "Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem," in which not
only the introduction of the name of Israel between Judah and Jerusalem
is to be noticed, but also the fact that the nota acc. את is only placed
before Yehūdâh and Yisrâ'ēl, and not before Yerūshâlaim also, is not
explained on the ground that Israel denotes the kingdom of the ten
tribes, Judah the southern kingdom, and Jerusalem the capital of the
kingdom (Maurer, Umbreit, and others), for in that case Israel would
necessarily have been repeated before Judah, and 'ēth before
Yerūshâlaim. Still less can the name Israel denote the rural population
of Judah (Hitzig), or the name Judah the princely house (Neumann). By
the fact that 'ēth is omitted before Yerūshâlaim, and only Vav stands
before it, Jerusalem is connected with Israel and separated from Judah;
and by the repetition of 'ēth before Yisrâ'ēl, as well as before
Yehūdâh, Israel with Jerusalem is co-ordinated with Judah. Kliefoth
infers from this that "the heathen had dispersed on the one hand Judah,
and on the other hand Israel together with Jerusalem," and understands
this as signifying that in the nation of God itself a separation is
presupposed, like the previous separation into Judah and the kingdom of
the ten tribes. "When the Messiah comes," he says, "a small portion of
the Israel according to the flesh will receive Him, and so constitute
the genuine people of God and the true Israel, the Judah; whereas the
greater part of the Israel according to the flesh will reject the
Messiah at first, and harden itself in unbelief, until at the end of
time it will also be converted, and join the true Judah of Christendom."
But this explanation, according to which Judah would denote the
believing portion of the nation of twelve tribes, and Israel and
Jerusalem the unbelieving, is wrecked on the grammatical difficulty that
the cop. ו is wanting before את־ישׂראל. If the names Judah and Israel
were intended to be co-ordinated with one another as two different
portions of the covenant nation as a whole, the two parts would
necessarily have been connected together by the cop. Vav. Moreover, in
the two co-ordinated names Judah and Israel, the one could not possibly
stand in the spiritual sense, and the other in the carnal. The
co-ordination of 'eth-Yehūdâh with 'eth-Yisrâ'ēl without the cop. Vav
shows that Israel is really equivalent to the Jerusalem which is
subordinated to it, and does not contain a second member (or part),
which is added to it, - in other words, that Israel with Jerusalem is
merely an interpretation or more precise definition of Yehūdâh; and
Hengstenberg has hit upon the correct idea, when he takes Israel as the
honourable name of Judah, or, more correctly, as an honourable name for
the covenant nation as then existing in Judah. This explanation is not
rendered questionable by the objection offered by Koehler: viz., that
after the separation of the two kingdoms, the expression Israel always
denotes either the kingdom of the ten tribes, or the posterity of Jacob
without regard to their being broken up, because this is not the fact.
The use of the name Israel for Judah after the separation of the
kingdoms is established beyond all question by [Ch2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001); [Ch2
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#017); [Ch2
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008); [Ch2
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002), [Ch2
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#004); [Ch2
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#002); [Ch2
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#005), etc.

(Note: Gesenius has correctly observed in his Thesaurus, p. 1339, that
"from this time (i.e., from the severance of the kingdom) the name of
Israel began to be usurped by the whole nation that was then in
existence, and was used chiefly by the prophets Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and
Deutero(?)-Isaiah, and after the captivity by Ezra and Nehemiah; from
which it came to pass, that in the Paralipomena, even when allusion is
made to an earlier period, Israel stands for Judah," although the proofs
adduced in support of this from the passages quoted from the prophets
need considerable sifting.)

Jehovah then showed the prophet four chârâshı̄m, or workmen, i.e.,
smiths; and on his putting the question, "What have these come to do?"
gave him this reply: "To terrify those," etc. For the order of the words
מה אלּה בּאים לעשׂות, instead of מה לעשׂות אלּה בּאים, see [Gen
42:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#012); [Neh
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#012); [Jdg
9:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#048). אלּה הקּרנות is not a nominative
written absolutely at the head of the sentence in the sense of "these
horns," for that would require הקרנות האלּה; but the whole sentence is
repeated from [Zac 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002), and to that
the statement of the purpose for which the smiths have come is attached
in the form of an apodosis: "these are the horns, etc., and they (the
smiths) have come." At the same time, the earlier statement as to the
horns is defined more minutely by the additional clause כּפי אישׁ וגו,
according to the measure, i.e., in such a manner that no man lifted up
his head any more, or so that Judah was utterly prostrate. Hachărı̄d, to
throw into a state of alarm, as in [Sa2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#002). Them ('ōthâm): this refers ad
sensum to the nations symbolized by the horns. Yaddōth, inf. piel of
yâdâh, to cast down, may be explained as referring to the power of the
nations symbolized by the horns. 'Erets Yehūdâh (the land of Judah)
stands for the inhabitants of the land. The four smiths, therefore,
symbolize the instruments "of the divine omnipotence by which the
imperial power in its several historical forms is overthrown"
(Kliefoth), or, as Theod. Mops. expresses it, "the powers that serve God
and inflict vengeance upon them from many directions." The vision does
not show what powers God will use for this purpose. It is simply
designed to show to the people of God, that every hostile power of the
world which has risen up against it, or shall rise up, is to be judged
and destroyed by the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 2](zac002)

</div>
