<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep001)  [Next](zep003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)

[Zephaniah](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zep 2:0</span></span>

Exhortation to Repentance in View of the Judgment - Zephaniah 2:1-3:8

Zephaniah, having in the previous chapter predicted the judgment upon
the whole world, and Judah especially, as being close at hand, now
summons his people to repent, and more especially exhorts the righteous
to seek the Lord and strive after righteousness and humility, that they
may be hidden in the day of the Lord ([Zep
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)). The reason which he gives for
this admonition to repentance is twofold: viz., (1) that the
Philistians, Moabites, and Ammonites will be cut off, and Israel will
take possession of their inheritances ([Zep
2:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004)), that all the gods of the
earth will be overthrown, and all the islands brought to worship the
Lord, since He will smite the Cushites, and destroy proud Asshur and
Nineveh ([Zep 2:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011)); and (2) that
even blood-stained Jerusalem, with its corrupt princes, judges, and
prophets, will endure severe punishment. Accordingly, the call to
repentance is not simply strengthened by the renewed threat of judgment
upon the heathen and the ungodly in Judah, but is rather accounted for
by the introduction of the thought, that by means of the judgment the
heathen nations are to be brought to acknowledge the name of the Lord,
and the rescued remnant of Israel to be prepared for the reception of
the promised salvation.

[Zephaniah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 2:1</span></span>

Call to conversion. - [Zep 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001).
"Gather yourselves together, and gather together, O nation that dost not
grow pale. [Zep 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#002). Before the decree
bring forth (the day passes away like chaff), before the burning wrath
of Jehovah come upon you, before the day of Jehovah's wrath come upon
you. [Zep 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#003). Seek Jehovah, all ye
humble of the land, who have wrought His right; seek righteousness, seek
humility, perhaps ye will be hidden in the day of Jehovah's wrath." The
summons in [Zep 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001) is addressed to
the whole of Judah or Israel. The verb qōshēsh, possibly a denom. from
qash, signifies to gather stubble ([Exo
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#007), [Exo
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#012)), then generally to gather
together or collect, e.g., branches of wood ([Num
15:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032); [Kg1
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010)); in the hithpoel, to gather
one's self together, applied to that spiritual gathering which leads to
self-examination, and is the first condition of conversion. The attempts
of Ewald and Hitzig to prove, by means of doubtful etymological
combinations from the Arabic, that the word possesses the meanings, to
grow pale, or to purify one's self, cannot be sustained. The kal is
combined with the hiphil for the purpose of strengthening it, as in [Hab
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005) and [Isa
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009). Nikhsâph is the perf. nipahl in
pause, and not a participle, partly because of the לא which stands
before it (see however Ewald, 286, g), and partly on account of the
omission of the article; and nikhsâph is to be taken as a relative,
"which does not turn pale." Kâsaph has the meaning "to long," both in
the niphal (vid., [Gen 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#030); [Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003)) and kal (cf. [Psa
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012); [Job
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#015)). This meaning is retained by
many here. Thus Jerome renders it, "gens non amabilis, i.e., non
desiderata a Deo;" but this is decidedly unsuitable. Others render it
"not possessing strong desire," and appeal to the paraphrase of the
Chaldee, "a people not wishing to be converted to the law." This is
apparently the view upon which the Alex. version rests: ἔθνος
ἀπαίδευτον. But although nikhsâph is used to denote the longing of the
soul for fellowship with God in [Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003), this idea is not to be found in
the word itself, but simply in the object connected with it. We
therefore prefer to follow Grotius, Gesenius, Ewald, and others, and
take the word in its primary sense of turning pale at anything, becoming
white with shame (cf. [Isa 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#022)),
which is favoured by [Zep 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015). The
reason for the appeal is given in [Zep
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#002), viz., the near approach of the
judgment. The resolution brings forth, when that which is resolved upon
is realized (for yâlad in this figurative sense, see [Pro
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001)). The figure is explained in the
second hemistich. The next clause כּמוץ וגו does not depend upon בּטרם,
for in that case the verb would stand at the head with Vav cop., but it
is a parenthesis inserted to strengthen the admonition: the day comes
like chaff, i.e., approaches with the greatest rapidity, like chaff
driven by the wind: not "the time passes by like chaff" (Hitzig); for it
cannot be shown that yōm was ever used for time in this sense. Yōm is
the day of judgment mentioned in [Zep
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007), [Zep
1:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014); and עבר here is not to pass
by, but to approach, to come near, as in [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019). For the figure of the chaff, see
[Isa 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#005). In the second בּטרם is
strengthened by לא; and חרון אף, the burning of wrath in the last
clause, is explained by יום אף יי, the day of the revelation of the
wrath of God.

[Zep 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#003)

But because the judgment will so speedily burst upon them, all the pious
especially - ‛anvē hâ'ârets, the quiet in the land, οι πραεῖς ([Amo
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007); [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004); [Psa
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011)) - are to seek the Lord. The
humble (‛ănâvı̄m) are described as those who do Jehovah's right, i.e.,
who seek diligently to fulfil what Jehovah has prescribed in the law as
right. Accordingly, seeking Jehovah is explained as seeking
righteousness and humility. The thought is this: they are to strive
still more zealously after Jehovah's right, viz., righteousness and
humility (cf. [Deu 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020); [Isa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001), [Isa
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007)); then will they probably be
hidden in the day of wrath, i.e., be pardoned and saved (cf. [Amo
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#015)). This admonition is now still
further enforced from [Zep 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004) onwards
by the announcement of the coming of judgment upon all the heathen, that
the kingdom of God may attain completion.

[Zephaniah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 2:4</span></span>

Destruction of the Philistines. - [Zep
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004). "For Gaza will be forgotten, and
Ashkelon become a desert; Ashdod, they drive it out in broad day, and
Ekron will be ploughed out. [Zep 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005).
Woe upon the inhabitants of the tract by the sea, the nation of the
Cretans! The word of Jehovah upon you, O Canaan, land of the
Philistines! I destroy thee, so that not an inhabitant remains. [Zep
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006). And the tract by the sea becomes
pastures for shepherds' caves, and for folds of sheep. [Zep
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#007). And a tract will be for the
remnant of the house of Judah; upon them will they feed: in the houses
of Ashkelon they encamp in the evening; for Jehovah their God will visit
them, and turn their captivity." The fourth verse, which is closely
connected by kı̄ (for) with the exhortation to repentance, serves as an
introduction to the threat of judgment commencing with hōi in [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005). As the mentioning of the names of
the four Philistian capitals (see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)) is simply an individualizing
periphrasis for the Philistian territory and people, so the land and
people of Philistia are mentioned primarily for the purpose of
individualizing, as being the representatives of the heathen world by
which Judah was surrounded; and it is not till afterwards, in the
further development of the threat, that the enumeration of certain near
and remote heathen nations is appended, to express more clearly the idea
of the heathen world as a whole. Of the names of the Philistian cities
Zephaniah makes use of two, ‛Azzâh and ‛Eqrōn, as a play upon words, to
express by means of paronomasia the fate awaiting them. ‛azzâh, Gaza,
will be ‛azûbhâh, forsaken, desolate. ‛Eqrōn, Ekron, will be tē‛âqēr,
rooted up, torn out of its soil, destroyed. To the other two he
announces their fate in literal terms, the shemâmâh threatened against
Ashkelon corresponding to the ‛ăzūbhâh, and the gârēsh predicated of
Ashdod preparing the way for Ekron's tē‛âqēr. בּצּהרים at noon, i.e., in
broad day, might signify, when used as an antithesis to night, "with
open violence" (Jerome, Kimchi); but inasmuch as the expulsion of
inhabitants is not effected by thieves in the night, the time of noon is
more probably to be understood, as v. Clln and Rosenmller suppose, as
denoting the time of day at which men generally rest in hot countries
([Sa2 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#005)), in the sense of
unexpected, unsuspected expulsion; and this is favoured by [Jer
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#008), where the devastation at noon is
described as a sudden invasion. The omission of Gath may be explained in
the same manner as in [Amo 1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006), from
the fact that the parallelism of the clauses only allowed the names of
four cities to be given; and this number was amply sufficient to
individualize the whole, just as Zephaniah, when enumerating the heathen
nations, restricts the number to four, according to the four quarters of
the globe: viz., the Philistines in the west ([Zep
2:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005)); the Moabites and Ammonites
comprised in one in the east ([Zep
2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)); the Cushites in the south
([Zep 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011), [Zep
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012)); and Asshur, with Nineveh, in
the north (north-east), ([Zep
2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#013)). The woe with which the
threat is commenced in [Zep 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005)
applies to the whole land and people of the Philistines. Chebhel, the
measure, then the tract of land measured out or apportioned (see at [Deu
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004); [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009), etc.). The tract of the sea is
the tract of land by the Mediterranean Sea which was occupied by the
Philistines (chebhel hayyâm = 'erets Pelishtı̄m). Zephaniah calls the
inhabitants gōi Kerēthı̄m, nation of the Cretans, from the name of one
branch of the Philistian people which was settled in the south-west of
Philistia, for the purpose of representing them as a people devoted to
kârath, or extermination. The origin of this name, which is selected
both here and in [Eze 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016) with a
play upon the appellative signification, is involved in obscurity; for,
as we have already observed at [Sa1
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014), there is no valid authority for
the derivation which is now current, viz., from the island of Crete (see
Stark, Gaza, pp. 66 and 99ff.). דּבר יי עליכם forms an independent
sentence: The word of the Lord cometh over you. The nature of that word
is described in the next sentence: I will destroy thee. The name Kena‛an
is used in the more limited sense of Philistia, and is chosen to
indicate that Philistia is to share the lot of Canaan, and lose its
inhabitants by extermination.

[Zephaniah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zep 2:6</span></span>

The tract of land thus depopulated is to be turned into "pastures
(nevōth, the construct state plural of nâveh) of the excavation of
shepherds," i.e., where shepherds will make excavations or dig
themselves huts under the ground as a protection from the sun. This is
the simplest explanation of the variously interpreted kerōth (as an inf.
of kârâh, to dig), and can be grammatically sustained. The digging of
the shepherds stands for the excavations which they make. Bochart
(Hieroz. i. p. 519, ed. Ros.) has already given this explanation:
"Caulae s. caulis repletus erit effossionis pastorum, i.e., caulae a
pastoribus effossae in cryptis subterraneis ad vitandum solis aestum."
On the other hand, the derivation from the noun kērâh, in the sense of
cistern, cannot be sustained; and there is no proof of it in the fact
that kârâh is applied to the digging of wells. Still less is it possible
to maintain the derivation from יכר (Arab. wkr), by which Ewald would
support the meaning nests for kērōth, i.e., "the small houses or carts
of the shepherds." And Hitzig's alteration of the text into כּרת =
כּרים, pastures, so as to obtain the tautology "meadows of the
pastures," is perfectly unwarranted. The word chebhel is construed in
[Zep 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006) as a feminine ad sensum, with
a retrospective allusion to 'erets Pelishtı̄m; whereas in [Zep
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#007) it is construed, as it is
everywhere else, as a masculine. Moreover, the noun chebhel, which
occurs in this verse without the article, is not the subject; for, if it
were, it would at least have had the article. It is rather a predicate,
and the subject must be supplied from [Zep
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006) : "The Philistian tract of land by
the sea will become a tract of land or possession for the remnant of the
house of Judah, the portion of the people of God rescued from the
judgment. Upon them, viz., these pastures, will they feed." The plural
עליהם does not stand for the neuter, but is occasioned by a
retrospective glance at נות רעים. The subject is, those that are left of
the house of Judah. They will there feed their flocks, and lie down in
the huts of Ashkelon. For the prophet adds by way of explanation,
Jehovah their God will visit them. Pâqad, to visit in a good sense,
i.e., to take them under His care, as is almost always the meaning when
it is construed with an accusative of the person. It is only in [Psa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006) that it is used with an acc.
pers. instead of with על, in the sense of to chastise or punish. שׁוּב
שׁבוּת as in [Hos 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#011) and [Amo
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#014). The keri שׁבית has arisen from a
misinterpretation. On the fulfilment, see what follows.

[Zephaniah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 2:8</span></span>

The judgment upon Joab and Ammon. - [Zep
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008). "I have heard the abuse of Moab,
and the revilings of the sons of Ammon, who have abused my nation, and
boasted against its boundary. [Zep
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009). Therefore, as I live, is the
saying of Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Yea, Moab shall become
like Sodom, and the sons of Ammon like Gomorrha, an inheritance of
nettles and salt-pits, and desert for ever. The remnant of my nation
will plunder them, the residue of my nation will inherit them. [Zep
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#010). Such to them for their pride,
that they have despised and boasted against the nation of Jehovah of
hosts." The threat now turns from the Philistines in the west to the two
tribes to the east, viz., the Moabites and Ammonites, who were descended
from Lot, and therefore blood-relations, and who manifested hostility to
Israel on every possible occasion. Even in the time of Moses, the
Moabitish king Balak sought to destroy Israel by means of Balaam's
curses (Numbers 22), for which the Moabites were threatened with
extermination ([Num 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)). In the
time of the judges they both attempted to oppress Israel ([Jdg
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012). and [Jdg
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007).; cf. [Sa1
11:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001) and 2 Samuel 10-12), for which
they were severely punished by Saul and David ([Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), and [Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002); [Sa2
12:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#030)). The reproach of Moab and
the revilings of the Ammonites, which Jehovah had heard, cannot be
taken, as Jerome, Rashi, and others suppose, as referring to the
hostilities of those tribes towards the Judaeans during the Chaldaean
catastrophe; nor restricted, as v. Clln imagines, to the reproaches
heaped upon the ten tribes when they were carried away by the Assyrians,
since nothing is know of any such reproaches. The charge refers to the
hostile attitude assumed by both tribes at all times towards the nation
of God, which they manifested both in word and deed, as often as the
latter was brought into trouble and distress. Compare [Jer
48:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026); and for giddēph, to revile
or blaspheme by actions, [Num 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030);
[Eze 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#027); also for the fact itself,
the remarks on Amos 1:13-2:3. יגדּילוּ על גב, they did great things
against their (the Israelites') border (the suffix in gebhūlâm, their
border, refers to ‛ammı̄, my people). This great doing consisted in their
proudly violating the boundary of Israel, and endeavouring to seize upon
Israelitish territory (cf. [Amo 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013)).
Pride and haughtiness, or high-minded self-exaltation above Israel as
the nation of God, is charged against the Moabites and Ammonites by
Isaiah and Jeremiah also, as a leading feature in their character (cf.
[Isa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006); [Isa
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#011); [Jer
48:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029)). Moab and Ammon are to be
utterly exterminated in consequence. The threat of punishment is
announced in [Zep 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008) as irrevocable
by a solemn oath. It shall happen to them as to Sodom and Gomorrha. This
simile was rendered a very natural one by the situation of the two lands
in the neighbourhood of the Dead Sea. It affirms the utter destruction
of the two tribes, as the appositional description shows. Their land is
to become the possession of nettles, i.e., a place where nettles grow.
Mimshâq, hap leg., from the root mâshaq, which was not used, but from
which mesheq in [Gen 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002) is derived.
Chârūl: the stinging nettle (see at [Job
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007)), which only flourishes in waste
places. Mikhrēh melach: a place of salt-pits, like the southern coast of
the Dead Sea, which abounds in rock-salt, and to which there is an
allusion in the threat of Moses in [Deu
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022). "A desert for ever:" the
emphasis lies upon ‛ad ‛ōlâm (for ever) here. The people, however, i.e.,
the Moabites and Ammonites themselves, will be taken by the people of
Jehovah, and be made their possession. The suffixes attached to יבזּוּם
and ינחלוּם can only refer to the people of Moab and Ammon, because a
land turned into an eternal desert and salt-steppe would not be adapted
for a nachălâh (possession) for the people of God. The meaning is not,
they will be their heirs through the medium of plunder, but they will
make them into their own property, or slaves (cf. [Isa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#002); [Isa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#005)). גּויי is גּוי with the suffix
of the first person, only one of the two י being written. In [Zep
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#010) the threat concludes with a
repetition of the statement of the guilt which is followed by such a
judgment.

The fulfilment or realization of the threat pronounced upon Philistia,
Moab, and Ammon, we have not to look for in the particular historical
occurrences through which these tribes were conquered and subjugated by
the Chaldaeans, and to some extent by the Jews after the captivity,
until they eventually vanished from the stage of history, and their
lands became desolate, as they still are. These events can only come
into consideration as preliminary stages of the fulfilment, which
Zephaniah completely passes by, since he only views the judgment in its
ultimate fulfilment. We are precluded, moreover, from taking the words
as relating to that event by the circumstance, that neither Philistia on
the one hand, nor Moabites and Ammonites on the other, were ever taken
permanent possession of by the Jews; and still less were they ever taken
by Judah, as the nation of God, for His own property. Judah is not to
enter into such possession as this till the Lord turns the captivity of
Judah ([Zep 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#007)); that is to say, not
immediately after the return from the Babylonish captivity, but when the
dispersion of Israel among the Gentiles, which lasts till this day,
shall come to an end, and Israel, through its conversion to Christ, be
reinstated in the privileges of the people of God. It follows from this,
that the fulfilment is still in the future, and that it will be
accomplished not literally, but spiritually, in the utter destruction of
the nations referred to as heathen nations, and opponents of the kingdom
of God, and in the incorporation of those who are converted to the
living God at the time of the judgment, into the citizenship of the
spiritual Israel. Until the eventual restoration of Israel, Philistia
will remain an uninhabited shepherds' pasture, and the land of the
Moabites and Ammonites the possession of nettles, a place of salt-pits
and a desert; just as the land of Israel will for the very same time be
trodden down by the Gentiles. The curse resting upon these lands will
not be entirely removed till the completion of the kingdom of God on
earth. This view is proved to be correct by the contents of [Zep
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011), with which the prophet passes to
the announcement of the judgment upon the nations of the south and
north.

[Zephaniah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zep 2:11</span></span>

"Fearful is Jehovah over them, for He destroyeth all the gods of the
earth; that all the islands of the nations, every one from its place,
may worship Him." Whilst עליהם refers to what precedes, the next clause
in the reason assigned points to the announcement of judgment upon the
remaining nations of the earth in [Zep
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012).; so that [Zep
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011) cannot be taken either as the
conclusion of the previous threat, or as the commencement of the
following one, but leads from the one to the other. Jehovah is terrible
when He reveals Himself in the majesty of Judge of the world. The suffix
appended to עליהם does not refer to עם יהוה, but to the להם in [Zep
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#010), answering to the Moabites and
Ammonites. Jehovah proves Himself terrible to these, because He has
resolved to destroy all the gods of the earth. Râzâh, to make lean;
hence to cause to vanish, to destroy. He causes the gods to vanish, by
destroying the nations and kingdoms who relied upon these gods. He
thereby reveals the nothingness of the gods, and brings the nations to
acknowledge His sole deity ([Mic
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#012)). The fall of the false gods
impels to the worship of the one true God. וישׁתּחווּ לו is the
consequence, the fruit, and the effect of Jehovah's proving Himself
terrible to the nations and their gods. איּי הגּוים, islands of the
Gentiles, is an epithet taken from the islands and coastlands of Europe,
to denote the whole of the heathen world (see at [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)). The distributive עישׁ ממּקומו
refers to haggōyı̄m as the principal idea, though not in the sense of
"every nation," but in that of every individual belonging to the
nations. Mimmeqōmō, coming from his place: the meaning is not that the
nations will worship Jehovah at their own place, in their own lands, in
contradistinction to [Mic 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001); [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016), and other passages, where the
nations go on pilgrimage to Mount Zion (Hitzig); but their going to
Jerusalem is implied in the min (from), though it is not brought
prominently out, as being unessential to the thought. With regard to the
fulfilment, Bucer has correctly observed, that "the worship of Jehovah
on the part of the heathen is not secured without sanguinary wars, that
the type may not be taken for the fact itself, and the shadow for the
body .... But the true completion of the whole in the kingdom of Christ
takes place here in spirit and in faith, whilst in the future age it
will be consummated in all its reality and in full fruition." Theodoret,
on the other hand, is too one-sided in his view, and thinks only of the
conversion of the heathen through the preaching of the gospel. "This
prophecy," he says, "has received its true fulfilment through the holy
apostles, and the saints who have followed them; ... and this takes
place, not by the law, but by the teaching of the gospel."

[Zephaniah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 2:12</span></span>

After this statement of the aim of the judgments of God, Zephaniah
mentions two other powerful heathen nations as examples, to prove that
the whole of the heathen world will succumb to the judgment. [Zep
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012). "Ye Cushites also, slain of my
sword are they. [Zep 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#013). And let him
stretch out his hand toward the south, and destroy Asshur; and make
Nineveh a barren waste, a dry place, like the desert. [Zep
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014). And herds lie down in the midst
of it, all kinds of beasts in crowds: pelicans also and hedgehogs will
lodge on their knobs; the voice of the singer in the window; heaps upon
the threshold: for their cedar-work hath He made bare. [Zep
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#015). This the city, the exulting one,
the safely dwelling one, which said in her heart, I, and no more: how
has she become a desolation, a lair of beasts! Every one that passeth by
it will hiss, swing his hand." As a representative of the heathen
dwelling in the south, Zephaniah does not mention Edom, which bordered
upon Judah, or the neighbouring land of Egypt, but the remote Ethiopia,
the furthest kingdom or people in the south that was known to the
Hebrews. The Ethiopians will be slain of the sword of Jehovah. המּה does
not take the place of the copula between the subject and predicate, any
more than הוּא in [Isa 37:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#016) and [Ezr
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#011) (to which Hitzig appeals in
support of this usage: see Delitzsch, on the other hand, in his Comm. on
Isaiah, l.c.), but is a predicate. The prophecy passes suddenly from the
form of address (in the second person) adopted in the opening clause, to
a statement concerning the Cushites (in the third person). For similar
instances of sudden transition, see [Zep
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018); [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008); [Eze
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#022).

(Note: Calvin correctly says: "The prophet commences by driving them, in
the second person, to the tribunal of God, and then adds in the third
person, 'They will be,' etc.")

חללי חרבּי is a reminiscence from [Isa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016) : slain by Jehovah with the
sword. Zephaniah says nothing further concerning this distant nation,
which had not come into any hostile collision with Judah in his day; and
only mentions it to exemplify the thought that all the heathen will come
under the judgment. The fulfilment commenced with the judgment upon
Egypt through the Chaldaeans, as is evident from [Eze
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#004), [Eze
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#009), as compared with Josephus, Ant.
x. 11, and continues till the conversion of that people to the Lord, the
commencement of which is recorded in [Act
8:27-38](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027). The prophet dwells longer
upon the heathen power of the north, the Assyrian kingdom with its
capital Nineveh, because Assyria was then the imperial power, which was
seeking to destroy the kingdom of God in Judah. This explains the fact
that the prophet expresses the announcement of the destruction of this
power in the form of a wish, as the use of the contracted forms yēt and
yâsēm clearly shows. For it is evident that Ewald is wrong in supposing
that ויט stands for ויּט, or should be so pointed, inasmuch as the
historical tense, "there He stretched out His hand," would be perfectly
out of place. נטה יד (to stretch out a hand), as in [Zep
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004). ‛al tsâphōn, over (or against)
the north. The reference is to Assyria with the capital Nineveh. It is
true that this kingdom was not to the north, but to the north-east, of
Judah; but inasmuch as the Assyrian armies invaded Palestine from the
north, it is regarded by the prophets as situated in the north. On
Nineveh itself, see at [Jon 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002) (p.
263); and on the destruction of this city and the fall of the Assyrian
empire, at [Nah 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019) (p. 379).
Lishmâmâh is strengthened by the apposition tsiyyâh kammidbâr.

Nineveh is not only to become a steppe, in which herds feed ([Isa
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010)), but a dry, desolate waste,
where only desert animals will make their home. Tsiyyâh, the dry, arid
land - the barren, sandy desert (cf. [Isa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)). בּתוכהּ, in the midst of the
city which has become a desert, there lie flocks, not of sheep and goats
(צאן, [Zep 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006); cf. [Isa
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020)), but כּל־חיתו־גוי , literally
of all the animals of the (or a) nation. The meaning can only be, "all
kinds of animals in crowds or in a mass." גּוי is used here for the mass
of animals, just as it is in [Joe 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006)
for the multitude of locusts, and as עם is in Prov. 30:35-36 for the
ant-people; and the genitive is to be taken as in apposition. Every
other explanation is exposed to much greater objections and
difficulties. For the form חיתו, see at [Gen
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024). Pelicans and hedgehogs will make
their homes in the remains of the ruined buildings (see at [Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011), on which passage Zephaniah
rests his description). בּכפתּריה, upon the knobs of the pillars left
standing when the palaces were destroyed (kaphtōr; see at [Amo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)). The reference to the pelican, a
marsh bird, is not opposed to the tsiyyâh of [Zep
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#013), since Nineveh stood by the side
of streams, the waters of which formed marshes after the destruction of
the city. קול ישׁורר cannot be rendered "a voice sings," for shōrēr, to
sing, is not used for tuning or resounding; but yeshōrēr is to be taken
relatively, and as subordinate to קול, the voice of him that sings will
be heard in the window. Jerome gives it correctly: vox canentis in
fenestra. There is no necessity to think of the cry of the owl or hawk
in particular, but simply of birds generally, which make their singing
heard in the windows of the ruins. The sketching of the picture of the
destruction passes from the general appearance of the city to the
separate ruins, coming down from the lofty knobs of the pillars to the
windows, and from these to the thresholds of the ruins of the houses.
Upon the thresholds there is chōrebh, devastation (= rubbish), and no
longer a living being. This is perfectly appropriate, so that there is
no necessity to give the word an arbitrary interpretation, or to alter
the text, so as to get the meaning a raven or a crow. The description
closes with the explanatory sentence: "for He has laid bare the
cedar-work," i.e., has so destroyed the palaces and state buildings,
that the costly panelling of the walls is exposed. 'Arzâh is a
collective, from 'erez, the cedar-work, and there is no ground for any
such alteration of the text as Ewald and Hitzig suggest, in order to
obtain the trivial meaning "hews or hacks in pieces," or the cold
expression, "He destroys, lays bare." In [Zep
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#015) the picture is rounded off. "This
is the city," i.e., this is what happens to the exulting city. עלּיזה,
exulting, applied to the joyful tumult caused by the men - a favourite
word with Isaiah (cf. [Isa 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#002); [Isa
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#007); [Isa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#008); [Isa
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013)). The following predicates from
היּושׁבת to עוד are borrowed from the description of Babel in [Isa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008), and express the security and
self-deification of the mighty imperial city. The Yod in 'aphsı̄ is not
paragogical, but a pronoun in the first person; at the same time, 'ephes
is not a preposition, "beside me," since in that case the negation "not
one" could not be omitted, but "the non-existence," so that אפסי = איני,
I am absolutely no further (see at [Isa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008)). But how has this self-deifying
pride been put to shame! איך, an expression of amazement at the tragical
turn in her fate. The city filled with the joyful exulting of human
beings has become the lair of wild beasts, and every one that passes by
expresses his malicious delight in its ruin. Shâraq, to hiss, a common
manifestation of scorn (cf. [Mic 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016);
[Jer 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#008)). היניע יד, to swing the
hand, embodying the thought, "Away with her, she has richly deserved her
fate."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 3](zep003)

</div>
