[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal23)  [Next](goal25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

### CHAPTER XX.

#### THE IMAGE AND THE LIKENESS.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> bringing before your minds this
wonderful ultimate of the purpose of God in the creation of the world
and of its inhabitants, man, the most that we can do is to call your
attention to certain laws and forces already visible and active among
men. This ultimate has had no physical standing in the world—it has
existed only in the creative-thought, and therefore no language has yet
been formed, capable of portraying its realities.

As we have briefly stated the methods by which man is to come into "The
Image of God" and "The Likeness of God," we shall now give a brief
synopsis of the manner in which "The Image and the Likeness" are to be
brought into form.

Through the *regeneration*, every member of that Great Body of the first
ripe fruit of the earth, the 144,000, becomes exceedingly sensitive. In
other words, all the life-currents and mind-powers become intensified,
and the sense nature becomes so acute, that each member is conscious of
every thought, feeling and emotion of every other member. Even now we
find that there are men and

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

women who through evolutionary processes alone, have become so refined
and intensified that they are able to know and to read the thoughts of
others. Within the last few years many mind-readers have been before the
public and some of them have demonstrated to the satisfaction of
investigators that they can read the thoughts of persons.

When men and women have lived the high and holy life taught by the
Christ, which includes regeneration (for he lived a celibate life),
conserving all the life generated by the body, then every function of
their bodies will be increased and intensified, so that we may say that
each individual will become twelve times greater in mind-power, and all
the powers of the body, than he was before he began to live the
regenerate life. They not only become stronger and wiser, but they
become exceedingly sensitive and intense in their consciousness, and as
they are governed by the spirit of love from God, they see in each other
the child of God, and so they love each other as they love God, and as
they love themselves. The character of this oneness is best explained by
illustration, for example:

Imagine twelve such persons together in one room. Each one of the twelve
has so far developed, and is so perfectly in sympathy with the others
that he feels every feeling and knows every thought of the others. When
these twelve are first brought together, the reciprocal action of the

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

thoughts and feelings produces a condition very much like that produced
when a number of persons are talking at once—a state of confusion. But
let one begin to speak and get the interest and attention of the others
so as to focalize the thought, and the minds of the whole body would
think together as one.

Again, imagine this body of twelve to be a regenerate body, whose whole
desire is to be centered in God, and whose members have been begotten
from above. Because God's spirit is the life of the body, the body must
be one as God is one. Since each person necessarily expresses a function
of some part of the Grand Man—as Aries, the head, Taurus, the neck, *et
cetera*—and each seeks to express only the mind of God, he makes no
effort to be that which he is not, but supplies his own particular mind
quality to the whole body. And whatever particular function is called
into action, the body unites in giving power to that function to express
itself. Its thought would be the aggregate thought of all the members,
in precisely the same way as when one attempts to lift a heavy weight
with the right hand, the will and every function of the physical body
are called upon to supply their quota of energy for its accomplishment.

Who has not realized while talking to a number of persons that there
were certain persons in the audience that gave special
[inspiration](errata.htm#16), that supplied

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

a mind-power so marked that the speaker could not but realize it? So it
would be in the bringing together of twelve persons in perfect harmony
with the mind, the spirit, of the Father. God's spirit being the life of
all, they would run together as so many drops of water, yet every
individual would maintain his own consciousness, but his consciousness
would be enlarged and his realization would be increased to comprehend
the consciousness and realization of the whole body. Each member's
capacity and brain-power would be twelve times as strong and capable in
every department.

As man lives in his memories and realizes in his consciousness, his
realizations constitute his limitations. But when he takes into his
consciousness the consciousness of eleven others, his realizations have
been augmented eleven-fold. This increase of consciousness on the part
of one does not detract from the others but, on the contrary, they each
extend their sphere of consciousness in the same ratio.

In the organizing of the Body of the Christ, the bringing into
existence, <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, as king and
ruler of this planet, each individual in his preparation must have
consecrated his life to God, promised absolute obedience to and
acquiescence in the knowledge and wisdom derived from the Spirit. He
must have undergone a long course of training, wherein the newly
begotten child of God

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

grows to manhood and takes absolute possession of the physical body and
becomes fully conscious of the mind of the Father, of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, the Great Body of perfected
souls that created the world. Being thus conscious of the mind of the
Father, when the Father wills to build the house (see first chapter of
Haggai) his Spirit will move within each individual and cause him to be
conscious that it is the will of the Father and therefore it is the will
of each to come out from the world, to gather together into one place,
"the place prepared of God," where the whole body will be led and
instructed by the Spirit that each may be his natural, spiritual self.
Every individual will be perfectly free to express his own higher,
spiritual nature, and then, as the interests of all are as one—that is,
the expression of the mind and will of the Father—the whole Body of
144,000 souls (or 288,000 persons) will be as one individual, and the
sphere of each individual will be so enlarged as to embrace the whole
Body. As the Spirit said through the apostle, "For as the body is one,
and hath many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are
one body; so also is Christ."

We shall now consider 144,000 regenerate persons built into one Body,
through the expansion of a sphere of consciousness to include the
entirety of the Body:

Let 1 represent a person's normal powers; 12 represent a person's powers
after living the regenerate

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

life; 2 × 144,000 = 288,000, or the entire Body (men and women); then
the powers of the entire Body will be represented by 288,000 × 12 =
3,456,000, or the powers of the Body will be represented by 3,456,000
times the powers of a normal individual. Can you imagine the power of
such a Body?—a Body in which when one member is called into action, the
whole Body contributes all its powers to the execution of that action,
in the same manner that our own body functions.

In this Great Body, as we have seen, whatever the Body wills, or rather
whatever the Spirit of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, who has
become the life of the Body, wills, each member of the Body wills, and
whatever the will determines upon and centers the activities of the Body
in, the powers of the whole Body, so far as necessary, help to
accomplish.

You who know something about the psychic power of a person to control an
audience, can have some idea of the power of this Body to control the
world. Thus it is made plain that God's methods are purely natural. When
the angel showed John in the Revelation that these are to be kings and
priests unto God and to reign on the earth, we are not to understand
that they are to attain to that calling by some supernatural leap
through the direct interposition of God.

When God said, "Let us make man in our image and like us, and let them
have dominion," he set in motion laws, which in their ultimate would
bring

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

the condition into existence that we have been trying to present to your
mind—a Body of men and women that has become the temple of the living
God, the God of the universe. Through the normal working of the mind of
that Body (normal because in unity with its Creator) it necessarily
takes control, exercises dominion over the entire mind-currents, yea,
and over all the laws and creative methods active in the planet earth.

In the organization of this Body and its unity with the Spirit of God we
have a picture of the exact "Image and Likeness," for this "Image and
Likeness" is the ultimation of the divine purpose, purposed in the Mind
that never fails.

The difference between this Body and that of the Elohim is in degree and
not in form or function, or methods of organizing. Consequently if you
have difficulty to conceive how Elohim the God and Creator of the world
can be a Great Body of men, separate individually and yet one, we think
what has been said concerning the gathering, preparing and organizing of
this Body of 144,000, makes it plain. We think it has been made plain
that when Elohim said, "Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness," that this was the ultimate of the race, and that this
gathering and organizing of the Body are the fulfilment of that
declaration.

In order to help the mind to comprehend so great a thought, let us
imagine a man that is both male

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

and female in his own person, builded of molecules which are individual
men and women, a Grand Man possessing far more than 288,000 times the
power of any individual that we have heretofore known. Every function
and organ of this man is filled with the Spirit of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the God of the universe, imbued with
his mind and with his will. Standing upon the highest plane of planetary
unfoldment, he overlooks his "dominion," the planet earth, with its
teeming millions who have developed to a point where they have outgrown
their civilization and all their facilities and are trembling upon the
brink of a precipice down which they must inevitably fall, to the
condition of six thousand years ago, unless there is a savior who is
able and willing to create for them a new order of existence.

The organism that we have been picturing, will have abundant capacity to
provide for this dying race the new conditions which are an absolute
necessity to its perpetuity. From the thought that we have presented, it
is evident that, judging by the known capacity of men, we have in such a
Body an aggregate mind and will, amply sufficient to lift civilization
to a plane of action where it could go on [developing](errata.htm#17).
But how much more should we expect of such a Body when filled with the
light of the Infinite Mind!

Many of the leading physiologists of this the Twentieth Century are
saying that the strenuous

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

life developed in this cycle has produced and intensified qualities
within man that have made him too sensitive and refined for the ordinary
duties of life, and that, consequently, diseased conditions are rapidly
gaining ground in organs too delicate for the strain put upon them. They
conclude, therefore, that the race has reached the climax of its
unfoldment and must fall back to unknown depths if not to annihilation.
But there comes the voice of God through the prophet ringing down the
ages: "And saviors shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of
Esau; and the kingdom shall be <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>'S."

The object of this volume is to bring to you, mature souls of our age,
the knowledge of the purpose of God concerning each individual and to
suggest methods by which not only you yourselves may be saved, but
methods by which you may become members of that Body which is to be the
Savior of the world, the anointed Lord of all the earth. The way is so
plain that, as the prophet Isaiah said, "wayfaring men, yea fools, shall
not err therein."

It is for you, as individuals, to consecrate your lives to God, and to
desire above all things to know the truth that you may live in harmony
with it. If you do this, honestly and sincerely, then will God send into
you "the Spirit of Truth" that will lead you into all truth.
Consequently, when you read this work you will be caused to perceive the

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

truths that it contains, which will put your mind in harmony with your
consecration, so that you will no longer resist the leadings of the
Spirit. Then will the angel of God take charge of your life and help you
in every time of need, and lead you into the unity of the Body of the
Christ, the Savior of the world, brought to light in these pages. To
that end we consecrate these thoughts and pray that the Spirit of the
Highest may attend them and illuminate your intelligence to receive
them.

THE MANIFESTATION OF THE BODY

While the gathering of the Body, according to the Revelation, will be
the work of a short time, yet we are told that the perfecting of this
body, the perfecting of its dominion over the earth, will take a
thousand years.

It is hardly reasonable to suppose that there is any one now living,
even if placed under the most favorable conditions, who could be
perfected in the likeness of God, <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>
Elohim, in a short period; for all that belongs to attainment, is not
only a subjugation and conquest of the body, but it is also a growth of
the soul and a growth and a development of the body into perfect harmony
with Spirit.

There is, however, a most potent factor that will work in this Body, a
factor yet unknown to the race, which is this:

Every member of the Body, before he can become really one with the Body,
must have not only

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

overcome generation, but he must have turned the currents of generation
toward the brain and polarized the mind <span
class="smallcaps">fixedly</span> upon the Spirit.

Man in polarizing the mind on the Spirit at once finds himself the focal
point of the planet and of its subtile mind-currents and electric
forces. In generation he is the head of the planet, leading creation,
but when he has taken control of that creative-power in himself and has
brought it under the absolute control of the mind, he begins to possess
dominion over the earth. The two forces active in creation, the positive
and the negative forces, represented and focalized in the man and the
woman, produce in them, because of the unity of the two in "the
regeneration," a condition almost identical with that seen in the
electric arc lamp; and after they have come into order it will not be
long before nature's energies will cause their bodies to become luminous
and bright as the body of an angel, "shining as the sun." <span
id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16)

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

This condition of luminosity could not obtain all at once; if it did, it
would burn up and destroy the physical body. It will require years for
the body to change from what we now know as material substance into the
spiritual substance adapted to the fires of the Divine Life. No wonder
that God by the prophet asked, "Who among us shall dwell with the
devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?" The
condition into which this body enters is a condition that transforms all
that belongs to manhood and womanhood into the likeness of God.

We read—and it is true—that "God is a consuming fire," and that "God is
love." We must bear in mind that it is not the gross fire that we know
as fire, nor the gross passion that the world calls love, but it is a
fire like that which Moses saw in the burning bush which did not consume
the bush. It is a fire that transmutes, consuming nothing but the
grosser elements, transmuting them into the finer elements and to that
more like itself.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

At the present time we are so far from being like God that if God should
speak to us in words, those words would consume us as a living fire.
Therefore those composing this Body must abide for centuries in that
living fire before they are wholly transformed into spiritual substance.
They will not die, but as it was said of the Christ, so it may be said
concerning them, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in Hades \[the grave\],
neither wilt thou give thy Holy One to see corruption," for they will
have overcome death, as did the Christ.

In place of the body's seeing corruption, the same law that now
perpetuates it, will be accelerated. That is, we take nourishment to
replace the tissue that is being burned up by thought and action. Thus
we are continually eliminating the old and taking on new bodily
substance. As this bodily substance taken on is qualitated by the mind
active at the time, so the members of this Grand Body, as they burn out
and eliminate the old, will take on more and more spiritualized
substance. The time will finally come in this process when they will
become as invisible to those upon our present plane, as spirit is now
invisible to man. The change with this body will be so gradual, however,
that there will be no death. The process will be similar to that active
in our present physical existence, by which we are constantly
eliminating the old and taking on new flesh.

It is necessary that this change should be gradual,

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

for the members of this Body are to be, as declared by the angel to
John, "kings and priests unto God and reign on the earth;" that is,
while they will execute kingly dominion, it will not be by force, not by
arbitrary word of command, but by the spirit of divine love, for "God is
love." That love will cause humanity to love to obey, to desire to obey,
to desire to live in harmony with the laws of God manifested through
this Body. They will be priests unto God, because they will be
instructors and teachers to the world. If this change were too sudden,
this Body would soon be placed so far beyond the people who are to carry
forward the work of Generation that they would no longer be able to
touch the mentality of the people. On the contrary, this process of
refining being gradual, this Body will be able to lead the world of
humanity up with them. This was revealed to John on Patmos, as seen in
Revelation, for, after the 144,000 were sealed, John saw an innumerable
company of every nation, tribe and people who came up to the same
general relation with God as the 144,000.

The world now under the most potent conditions of spiritual and mental
power, could not be redeemed and brought up to this physical and
spiritual plane in less than a thousand years, and perhaps not all of
them in that time, for we read in Revelation that after the thousand
years have

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

expired, Satan, the adversary, will be loosed for a little season.

This Body being, as we have said, the focal point of the planet, it will
be able as was the Christ to command the unclean spirits and to control
them absolutely, and in order that the world may be led up to this high
plane, the dark influences that now hinder the progress of the race must
be bound so that their power over the people will cease. After the race
has been redeemed, after the reign of a thousand years of this Body upon
the earth, the adverse forces must be again let loose, for there will be
those who are unfit for this new order of life, and they must be given
the choice between serving the good or the evil; for we read:

"And when the thousand years are finished, Satan shall be loosed out of
his prison, and shall come forth to deceive the nations which are in the
four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to the
war: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they went up over
the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about,
and the beloved city: and fire came down out of heaven and devoured
them."

This means that they must place themselves in a position to be destroyed
before divine justice can destroy them. Every man must become his own
judge, and "with what judgment he judges he shall be judged, and with
what measure he metes,

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

it shall be measured to him again." This is divine law.

In conclusion we wish to call the attention of our readers to the
imagery presented in the twenty-first chapter of Revelation, wherein
John sees the new city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God. We read that "the city lieth four-square, and the length
thereof is as great as the breadth: . . . the length and the breadth and
the height thereof are equal." But as it would take a volume to convey
the thought herein embodied, let it suffice to say that when this takes
place it will be because the Body has become so highly developed and
spiritualized that the Elohim, the matured souls of all the ages, will
dwell with men, as the angel said to John in Revelation xxi. 3-5:

"And I heard a great voice out of the throne saying, Behold the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall dwell with them, and they
shall be his peoples, and God himself shall be with them, and be their
God: and he shall wipe away every tear from their eyes; and death shall
be no more; neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain, any
more: the first things are passed away. And he that sitteth on the
throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he saith, Write: for
these words are faithful and true."

Again we read in verses 22 and 23 of this chapter:

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

"And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God the Almighty, and the
Lamb, are the temple thereof. And the city hath no need of the sun,
neither of the moon, to shine upon it: for the glory of God did lighten
it, and the lamp thereof is the Lamb."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[259:\*](goal24.htm#fr_16) The mere suggestion
of the final unity of man and woman opens the door to temptation and
deception. When a man who is trying to live the regenerate life, to
conquer the sex passions, comes into the presence of a good woman, it
seems to stimulate and to strengthen all his powers. He feels assured
that she would be a great help to him in the regenerate life, in
obtaining these grand ultimates. But we speak from the experience of
thousands during the last ten years of our work, when we say that in
every case they find themselves disappointed; they have met the god of
generation, face to face, and are enslaved by him, or the two are forced
to separate under great difficulty and sorrow. When one realizes the
great truth that there are two factors in the world, *creation* and
*re-creation*, *generation* and *regeneration*, and that generation is
the <span id="page_260">p. 260</span> one factor now dominating the
whole world, he may perhaps understand that no man in union with woman
can meet and conquer it. He must first absolutely conquer it within
himself in all its powers. For in the regeneration man and woman, in
their unity, must have absolute control of the god of creation—over
every creative-power in the world; and not only so, but they must be so
strong that they can even take of the life, the fires of the Spirit and
control them absolutely, which is an achievement as many times greater
than anything that we have ever known as the day is brighter than the
night. Because of this the Lord by the prophet Isaiah said, "Who among
us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Personal Application](goal25)
