[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal25)  [Next](goal27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

# EXIT FROM THE OLD TO THE NEW

### CHAPTER XXI.

#### PART I.

<span class="smallcaps">Our</span> Lord Jesus said, "Narrow is the gate,
and straitened the way, that leadeth unto life, and few be they that
find it." No doubt since the time of Christ, these words have brought a
shock to many a devout soul; but we are inclined to believe that the
words, "few be they that find it," were intended more especially to
apply to the age of generation and death intervening between the time of
Christ and the present, for, as has been herein stated, it is the
attainment through this "narrow way" that was the ultimate purpose in
the mind of the Creator in creating man. This purpose is the end to
which *all* men must attain some time, but at this time, at the end of
this age, there will be comparatively few that will attain.

We repeat here what has been said before, that all who have the *will*
to attain, may attain, for

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

the fact that they have the will to live the life requisite to attain,
is an absolute proof that they have the ability within themselves.

Again, it was said by the apostle, "Other foundation can no man lay than
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ;" for not only has he given
the world the quality that is planted in the earth-life of man, the
substance of Divinity, but his teachings have been left on record,
which, if followed faithfully, will lead man to the final
goal—*immortality*. But there are some things about the history of the
church in the past that repel many intelligent, highly developed people
of our day from seeking what used to be called "religion," or
"conversion." This repulsion is mainly due to a peculiar emotionalism
that has followed the church.

This emotional devotion has had its use, not that the Elohim are
influenced by that emotional zeal, for it is the office and desire of
God and his angels to lead his people in the way of true intelligence.
But emotional devotion has served the purpose of breaking down and
suppressing the animal sense desires, and has caused the inner
consciousness to centralize on the idea of God. This has enabled God's
people in the church to inspire, to draw in, so to speak, from the
Universal Soul a new and higher quality of life, and it has produced
sufficient effect upon many to cause them to continue striving to live a
better life—striving to be the

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

expression of that higher life that has been drawn into the organism.

But now that we have come to know the truth—for the Lord Christ said,
"And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free"—we have
endeavored to set forth the great truths of the Gospel of Christ and if
these facts are fully grasped by the intelligence they will have an
important influence on the soul-consciousness, because they are truth.

While heretofore suggestions have been given that cover the subject of
this chapter and those following, yet, as they are associated with
thoughts of greater or less magnitude, new to the majority of thinkers,
they may have been overlooked.

If we were going to ascend a ladder we should place one foot upon the
first rung and then the other foot upon the next rung, and so on; we
could not begin at the middle, try as we would. So in all that we do, we
must begin at the beginning and work up gradually.

There are many in the world who began at the beginning and they began
well, but through the deceitfulness of the world, through lack of
knowledge on the part of the teachers, through many doctrines being
thrown upon the world, they are lost, bewildered, and do not know what
to do in order to attain this divine ultimate.

First of all it is necessary that we be rational. The doctrines set
forth in this work are destined

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

to bring our minds out of the old mythical ideals—the dream-condition of
the past—and to place us upon a solid foundation of knowledge and
understanding, that we may obtain the power designed for us in the
beginning.

In the past, prayer has been a vague ideal. Men have prayed. Prayed to
whom? to what? They have been, as Jesus said, like the Gentiles who
"think that they shall be heard for their much speaking." Ministers
stand in the pulpit and pray for everything; but if they really believed
that one-half of what they asked for would be granted them, they would
be frightened. When the Lord Jesus said, "Ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find," he referred to something just as
practical, as direct and positive, as if you were going out into the
business world to transact affairs of the material life. You could not
be induced to ask a favor of any one in the material interests of this
world, unless you really felt the need of that favor, and then you would
think over the matter wisely and well and consider who would be most
likely to grant the favor, and when you asked you would have confidence,
reasonable belief, that you would receive that which you asked for; in
other words, you would have faith that you would receive that which you
asked for. And if you go to God, the Cause and Source of all things, in
the same way, you will find that the word of

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

the Lord Christ is a great truth: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek,
and ye shall find."

In this work two phases of the God manifestation have been brought to
your mind: (*1*) *Yahveh, the universal and all-pervading Mind and Will
of the universae*, and (*2*) *the manifestation of Yahveh in Elohim*. We
have to do directly with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> the
Universal Mind, the Fountain of Life, from which we were organized, the
Fountain of Life from which all things come. In that Fountain of Life is
everything that is. What did the apostle mean when he said:

"But the righteousness which is of faith saith thus, Say not in thy
heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down:)
or, Who shall descend into the abyss? (that is, to bring Christ up from
the dead.) But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and
in thy heart: that is the word of faith which we preach." (Rom. x. 6-8.)

There are many at the present time who are looking for that same Jesus
to come in the clouds of heaven with power and great material glory;
but, we are told, that Christ will come as a thief in the night. How can
we harmonize these two passages of Scripture?—In this way: We see from
the foregoing quotation, the Christ "is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in
thy heart;" if you have faith in God and in that divine sonship that we
have herein set forth, you will be a partaker of

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

that passover lamb that was all eaten, that paschal lamb that enters
into and finds expression in the inner life of the partaker, and causes
you to become a member of the Body of the Christ. When the Body is
organized in harmony with the Divine Purpose, then this Body of the
Christ, referred to in the chapter "The Image and the Likeness," will be
manifest to the world with great power and glory.

Therefore cease to say in your heart, "Who shall ascend into heaven to
bring Christ down from above?" but remember it is the word of faith, not
blind, unreasoning faith, but a faith that is born of knowledge and of
experience by the indwelling Spirit. And how is this experience to be
obtained?—This is the all-important question.

Remember first that prayer is the sincere desire of the heart. Have you
a sincere and earnest desire to be like the Christ? He is the great Door
and Head of that Eternal Brotherhood on earth; who by his teachings and
by the light of truth that he left to the world has shown the path that
leads directly from ignorance, sickness, sorrow and death, and who was
manifested that he might bring life and immortality to light. If you
have this sincere desire you will reach out for that spirit which was
manifested in the Christ, desiring that that spirit be in you and that
it manifest through your life and character.

As to methods to be applied in order that that

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

divine sonship may be manifested in you, turn to that wonderful Sermon
on the Mount—the fifth, sixth and seventh chapters of the Gospel
according to Matthew—read it carefully; read it with an outreaching to
God, the Source of life, light and knowledge, that you may know, that
you may have the understanding that the Spirit intended you should have,
and not only the understanding, but the power to apply it in your life.
And as you desire that power, remember the Master said, "Believe that
you have it and you shall have it."

Therefore, as you read over that wonderful sermon, decide that you will
follow the teachings absolutely and believe—for you have reason for
believing—that you have the power from God to live the life therein
taught and to live it perfectly. At this point it will be necessary to
realize the importance of the suggestion to be rational, for unless you
take hold of these teachings of the Christ with a reasonable mind, you
will be inclined to go to extremes, to become irrational in your
application of the truth. For instance, the Lord said, "Be not therefore
anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or,
Wherewithal shall we be clothed? for your heavenly Father knoweth that
ye have need of all these things." The irrational one therefore says: I
will take no thought; I will be just like the birds; I will sit down and
do nothing and the Lord will feed me. The irrational side of this is
very apparent,

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

not only from the world's point of view, but from a spiritual standard.
How does God feed the birds? Do they not have to work for their living,
to hunt their food wherever they can find it? Sometimes it is difficult
for them to find sufficient, but they go right on faithfully doing their
best. So must you do your best, but do not be anxious, is the word of
the Lord.

This will be a suggestion to you of what we mean by being rational in
following the teachings of the Lord Christ. Remember this, God, the
everlasting Father, or Elohim and his angels, never do anything for us
that we can do for ourselves. Bear in mind that God's original purpose
was to make man in his Image and Likeness and to give man the ability to
do and to accomplish and to obtain that which is absolutely necessary to
him.

Therefore, in order that you may develop into his Likeness, it is
necessary that you should be left to use your own power and knowledge to
gain all that is necessary for your attainment and for the proper
support of your body.

As we said before, <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> is the
all-pervading Spirit in whom is everything and out of which came
everything, therefore everything that you need is in the ether around
you. Remember, when it was in order the Christ brought out of the
invisible sufficient bread and meat to feed 5000, and Elijah caused the
cruse of oil and the meal of the widow to replenish themselves during
the famine. This

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

was a demonstration of the fact that everything that is necessary for
you is around you and that you have only to take it by faith.

But this suggests something that has puzzled the world for ages—*faith*.
What is faith? You who are sitting and reading these words can lay this
book down, rise and walk across the floor. How do you do it? by what
power?—You do it by faith. If some one of your associates should say to
you: "You cannot lay down that book; you cannot rise from your chair,"
you would smile at the suggestions and lay down the book and rise and
walk. But if a mind possessing similar power to that of the Christ
should speak to your soul-consciousness and say: "You cannot lay your
book down," or, "You cannot rise from your chair," your faith in your
ability to move would be overpowered and under the influence you could
not move.

Then we give this definition: *Faith is belief without a doubt in the
inner consciousness*. You have the consciousness within yourself that
you can move the body, that you can do about as you please, and so you
can, but that faith that you can get up and walk around the room may be
counteracted and in the absence of faith you would be powerless.

Now we ask you to lay this book down and to think about this condition
that enables you to move your hand, and when you realize what the
influence is and discover the condition of mind that enables

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

you to move your body, you have found the key to the whole situation,
you have found the key to the words of the Christ when he said, "All
things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye have received
them, and ye shall have them." Everything that you can imagine is all
around you, and it is just as much a material substance as those things
with which you are familiar. Therefore faith means belief that you have
that which you desire, and as you read over the teachings of the Master
in his wonderful sermon, believe that you have the power to live up to
the requirements and refuse to allow doubts and fears to enter into your
mind. Know that God is and that in him is all power. You can believe but
you can do it, however, only by refusing to disbelieve. With this
thought carefully considered and worked out for yourself—for no man can
make you know how to move your hand—you will discover the secret of
faith.

That faith is a mental effort you may prove for yourself, for instance,
by taking a weight of ten, twenty or thirty pounds in your hand and
while holding it try to think quietly and deeply upon some difficult
subject. You will at once discover that in order to hold the weight you
have to keep your mind on it—the holding demands the thought.

We are here brought to consider faith and the powers embodied in the
workings of the mind. Remember the words, "Without faith is sin." We ask
you then to work out from the little suggestion

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

that we have given you, this great problem of faith, and then have faith
in God, and all things are yours.

But in the midst of all this you may ask the question: Are we left alone
to work this out for ourselves?—No, emphatically *no*. <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim through his angels is watching
over you with more than a mother's care, which God expressed in the
thought that he gave in the preparatory message before the delivery of
the ten commandments: "If ye will obey my voice indeed and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar <span
class="smallcaps">treasure</span> unto me above all people." Then hold
this thought: I am a special treasure, beloved of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim above all people, because I
desire above all things to know and to do the right.

If you have some special treasure, special because it is the treasure
above all other treasures, how carefully you guard it, how closely you
watch it. If you see anything that is coming to injure it or to detract
from it, how quickly you will rescue it from danger. So as soon as you
decide firmly and fully to seek God with all your heart, to go right on
day by day doing the things required in the teachings of the Christ, not
by idealizing them and dreaming about them, but by following his
teachings with the same rational, practical thought that you would
exercise in any business venture, then <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim through his angels will watch
over you and protect you from every harm and will

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

illuminate your mind that you may know how to do and what to do. The
Lord Christ had reference to this same rational following of his
teachings when he said:

"Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in
heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, did we not
prophesy by thy name, and by thy name cast out demons, and by thy name
do many mighty works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew
you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity." (Matt. vii. 21-23.)

The old idea of saying "I believe," and thinking that will save you is a
deception of the evil one, for if the Lord Jesus taught anything
emphatically it was, "If any man willeth to do his will, he shall know
of the teaching." Again, in his last message through his angel to John
he said, "He that overcometh shall inherit these things."

Therefore, in the rational teachings of the Christ we meet first faith
then works, and through the works of obedience you will obtain the
guidance of the Spirit, who will not come to you as one man comes to
another man and tell you what to do and what not to do, but the angel of
Elohim will come near to you and will cause his knowledge and
understanding to be reflected upon your consciousness, then will you
know as he knows and you will be left free to act as you please in
relation to it. Thus, after you have decided to do the best you

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

know, the angel of Elohim will cause you to know, then the
responsibility rests upon yourself.

As you go on doing the best you can, you will see before you many
obstacles that will appear insurmountable, but if you are determined to
live the life as far as it is possible to you, you will find that the
obstacles will gradually move out of your path as you press forward. You
may see an insurmountable wall before you, but do not stop, go as far as
you can, and when you have gone as far as you can, lo, there will be an
opening through solid rock, if need be, that you may pass through, and
you will soon be brought to the realization of that glorious fact that
you have friends, loving, faithful friends, so pure, so unselfish, that
you cannot for a moment doubt their fidelity, and you will realize that
these friends that love you more dearly than any earthly parent, possess
all power in heaven and in earth.

The knowledge of these facts will be given to you if you follow the
instructions of the Lord Christ wholly, fearlessly; because, "ye
received not the spirit of bondage again unto fear; but ye received the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father." Here you are brought
face to face with the beginning of overcoming, and the *first* step on
the road after your firm decision to follow the teachings of the Christ,
is to conquer fear.

We have said that the angels of Elohim will be sent to you to reflect
upon your consciousness the

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

knowledge that you need. This needs some explanation which we shall
give, so that when you have the experience you will not let it pass
unheeded and thus lose the instruction intended for you:

As we have said, the angels do not come to you as one man comes to
another, you are not conscious of the angel's presence at all, you are
conscious only that your mind is illuminated and for the time being you
feel such an exaltation, such a peace, joy and elevation of life and
character that you are confident that this condition will remain with
you always; and because of that feeling that it will continue, you are
liable to fail to impress upon your mental consciousness the thought
that was reflected upon you.

No doubt some of you who read these words—and we are prepared to say
that the following is true of all who have sought to do the will of the
Lord wholly—have had times when your mind suddenly became luminous and
bright and you would be so happy and exalted that you would feel as if
that condition must continue always; but in a little while it was gone
and you were let down to where you were before. Why is this?

It was a time that the angel of the Elohim saw that it was necessary to
impress your mind with that which would encourage, strengthen and
establish you in faith, or to impress your mind with certain things that
you should do or that you

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

should not do, and when the impression was made, the angel withdrew from
you and you were again conscious of your own self.

Do not then be anxious and imagine that you did that which you should
not have done, and therefore you lost your exalted feeling; but give
your attention to the recalling and to the impressing upon your
consciousness all that the angel impressed upon it in the moment of
exaltation, that you may hold that knowledge and profit by it; for to
that end, the angel of the Lord was sent to you. Know this, that though
you seem to be let down into the old darkness, the old obscurity, you
are not left alone, yet you are alone—a paradox—because if the angel of
the Lord overcame for you the angel would be the overcomer and would
attain the results and not you, for the promise is, "He that overcometh
shall inherit these things."

Therefore, it is you that is to be the overcomer and it is for you to go
to work with a quiet, reasonable, logical attitude of mind to examine
self, to analyze your mentality and to study how you may do and
accomplish; and when in the course of your efforts to do the right and
to know the truth, you reach a point where it is absolutely essential
for you to know, that knowledge will be reflected upon your mind. It
will not always produce exaltation, joy and elevation, but sometimes the
same angelic mind will reflect upon your consciousness the realization
of failure, of error.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

At this point it will be necessary to avoid self-condemnation, for
self-condemnation is evil, but when you are caused to see the error,
then think over the error carefully and make your decision firmly that
that error shall not occur again. Then dismiss it from your mind and
continue to do the best you know; for here is an open door for the
adversary to come in to torment you and cause you to worry and to feel
that you have failed and that there is no use in your trying to
overcome, *et cetera*. But know that this is the adversary, the dark
influences that you are beginning to meet—the temptations of the devil,
as the church expresses it, and as Christ said through his angel (Rev.
xii. 10) it is "the accuser of our brethren . . . . that accuseth them
before our God day and night." Yes, there is an old accuser that you
have to overcome; he will come to you and accuse you of this, that and
the other, when in reality you have done no wrong. How can you overcome
this accuser? If you claim righteousness when you are not righteous,
then you come under condemnation. If you justify yourself in doing
wrong, then you come under condemnation. How then can you overcome this
most deceptive adversary?—Thus:

Know that the Lord's angel never accuses you. He may reflect upon your
consciousness the fact of your error; but when you have weighed and
balanced the matter carefully and know wherein you

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

made the error, then decide firmly that you will never allow it to occur
again and dismiss the matter from your mind.

If the condemnation continues to recur to you, repel it, refuse to be
condemned and open your love toward God and reach out for the
consciousness of your acceptance, and if you repel the accuser, you will
obtain the consciousness of your acceptance.

You here meet a law in God's great nature that is hard to understand. If
you condemn yourself you stand condemned before God. Therefore, we urge
upon you the necessity of settling the matter, according to the
directions of Christ:

"If therefore thou art offering thy gift at the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave there thy
gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift."

This is to say, after you have become reconciled, after you have made
reparation for wrong that you have done, then come and offer your gift,
your self-sacrifice to the Lord, and you will be accepted. You have
reconciled the matter of error when you have properly weighed and
balanced the matter and have reached a clear understanding and have made
a firm decision not to allow such error to occur again. Then you are
free to go forward in your attainment of a new and higher consciousness
of the Divine Life.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

When you have thoroughly enlisted in the work, you will find that there
is a consciousness within you which the church calls "conscience," which
will justify or condemn you in all that you do. But as we have
heretofore set forth, this conscience justifies you if you live up to
what you believe to be right, and it will condemn you if you do that
which you believe to be wrong, whether or not it be right or wrong in
reality. Therefore, it is necessary that you should know the truth, that
the truth may make you free from false beliefs.

We have here made only a suggestion for you to think about, for the
field is too large to write fully on the subject, but you who would
attain oneness with the Body of the Christ must think often on the
subject and must desire to know the truth. The more thoroughly the mind
can be illuminated, and the greater the mental activity that can be
attained, the more clearly will you be able to discern the truth.

Here again the church has been deceived. The apostle said, "The mind of
the flesh is death; but the mind of the spirit is life and peace:
because the mind of the flesh is enmity against God." The mind of the
flesh is the intellect whose office is to think of the necessities of
the body. Is that evil?—Not unless you worry about it. If you become
anxious and worried about providing for the body, then such worrying is
evil; or if your whole

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

time is occupied in providing for the body, it is evil. Remember, Christ
said, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you."

You will not go far in the way that we have marked out, before you will
realize that you have a double consciousness, that your mind may be busy
with the things of the world, with the duties of life, and the soul at
the same time will be centered upon God, and even be busy in the world
of spirit, so that when you have finished the material duties, you find
that there is active within you a loving unity with Divinity, and that
the soul had been carrying on the thought of the Spirit.

But here again you may be deceived. It is the office of the soul, or
inner consciousness, to bring to your external consciousness or
reasoning mind, the great truths, a few of which we have endeavored in
this work to bring to your understanding. Your external consciousness is
manifest by virtue of your reasoning brain. When the reasoning brain has
been illuminated by the soul and you are able to think, to reason and to
understand the truth, then you feel the redeeming power of that truth in
the body as well as in the soul; this is what is meant by being
spiritually minded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. Part II](goal27)
