[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

### CHAPTER XXVI.

#### EXIT FROM THE OLD TO THE NEW.

#### PART VI.

#### PRAYER.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> bringing the thought of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the God of the universe, the Formless
Former of all things, and his manifestation in Elohim, to the mind of
the public, it is apt to cause confusion in regard to man's relation to
God in his different attributes. In the past, men made an image of God
the Father, as the image of a man, and also an image of God the Son, as
the image of the Christ, <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) and they
bowed down and worshiped them, notwithstanding the emphatic utterance in
the Commandments, "Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, nor the
likeness of any form that is in the heaven

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under
the earth," and the emphatic warning given by Moses before his death
(Deut. N. 12-20).

When the mind has been drawn away from this error, imaging God, it is
liable to feel lost for a time, therefore we want to bring to your mind
the relation that we bear to <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the
God of the universe, and to his embodied form in <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim.

OUR RELATION TO <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> ELOHIM

is that of a man to an elder brother. You remember that even Christ
called us brethren (See Heb. ii. 11; Ps. xxii. 22); and the great and
mighty angel that manifested to John on Patmos rebuked John for falling
down to worship him, saying: "See thou do it not: I am a fellow-servant
with thee and with thy brethren the prophets." Jesus not only called his
disciples "brethren," but he justified them in calling him "Lord and
Master," for he said, "So am I."

<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) the Creator of the world, is our Lord and
Master, even as was the Lord Christ, because he was a manifestation of
Eloah, one of the great Body of Elohim.

When you realize that you have been accepted as one of the brethren of
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, a member of that Eternal
Brotherhood of all the ages

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

and of systems of worlds, you should realize in yourself the same
feeling, only with greater reverence, that you had when you became a
member of some fraternity. When a man becomes a member of the Masonic
Order, he feels that he is allied to that order and he is likely to say:
"*We* are doing so and so," or, "*We* have done thus and so." He feels
his alliance, a oneness with that order, and in his alliance and
conscious oneness he has more confidence in the members of that order
than in any one else. He feels that in their compact it is not only a
duty, but a pleasure to help each other.

You, Reader, by thinking over your own experience can bring this thought
more clearly to your mind than we can present it. You need to think only
of your experiences; if you are a member of some order think of the
change of feelings that took place when you became a member, and observe
also those that are active members of some of these orders, and you will
be made to realize what that spirit of brotherly friendship means. This
brotherly friendship should be realized in a greater measure when you
have entered into covenant with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>
Elohim and have been consciously accepted as a member. This spirit of
brotherly friendship should be cultivated and should be kept in mind.
When cultivating it do not forget that while they are your Brethren,
they are your elder Brothers, and that you are but a child.

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They are Masters,
and your teachers, therefore they should be held in greatest reverence.
You should try to realize also that the greatness, the grandeur, the
God-power and all the wonderful attributes that you have heretofore
attributed to God, are embodied in this wondrous Brotherhood and
expressed through them.

When you realize these facts in all their greatness the things of the
world will sink into insignificance; all relationships of an earthly
existence will appear of very little importance. The petty evils that
have harassed you in the past will seem so ridiculous that you will be
lifted above them all and placed upon a plane of consciousness, so
superior to anything that you have ever known, that you will then
realize what the Lord meant when he said, "Be ye therefore perfect even
as your Father in heaven is perfect;" then you will know what it means
to ask and to receive; for you will not ask of your Brethren, <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, anything that you can do for
yourself. If you should feel the need of wisdom, of power, of knowledge,
or of any material thing, then you can go to the Father, <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, who is truly your Father as well
as your Brethren, and make known your wants and they will be granted
immediately.

Suppose you have a message for the enlightenment or salvation of a
person or a people, wisdom will cause you to realize that you cannot
grasp the innermost needs of that people perfectly, neither

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

is the human mind capable of correctly forming the thought so as to meet
the requirements of the occasion, therefore it is well, under such
circumstances, to call on <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim
as on a loving, faithful brother, for wisdom, knowledge and power, that
you may lead the person, or people to a knowledge of the truth; then go
forward fearlessly; and you will always find that the angel of the Lord
will be present with you, and that wisdom, knowledge and power, so far
transcending your own, will be manifested through you, that your
admiration, your deepest gratitude and affection will be called forth.
Remember the words of the Psalmist, "He shall give his angels charge
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways."

The foregoing is a suggestion and only a suggestion, a truth so far as
it goes, for your mind to take hold of, to think about, and to desire
earnestly to know and to realize.

If we have succeeded in turning your face in the right direction, then
we can say with perfect confidence: Go forward knowing that the angel of
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> will ever be near you and an
Infinite Fountain of knowledge and wisdom will ever be accessible to
you.

The next important thought is

OUR RELATION TO <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>,

the Formless Former and Cause of all things, the Life animating all
life, the Substance originating all substance, "in whom we live and move
and

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

have our being." As we have said, in <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> is all that is, and as the Lord Christ
said, "All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye have
received them, and ye shall have them." In our prayer to <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> it is necessary to realize first that
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> is the Will of the universe, and
this being true there is no power of any name or nature, or form of
manifestation that is not the manifestation of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the Will that produced all things.

In considering the thought of prayer to <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the Omnipresent, the Source and
Fountain from which all things flow, there is much that each person must
learn from himself; there is only a little that can be put into words,
but that little is enough to guide the mind in the right direction; the
natural intuition and the spiritual leading, must fill in the deficiency
which words can not express.

When the great general truth of the existence and manifestation of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> (1) in the form of the perfected souls,
the Elohim, and (2) in the creation of all things, is understood, then
we can begin to ascend the ladder that was prepared for us by the Christ
and prophetic revelation—ascend until we reach the realm where all is
light, all is perfect knowledge, perfect at least so far as the
individual is capable of utilizing it in the sphere in which he lives.
When we speak of perfection in the line of knowledge, we rejoice to be
able to

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

say that there is no such thing as perfection in knowledge; that is,
there is no limit beyond which we cannot go, for in God's infinite
wisdom, progression is as infinite as <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the God of the universe. But we can
deal only with the mentality that we have, the consciousness that we
have and the Source of this consciousness.

We have seen in our consideration of inspiration that we can inspire
only that which we are able to form some conception of, or something
directly relative to it; for that of which we can form no idea is
impossible to us—even to pray for. But we can have and do have a
conception, an idea of Jesus, and when he has given us the proper
conception of the Father, as he calls him, the Elohim, then we can
inspire, draw in from <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the quality
that the Christ and the Elohim possess. It is because of this that Jesus
said, "And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, If ye shall ask anything of the Father, he will give it you in
my name."

The church has never understood this thought, because they have had but
a vague idea of the Christ, his mission, and who he really is, but now
that we have brought to your attention the fact that he was the
incarnation of one of the Elohim, asking in his name has an expansive
meaning.

What is his name?—The angel said, "Thou shalt call his name Jesus; for
it is he that shall save his people from their sins." Then, in asking
any-

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

thing in his name, we must have a correct idea. of what it is to be
saved from sin, and that idea cannot be obtained without the conception
which we have heretofore brought to light, namely, the purpose of God in
the creation of man—that we may be kings and priests unto God and reign
as such on the earth; or, in the language of the prayer that the Christ
taught, "Let thy \[the Father's\] kingdom come and thy will be done on
earth as it is done in heaven." This then is the expression of his name,
and it was the object of his coming into the world—to open the door that
we may attain the object for which we were created.

When the mind comes into harmony with that object, and the life is
dedicated to God—our hopes, desires, ambitions and all that we are, are
centered in that object—then we shall be caused to know <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, the God of the solar system.
When the time comes that we shall know the Elohim, we have reached "that
day" referred to by the Christ, "In that day ye shall ask me nothing."
Therefore it follows that when we pray, while directly we do not ask
Elohim, but we really are allying our consciousness to them while
reaching out to <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the God of the
universe, to inspire, gather in such qualities, powers and substance as
we really need to lift us upon a higher plane. But, as we have said, it
is impossible for us to gather to ourselves anything that we have no
conception of. Therefore it is the office and

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

pleasure of Elohim through his angels, to give us a conception, not only
in the mind, but also in the soul, of his great, grand and wonderful
existence as the God of our system.

Then as we pray, in order that we may gather to ourselves the qualities
that will lift us into his likeness, it becomes necessary that our mind
should hold clearly the conception of Elohim. It is necessary that we
should have the realization that we are accepted as members of that
Eternal Brotherhood of which we have said so much in former chapters,
and that we should ally ourselves to that Brotherhood with a vivid
realization of the fact of our membership to hold us in that direction.
This will ally us to the spiritual qualities that are in Elohim, and
through this alliance we may draw in the life-qualities that find
perfect expression in the Elohim.

Through that conscious alliance we are brought into touch with the
spiritual qualities of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>; and the
spiritual qualities within the soul will be enabled to lay hold of those
qualities that we stand in need of. This was the realization of the
apostle when he said, "The Spirit himself maketh intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered." When the Christ said, "how that
they ought to pray continually, and not to be weary" (Emphatic
Diaglott), he virtually said, desire always—and do not be weary—to
become like God, the Elohim, and in order that you may desire

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

effectively, it becomes necessary that you hold a vivid realization of
your oneness with that Eternal Brotherhood, <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20) a realization that you are no longer a
member of earth's inhabitants; your reciprocal relations having ceased
with earth's inhabitants, are transferred to those in the heavens. Then
when you pray, while you are conscious that you are reaching out into
the Fountain of Infinite Life, to <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>,
the God of the universe—in whom we live, and not only we, but all
things—yet your outreaching, bear in mind, must be immediately connected
in your consciousness with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim;
otherwise you may be inspiring qualities that are active within your
quiescent consciousness and not the qualities that are really desired to
make you like God. For if we are connected with <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, our sympathies are

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

there, and we have become one of that Body, one of its youngest, lowest
members, it is true, but still being members of that Body, we are
partakers of its life-currents, and all the mind-elements of that Body
become accessible to us.

As the object of our creation is that we become like Elohim—in that we
live from <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the same as the Elohim
live from <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>—and as Elohim is the
embodiment and expression of the highest qualities possible to exist in
this system, then by simply placing our mind upon <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, and desiring above all things
that which we need, we have access through the Body that we have become
united to, to the same qualities and to the same general Fountain. This
is what Jesus said but could not explain to the understanding of the
people of his day: "If ye ask anything in my name." The church in
praying often close with the words, "This we ask for Jesus’ sake." This
amounts to nothing; but what has amounted to something in the church
from the beginning to the present is, that as the Christian prays to
God, having in mind the Christ of Nazareth, he being the embodiment, the
manifestation in the flesh, of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>
Eloah, the Christian unites his consciousness to <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim.

Even now, you who have not reached the point where you can realize,
believe in from the depths of the soul, the existence, the godhood of
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, if you can love the Lord
Christ—and reach

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

out to him—for he is, he lives, and he is the only door—then through
your alliance to him you will come into direct touch with <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim and the spirit of the whole Body.
It is Christ's will and pleasure through his angels to lead you step by
step from knowledge to knowledge, until you are able to be introduced to
the Father.

Thus you see it is plain that in striving for the higher spiritual, you
draw from the fountains of pure spirit, only through the alliance of
your mind to the mind of Elohim. Let me repeat, if you have no
consciousness of the Elohim nor faith in them, if you have faith in
Jesus, who is Eloah, one of the Elohim, and let your prayer go out to
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> with your faith in Christ, the
door will be opened to you and your prayers will be answered, the
inspiration, or the thing desired, will be granted.

It was because of this relatedness that Jesus said, "All things
whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye have received them, and
ye shall have them." This was the announcement of a law with which we
are familiar on the lower planes of action, and, as Hermes Trismegistus
said, "True without error, certain and most true, that which is above is
as that which is below, and that which is below is as that which is
above."

Let us illustrate what we mean by being acquainted with this law on the
lower plane of action: We know that in order to develop a muscle we must
use it. How use it?—We must begin to act

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

as if we had muscular power. Therefore we have to believe that we have
it and go to work to use it, and the more we use it, the more vivid the
realization becomes that we have it, and the more fully will the muscle
develop and become firm and strong.

Again, so much is said about a trained mind. What does this mean? Let us
see. A young man may grow up to manhood without training—grow up like an
animal, simply following the impulses of his own nature. Finally the
impulse arises within him that he wants knowledge, he wants culture,
development. He begins to study and he pursues his studies diligently.
He does not know, but he believes that he can know, and he applies the
means for gaining knowledge, and as he studies, the brain organs fill
out and grow. We know from experience that it is a law that a man after
maturity may begin to study, use his brain and cause the size of his
head to increase considerably. These material things are accomplished
through prayer, the sincere desire of the heart. The poet James
Montgomery gives this beautiful definition of prayer:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Prayer is the soul's sincere desire,  
  Uttered or unexpressed;  
The motion of a hidden fire  
  That trembles in the breast.

Prayer is the burden of a sigh,  
  The falling of a tear,  
The upward glancing of an eye,  
  When none but God is near.

</div>

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

That prayer is neither more nor less than the sincere desire of the
heart, the interior, yearning, loving desire for something, is in
perfect keeping with the law that we have just brought to your mind.
Unless a person desires knowledge, he can not get it. If a child at
school has no desire to learn, he cannot learn. There may be a forced
external desire causing the child to memorize his lessons to prevent
being punished, but if he gain knowledge the desire must be there. And
this same law increases its potentiality, in its active efficiency as it
nears the Source of our being. When the sincere desire of the heart
unites the consciousness with Jesus the Christ, or to <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, and our earnest desire is that
we may have power to know the Father, and to be like him, such desire,
being in harmony with the trend of all creative law, becomes very
effective. And the more perfectly our consciousness is allied to <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, or to the Christ, the more
effective and active will be our desire to reach out to <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>.

This is the method by which you may apply the divine law that was
brought to light in the teachings of the Christ, and it was one of the
main objects of his mission to make it possible for man to apply this
law. We repeat, "He that overcometh shall inherit all things." Therefore
neither Elohim nor his angels will overcome for you, for if they

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

overcame for you, you would be neither the overcomer nor the inheritor.
It is their office to teach you how to become <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Eloah, the same as they are; that is, it
is their office to teach you how to inspire, draw in and incorporate and
embody in yourself the spirit of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>,
the God of the universe. By becoming the embodiment and expression of
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, you become <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Eloah.

How to begin this inspiring is an important matter. You have seen that
it is necessary to ally your consciousness either to the Lord Christ or
to <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, but you do this that
you may become one with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> as well as
one with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, in the same way
that <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim is one with <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>.

The word <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> means "I will be what I
will to be." This we have seen is the surface meaning. There is a deep,
hidden, underlying meaning in this name that no man in his present form
of existence can put into words.

We have, heretofore, called your attention to the scientific hypothesis
that the atom is composed of *electrons*, "rotating with inconceivable
velocity," whose distance is relatively as far apart as the planets of
our solar system; each atom representing, as it were, a minute solar
system. Again, every molecule is made up of atoms which, in turn, bear a
similar relationship to each other, thus there is a wheel within a
wheel, a system within a system.

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

A blacksmith may heat a piece of steel, hammer it, change its form, put
it in powerful rollers and roll it out as thin as he pleases, yet every
atom composing that piece of steel maintains its own sphere inviolable.
The power that holds these atoms separate from each other is the
*Will*—<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>. "He gave to the sea its
bounds, that the waters should not transgress his commandment." He has
given the atom its bounds that nothing can pass over it. We have reason
to believe that this same irresistible law holds worlds and suns and
systems of worlds in their places, and this law is enforced by virtue of
that Infinite Will that fills all things. <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> said, speaking through the prophet, "I
will work, and who shall reverse it?" (Is. xliii. 13.) Here is a thought
that you need, and you need to hold and to keep it ever in mind. First,
that it is the *will*, the purpose of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> that you become a mind-center for his
great spiritual nature to fill and to express himself through.

Will can resist the will of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>?

No one but yourself. Because of God's purpose to make man in his image
and like himself, he has put it within man's power to resist His will
within certain limits, and to suffer the consequences of that
resistance, thus making man a free, responsible being. But if you have
covenanted with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, then it is your
desire that his will be your will. You have seen that his part of the
covenant is the pledging of his name to be your power.

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">Have you taken that name</span>? Then you need to know
how to inspire, draw in and thus gather power from that Infinite Source,
for bear in mind that if your mind is united to the Will, <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, you may become as resistless as was the
Christ when he said, "All authority hath been given unto me in heaven
and on earth."

Remember that it is the office and the function of the Spirit of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> to serve you, to be absolute servant to
those who will do his will. Then if you fail to realize the power of
that name through faith in it, so that you find yourself weak and
incapable of being that which you will to be, or if you find that the
adverse forces within yourself and outside of yourself are so strong
that you can think of nothing else, so strong that they seem to crush
out your consciousness, then begin to breathe
[rhythmically](errata.htm#20) that wondrous name <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>. With every breath express that name,
and as you express it, strive to penetrate deeper and deeper into the
realization of its power; of its irresistible will power; of its power
to lift you into the consciousness of his own great nature; of its power
to make you irresistible in all that you wish to accomplish, of its
power to crush out, beat back and drive away every adverse condition. As
you thus breathe and repeat that name, let the soul open in loving unity
with Elohim to <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the Fountain from
which they, and you, and all things, live. The more fully your love goes

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

out to <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the more fully the
Fountain of that Infinite power will flow into you and fill you and make
you as much stronger, as much more potential than your adversary, as you
can possibly imagine. This, remember, is the source of your power and
this power you will need. For you who after reading this work consecrate
your life to God, and start out in the effort to become <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Eloah, will find that you meet
adversaries both in and out of the body.

There is an occult society that is well organized and numbers ten of
thousands, if not millions of members, scattered throughout the world,
and unless they can bring you into their organization and cause you to
work in harmony with their selfish purposes, they will strive to thwart
your every effort. They have the power, unknown to you, to enter your
room in the astral, to see what you are doing. They have power to
focalize a well-drilled and cultured will upon you to crush your
consciousness out of existence. They have power also to throw around you
antagonistic circumstances, to bring adverse conditions in almost every
conceivable way. If you are in union with others to bring these truths
to the world, they will raise up adversaries, as if out of the
invisible, and weak and unsuspecting persons will be made most subtile
and bitter antagonists. Much more might be said on this subject but
perhaps this is enough. One thing is certain, God has not left us
without

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

power to do and to accomplish the right, but he has allowed the
existence here on this planet of devils in human form who possess great
power and peculiar knowledge, knowledge and power that the majority of
our learned men believe impossible to exist among men. (See Rev. xvi.
13, 14.)

It is because of these powers and the development of the animal will in
the members of that organization, that it becomes necessary to give you
this one great secret of Divine Power. Bear in mind that your hope is in
God, in the power of that Infinite Name—His Will. It is now time that
there were a people organized and prepared to go forth "conquering and
to conquer," able to conquer every adversary. In order that you may be
able to overcome and to conquer all adversaries, we have given you the
foregoing thought. Permit us here, in order to prevent any mistakes, to
put the main thought, the means by which you obtain power to overcome
adversaries, in a few words:

You who have consecrated your life to God, want above all things to be
pure and holy and to know God and to do his will. You have either united
your life with Jesus the Christ, or have become acquainted with and have
united your life with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim. Now
you want power to pursue your aspirations—to pursue the knowledge of God
and of the Spirit. God gave you his name for that purpose, the "I will
be what I will to be."

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> With this
realization as you seek God and righteousness, begin to breathe
rhythmically and let every breath express the word <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, and as you express it let your
soul-desire go out to him for his power. Think of the words, "I will
work, and who shall \[or can\] reverse it?" Inspire that resistless
will. Let your mind be fixed upon God, the Elohim, and upon <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the God of the universe, and repeat the
name <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> until your love nature begins
to reach out in earnest desire for that power, then will it begin to
thrill every fiber of your being; it will make your whole body feel as
if it were as invulnerable as a piece of steel; it will create in you a
faith that you have in you a power that nothing can resist, and as soon
as that faith is established, go forth doing and accomplishing,
according to the light of the Spirit; and we, your fellow servant,
earnestly pray that the name "<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>" may
take control of your life, may be the strength in you, the protection
and the power to enable you to become like him. Ever keep in mind the
words of God recorded in the Scripture:

"<span class="smallcaps">The name Yahveh is a strong tower: the
righteous runneth into it, and is safe</span>."

*Divine peace abide with you*.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[344:\*](goal31.htm#fr_18) The Orientals worship
images of the ideals of their gods, the Catholic church has images of
the ideals of the Lord Christ and of the Virgin Mary, and the Protestant
church has the image of an ideal man in the mind, and there is really no
difference so far as the image is concerned, whether it be materialized
or a mental image, it is in the cause world a formation just the same.
When man makes an image of the Christ who lived in the form of man, he
worships the material body, the flesh, and so do the Pagan nations who
worship their idols, which are representations of the flesh.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[345:\*](goal31.htm#fr_19) As "<span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim" is the name of the collective
Body, we have used it in the singular in many places.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[353:\*](goal31.htm#fr_20) The names "<span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>" and "Elohim" are connected in different
ways in the various books of the Old Testament. For instance, Ezekiel
generally uses the form "Elohim <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>,"
while Isaiah generally uses the form "<span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim." This may be distinguished in
our English translations in the following manner: The words translated
"God" and "Lord" written with initial capitals only, are in the Hebrew
"Elohim," with the exception that wherever the name "Almighty God"
occurs, in the Hebrew it is *El Elyon*; but when all the letters are
capitalized thus, "LORD" or "GOD" these appellations are substitutes for
the name "<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>." By careful attention
to the meaning and use of these names, it will be found that they will
reveal many important truths heretofore covered, but in a general way
brought to light in this work. The word "Elohim" is not only the name of
the great Brotherhood, but its meaning is power; and the name "<span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>" is not only the name of the Infinite,
the All-pervading Spirit, but it expresses the Will, the ability to do
and to be, the Almighty Will.

 
