[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal15)  [Next](goal17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

#### THE ETERNAL ORDER OF MELCHISEDEK

<span class="smallcaps">Before</span> proceeding directly to the
evidence in the Bible of the existence of this Eternal Order, we make
the following statement:

We find evidences from the beginning of Genesis to the time of Christ
that there was a Brotherhood of men, who lived in the flesh and were
masters in the highest sense of the term. This Brotherhood, like the
Christ, were able to command the forces of nature, were righteous in all
their ways, and were in direct touch with <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> and Elohim—<span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the Spirit and God of the universe; and
Elohim, the Brotherhood who were the Creators of the world. These, as we
have intimated, were evidently from the age prior to Adam, from the age
of which the Orientalists claim to have abundant records, called the
Golden Age; and it is also related in mythology that one after another
of the gods left the abode of men, Virgo being the last to leave.

There was at that time a regular gradatory line, or, so to speak, a
ladder of attainment, a chain of connected links, from the neophytes
that were

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

under the instruction of the masters in the body, to the masters that
had passed beyond the confines of an earthly existence, on up to the
Elohim; and, reasoning from analogy, this chain does not end here, but
there are members—men who have lived in the body in other worlds from
the beginning of time to the present—who have reached heights of
attainment transcending the possibility of our finite conception.

In order to know something of that Eternal Brotherhood we must follow
the injunction of the writer of the letter to the Hebrews: "Therefore
leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on
unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead
works, and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms, and of
laying on of hands, and of [resurrection](errata.htm#14) of the dead,
and of eternal judgment. And this we will do, if God permit." (Heb. vi.
1-3).

If the Christian church had faithfully followed the leading of the
Spirit of God, or would follow it now, it would leave these first
principles of the doctrine of Christ and go on unto perfection, where
its members would know God and these things whereof we write. And they
would know these things, not from theory, but from an experience more
perfect, more vivid, more realistic, than the experiences of everyday
life in this material world; for the doctrines of Christ are but the
types and shadows of the glorious things that God has in

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

store for those that fear to do evil and love God and have perfect
confidence in his guiding intelligence.

If you carefully read the sixth chapter of Hebrews, not fearing to
accept the truth, you will see wonderful things in Paul's argument.
After an earnest appeal to all to believe God and to follow him
fearlessly, he closes the chapter with the following words: "That by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might
have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us: which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both
sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that within the veil;
whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high
priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek."

This allusion to our being permitted, through obedience to the leadings
of the Spirit, to enter "that within the veil," and become one with
Jesus and that eternal order of Melchisedek, or <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, is a direct reference to what
has always existed in the initiations of the faithful neophyte, who,
when he had attained worthiness, was permitted to enter the secret place
of the Most High, into the knowledge of that Eternal Brotherhood.

Frequent references are made throughout the Bible to "that within the
veil," a veil symbolized by the veil of the temple, dividing the holy
place from the Holiest of all. Jesus referred to it frequently

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

and proclaimed himself to be the door, the means by which one may enter
in through that veil, "whither," as Paul said, "the forerunner is for us
entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedek," implying that that order is within the veil.

We ask our readers carefully to read the seventh chapter of Hebrews, and
especially to note the following verses:

"If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it
the people received the law,) what further need was there that another
priest \[Jesus the Christ\] should rise after the order of Melchisedek,
and not be called after the order of Aaron? . . . For it is evident that
our Lord sprang out of Judah; of which tribe Moses spake nothing
concerning priesthood. And it is yet far more evident: for that after
the similitude of Melchisedek there ariseth another priest, who is made,
not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an
endless life. For he testifieth, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedek . . . . And inasmuch as not without an oath he was
made priest: (For those priests were made without an oath; but this with
an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord sware and will not repent,
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek:) By so much
was Jesus made a surety of a better testament."

There is much prejudice on the part of the people in regard to taking
the oath of an order that requires

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

secrecy, or, in other words, of an order that requires wisdom on the
part of its members as to what is to be taught to the public and what is
to be kept for those that are worthy; but here the statement is emphatic
that "not without an oath he was made a priest.''

If our Lord Jesus, the Christ, came not after the order of Aaron, as
Paul says, but came after the order of Melchisedek, then it follows that
the mission of Christ is to lead his followers into the membership of
that wondrous Brotherhood, to show them the way through the veil into
the Holiest of all, into the great mysteries of that Eternal
Brotherhood—a Brotherhood which, the writer said, had "neither beginning
of days, nor end of life." Not that this priest Melchisedek was without
beginning of days or end of life, for that would be contrary to all that
is known of organized or individualized existence. On the other hand, if
worlds have circled in the heavens from all eternity, if evolution has
always been the law governing all worlds, and if it has been a law from
all eternity that there are lines of demarcation between spheres of
existence, so that none can pass from that without to that within, from
the lower to the higher, until by attainment they have earned the right
to do so—until they have grown into it—which is one of the most absolute
laws of the universe, then it follows that this order of Melchisedek is
the order of all

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

redeemed souls from the beginning of time, and will so continue
throughout eternity.

We have long believed that the lifeless shell of the Masonic Order is
all that survives of what was originally the living formula of the
Eternal Brotherhood; but, through perversion, it has lost so much of its
vitality that what now remains is virtually a dead form, and even that
form has been so changed that but a small portion of the original is
left. There is, however, still enough of the divine order in it to
preserve its existence from the disintegrative forces of the ages. But
we know this: That grand order of Melchisedek of which Christ came as a
representative—as declared in the foregoing quotations—has always
existed and will always exist throughout eternity; and we who are
willing wholly to follow the Christ and his teachings will certainly be
led into full, conscious membership in that glorified Brotherhood.

We will now consider

THE EVIDENCES OF THE EXISTENCE OF THIS BROTHERHOOD IN THE BODY

Paul's reference to Melchisedek and to Abraham will be found in Genesis
xiv., and all who are interested in this subject should read the account
with the new light we have thrown upon it.

In Genesis xiv. we read the following words.

"And Melchisedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was
priest of God Most High (Heb. *El Elyon*). And he blessed him, and

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

said, Blessed be Abram of God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth:
and blessed be God Most High, who hath delivered thine enemies into
thine hand. And he gave him a tenth of all."

There are several thoughts to be considered in connection with this
account. One is the misconception that has arisen in the minds of
Christian people regarding this Melchisedek. It is thought that, because
Paul said that he was king of righteousness or king of peace, he could
not have been an earthly monarch, but we must bear in mind that in those
days kings were heads of tribes, or what, in many instances, we would
to-day call mayors of cities, and, as a rule, they were independent
rulers.

We must also bear in mind, when reading this chapter, that the king of
Sodom and the king of Salem went out to meet Abraham, and that both are
spoken of as kings. This in itself, as you will see by careful reading,
is evidence that Melchisedek was the head or ruling spirit of a resident
brotherhood, somewhere in the vicinity of Sodom, and that he was known,
not as a fighting king, but as a king of peace.

Those who have studied the laws and principles governing true mystics,
know that they invariably profess to be men of peace, and that they are
supposed to use their mystic powers to perpetuate peace. If there was an
organized body of those holy men who lived before the time of Adam, and
were gathered from those who are called in

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Genesis vi. 2 "the
sons of God," in contradistinction to the sons of men, then they
possessed similar powers to those manifested to the world by the Lord
Christ; otherwise the statement in Hebrews that Christ "came after the
order of Melchisedek" could not be true.

It is generally supposed that this allusion to the order of Melchisedek
had reference in some way to his personality or life; but the word
"order" has here a double meaning. It signifies, first, an organization
or society of persons having some common rule and obligation, as, for
instance, a mystic order; and, second, a system of methods of procedure,
usages, arrangements, methods of life, which form the constitution, or
fundamental principles, of an organization of men.

As the members of this order of Melchisedek lived from God, Spirit, and
were one with him, they possessed powers similar to those possessed by
Elijah, Elisha and the Christ, and through those powers they held the
respect, the reverence, the awe, of the child-races, and were enabled to
be to those races guides and instructors, and to control the destinies
of men, as we shall see further on.

Another thought is clear here; namely, this Melchisedek was in the body,
not a spiritual form as some suppose, for he brought bread and wine to
nourish Abraham after his long struggle with the kings; and Abraham gave
Melchisedek a tenth part

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

of the spoils that he had taken from the kings. So Melchisedek not only
offered unto Abraham material nourishment, but he, in turn, received
from Abraham material substance for himself and for his people.

We find in Genesis xvii. 1, the following words: "And when Abram was
ninety years old and nine, <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>
appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before
me, and be thou perfect." Whatever this appearance may have been,
whether it was a man in the body or a God-man from the heavens, we have
no absolute knowledge, but that it was one who talked to Abraham as a
man talks to another man, face to face, is unquestionable. And this is
further evidenced in chapter xviii. 1-8:

"And <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> appeared unto him by the oaks
of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day; and he lift
up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood over against him: and
when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed
himself to the earth, and said, My lord, if now I have found favor in
thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant: let now a
little water be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under
the tree: and I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your heart;
after that ye shall pass on: forasmuch as ye are come to your servant.
And they said, So do, as thou hast said. And Abraham hastened into the
tent unto

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sarah, and said,
Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make
cakes. And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetched a calf tender and
good, and gave it unto the servant; and he hasted to dress it, And he
took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it
before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat."

There are several points that we ask you to note in this account: The
first is that <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> appeared to him, and
then it is said that three men stood by Abraham, not three
angels—evidently the ones whom he called <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>; although if the account had said
angels, as the word "angel" merely means messenger of God, it would not
imply that they were not messengers in the body. That these were men,
there is no doubt, for in verse 3 Abraham said, "My Lord," or "My
Master;" the word here is *Adonai*, which means master, one to whom
authority has been delegated from a higher source. That Abraham
recognized their superiority as masters is shown in the words, "If now I
have found favor in thy sight," and in the fact that he bowed himself
before them. Another evidence that they were in the body is the
inference that Abraham brought them water with which to wash their feet,
they having walked a distance in the dust, and also in the emphatic
declaration that "they did eat" the bread which Abraham set before them.
If all three had not eaten, probably the account

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

would have so stated, but the words are "And they did eat;" and after
they had eaten they delivered their message. Please read the entire
chapter.

In verse 16 we find the following words: "And the men rose up from
thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring
them on the way." Mark you, Abraham went with the three men; but in
verse 17 the language is changed, for we read, "And <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> said, Shall I hide from Abraham that
which I do?" What we wish to call attention to here is the fact that one
of the three men remained with Abraham and that the other two went on to
attend to their work in Sodom, for we read in chapter xix. 1, "And the
two angels came to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom."
This shows that two of the men went on while one remained with Abraham
and gave him God's message.

In chapter xviii. 20, we read that <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>
said, "Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their
sin is very grievous; I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if
not, I will know." Therefore, whoever or whatever these men may have
been, one thing is certain—it was necessary that <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> go down and see whether it was
altogether according to the cry which had come unto him. In other words,
he must go in person that he may know

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

whether the report is true, before justice and destruction can be
executed upon Sodom.

Now, if it should be said that this conversation and prayer, or
argument—whichever you wish to call it—of Abraham with <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> was with a spirit, disembodied, verse 30
would dissipate such a thought, for we read, "And he \[Abraham\] said
unto him, Oh let not Adonai be angry, and I will speak." While
heretofore he called this one to whom he had been speaking <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, he now calls him Adonai, Master, and we
here make this assertion, that in no case is the word Adonai, or Master,
used in connection with a spiritual manifestation, but always in
connection with a person, at least supposed to be in the body; neither
is it used in connection with the God of the universe.

This being true, it is positive proof that Abraham recognized the one
with whom he was conversing as one who was in the body. He continues to
use the word Adonai in the last part of his argument to the end of the
interview, when the writer giving the account says, in verse 33, "And
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> went his way, as soon as he had
left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place." He
did not say that <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> had disappeared,
or that he went up from Abraham, but simply that he went his way; and
where did he go? In verse 21 he said, "I will go down now \[to Sodom\],
and see whether they have done altogether according to

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

the cry of it, which is come unto me," and we have no further account of
him.

The next account of the two angels is given in chapter xix. where they
come to Lot in Sodom, enter into his house and eat unleavened bread, *et
cetera*. In proof that these men were in the body, we read:

"The men put forth their hand, and brought Lot into the house to them,
and shut to the door. . . But he lingered and the men laid hold upon his
hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two
daughters; <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> being merciful unto
him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city."

Mark you, they laid hold upon the hand of Lot and of his wife and
daughters, which no spirit can do, for we well know that spirit cannot
touch matter nor matter, spirit. (Spirit may take hold of the mind and
thus influence the physical body, as if the body were taken hold of.)

In the foregoing we have evidence, if not absolute proof, of the
existence of a Brotherhood in the flesh who were directly in touch with
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the Spirit of the universe, and
one with him, and that they were so recognized by Abraham, who was
virtually a neophyte under the guidance and instruction of Melchisedek
and of the Brotherhood with whom Melchisedek was connected.

As further evidence of the existence of this Eternal

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brotherhood, we
read in Genesis xxxii. 24-28:

"And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the
breaking of the day. And when he saw that he prevailed not against him,
he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was
strained, as he wrestled with him. And he said: Let me go, for the day
breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. And
he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob. And he said, thy
name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for thou hast had power
with Elohim and with men, and hast prevailed."

Here we find that Jacob wrestled with a man, whom he recognized as of
the Elohim, that is he struggled with him before he obtained his new
name, Israel, which means prevailing prince; which is to say that he had
dominion in the line of his calling, as he demonstrated when his angry
brother, who came out to slay him, gave expressions of love to Jacob
instead of anger.

In verses 29 and 30 we read:

"And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he
said, Wherefore is it thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him
there. And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel \[i. e., the face
of God\]: for I have seen Elohim face to face, and my life is
preserved."

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

This implies that, while Jacob recognized that he was wrestling with a
man, he knew that he was a God-man, one having oneness with <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim. What the nature of that
wrestling was, whether mental or physical, we are not told, but the fact
that he recognized that he was wrestling with one who had power to
confer upon him the thing desired, is evidenced in the words, "I will
not let thee go except thou bless me."

We wish again to emphasize the thought that Jacob knew that he was
wrestling with a man; and when he received the blessing he wanted to
know the man's name. How natural it is for the human mind to want to
identify everybody with a class or name, which implies merely the plane,
office or sphere that the person occupies in this world, in place of
recognizing his or her spiritual calling.

As the angel who wrestled with Jacob and was called Elohim, was of that
grand, old order of Melchisedek, he had received a new name, which was
of the Spirit, and belonged exclusively to his sphere of use in that
mystic body, therefore he refused to give Jacob his name.

We read in Judges xiii. 6:

"Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of Elohim came
unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of
Elohim, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told
he me his name."

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

Now, observe that this messenger of Elohim appeared as a man to the
woman, and she called him a man of Elohim—man of God—which was a common
expression applied to those who belonged to that holy Order of
Melchisedek. Now, when her husband, Manoah, came:

"He said unto the angel of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, I pray
thee let us detain thee, until we have made ready a kid for thee. And
the angel of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> said unto Manoah,
Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt
offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>. For Manoah knew not that he was an
angel of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>." (vv. 15, 16.)

This means he did not know that the angel was in the spirit-form and not
in the material body. Again we read:

"And Manoah said unto the angel of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, What is thy name, that when thy saying
comes to pass we may do thee honor? And the angel of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> said unto him, Why askest thou after my
name, seeing it is secret?"

The angel did not deny that he had a name, and this teaches us that
those who are called angels are the souls of men who have lived in the
body, and, of course, had a name among men, but when they left the
sphere of evolution and became members of the order of Melchisedek, a
new name was given to them, which is the name of their calling in the
Divine Order.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

The fact that they are men who have lived on earth, and are our
brethren, was shown by the angel who gave the wonderful revelation to
John (Rev. xxii. 8, 9):

"And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and
seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which showed
me these things. Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy
fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them that keep
the sayings of this book: worship God."

This tells us that the angels of God are no more nor less than our
brethren who are living or have lived upon the earth or some other
world, but who have passed beyond the point where they are governed by
the laws of generation, for there are many who have completed their
fleshly existence and passed on as members of the Eternal Brotherhood;
and the angel that appeared to Manoah and his wife was undoubtedly of
that higher order, and had passed on, for in Judges xiii. 20, 21 we
read:

"It came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the
altar, that the angel of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> ascended
in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on it, and
fell on their faces to the ground. But the angel of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> did no more appear to Manoah and his
wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>."

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

That this angel of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> manifested to
Manoah that he had dominion over the elements is suggested in the words,
"And the angel did wondrously: and Manoah and his wife looked on."

We read in Joshua v. 13-15:

"And it came to pass when Joshua was by Jericho that he lifted up his
eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with
his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto
him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay, but as
the captain of the host of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> am I
now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and
said unto him, What saith Adonai unto his servant? And the captain of
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>'S host said unto Joshua, Loose thy
shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And
Joshua did so."

The connection between this verse and the following chapter is not
given, but it is said in Joshua vi. 2, that "<span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> said unto Joshua, See, I have given into
thy hand Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valor."
And he instructs Joshua how to take the strong city, but we have in this
case no evidence showing whether this messenger was in the flesh or not;
he simply said that he had come as captain of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>'S host, as the superior of Joshua, in
that he gave Joshua orders; thus proving that he was at least one of the
Masters.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

In I. Samuel ii. 27, we read:

"And there came a man of Elohim unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, did I plainly appear unto the
house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house."

He said that he "plainly appeared," but he did not say definitely
whether it was in the person of a man, or whether it was as a spirit
messenger, or whether it was in the form of a word of Elohim. But the
instances showing that men of Elohim appeared to the children of Israel,
the covenant people, as guides, protectors, and controllers of the
affairs of men, are too numerous to mention.

These quotations suffice to show, with the aid of the chapters in
immediate connection with them, that there did live during the period of
the patriarchs, even down to the time of the Judges, an order of mystics
called "Masters" by men, but who called themselves an "Order of the Sons
of God," who were in the body, yet not of the people; they lived in
obscurity, and came forth only to deliver messages from Elohim.

We have, moreover, chosen quotations that in the past have been a
mystery. The Christian world has erroneous ideas regarding these
passages and regarding the angels of God. Many believe that the angels
of God are uncreated beings, or of a separate creation, that they were
never men in the body; whereas the quotations given prove

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

the opposite, namely, that all of them are men who have come up by means
of the experiences through which we ourselves have passed, and have gone
on and become one with <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim.

There is reference to another phase of the manifestation of this order
of Melchisedek in the account of Enoch, who "walked with Elohim and was
not, for Elohim took him;" and again, in the story of Elijah, whose
name—*El-i-Yah*, that is, <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> is my
God, my power—was undoubtedly given him by the Brotherhood. The meaning
of his name was fully verified in the history of the doings of Elijah,
in the great power that he manifested over the forces of nature—power
evidently greater than that manifested by those before him, or by those
after him, with the exception of the Christ; and when Elijah was taken
up in a whirlwind his powers, or his mantle, fell upon Elisha.

You will see by carefully reading accounts in the Scriptures that there
were men in the body and out of the body who demonstrated by the wonders
they performed that they were members of that Eternal Brotherhood. When
we say wonders, we do not mean miracles as miracles have been
understood, for nothing is done that is not in accordance with the laws
of nature; but when men have become God-men, they may lay hold upon
superior laws and accelerate or retard the working of laws already
active in nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Jesus of the Order of Melchisedek](goal17)
