[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal06)  [Next](goal08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### REASON AND RELIGION.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> considering the underlying and
causative principles governing the two factors that give power, the one,
the "Reason," or the intellect, and the other, the sentiment that we
call "Religion," we necessarily enter an unknown realm, for mind must
study its cause—the stream must rise to its fountain.

Therefore in order to study the causes underlying mental phenomena, we
must reach out and inspire from the fountains of mind. We read that when
Jesus was speaking to the people of his day who failed to understand the
meaning of his words, he said to them, "He that is of God heareth God's
words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God." (John
viii. 47.) He here intimated the possibility of touching a sphere of
mind lying beyond that which is normal to the human faculties. And,
after all these centuries of the growth and the development of the race
and of the influence of the Christian Religion, have we not a right to
believe that there is a large body of men and women in the world that
have incorporated within themselves a

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

quality of mind transcendently above the mere human mind, or, shall we
say, the animal mind?

In view of these facts, we shall attempt to search into some of the
fountains from which come those faculties ultiinating in what we term
"Reason" and "Religion." Because the realm is an unexplored one and
there are no ready-made terms in which to express the thought, we ask
our readers to help us by studying themselves introspectively.

To begin with the investigation of the reasoning faculties: Why is it
that you cannot always use these faculties with equal facility? There
are times when, strive as you may to reason out a problem, the mind does
not seem to be in tune for its work. Under such circumstances we ask you
to turn within and carefully to seek the cause there. Do you not find
that there is some disturbance of the vital-currents? Can you reason to
advantage when there are inharmonies and combative conditions that you
are compelled to meet? Combativeness and anger confuse the mind and
prevent clear, logical reasoning. On the other hand, when surrounded by
loving friends, kind thoughts, genial associations, your mind works
freely and there is no trouble to reason clearly, positively, and
correctly. Does not this at least suggest that there is something behind
the phenomenon of what we call the reasoning mind? The sick man is not
capable of deep reasoning. The man engaged in research and deep thought
finds it necessary to keep the life-currents—

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the health and vigor of the body—in the best condition in order to do
his best work.

Another suggestive fact is, that intense concentration of thought and
close reasoning, exhaust the body even more rapidly than physical labor.
The thought seems to partake of and to use up the life of the body,
suggesting that, in some way, mind is directly connected with life.

Let us inquire into how we think, not into the methods applied to bring
thought into form, but into that which precedes, the means by which we
approach those activities which produce the actual thought.

There is first a desire and a will to do, followed by the turning of the
mind and the centralizing of it upon the subject that we wish to
consider. The question here arises as to what is meant when we say that
we have turned the mind to the consideration of a subject. Does it not
mean that we have turned the consciousness in a given direction? and is
not the life within us that which produces consciousness? What is this
within the human organism that makes us conscious when there is no
special interest, thought, or effort in any direction? This
consciousness that we are seems to carry forward the beating of the
heart, the circulating of the blood, the digesting of the food, and all
the processes of life without any apparent effort or annoyance on our
part. The child lives, grows, plays, and amuses itself while this
something that we call

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

life is carrying on the work of building and developing the child into
the man.

If, however, the slightest derangement occurs in the internal workings
of the body, pain is the result, and the peace and joy in the
consciousness of being is disturbed. As this consciousness controls the
body in its work of self-building and self-maintenance in the child as
well as the man, may it not be called *vital-thought?*

In the consideration of intuition, in the preceding chapter, we referred
to the law in accordance with which we were brought into being, in
accordance with which the life is gathered from God the Creative Source,
ensphered and bound for the uses of the organism. Now this life has
within itself all qualities. There is the life that organizes and forms
the bird, the cat-life, that forms the cat, the horse-life, that forms
the horse—each one of the different qualities of life forms an organism
suitable for the expression of its own kind or quality. Even if we do
not admit that God is the Creator of all things, we must admit that
there is a fountain from which all creative-life springs and multiplies
its kind. We know also that the study of living creatures shows that
some live, grow, and are normal and happy under conditions which would
be destructive to others, again showing the great variety in the quality
of life. And whether these various forms of animate existence think or
not, they certainly act in many respects as man acts

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

when he thinks. So that we cannot avoid the suggestion that the kind or
quality of life is the kind of thought, desire, and consequently,
action.

When we turn our attention to the human family, we recognize there also
a great diversity of thought, desire, sympathy, and feature. No two men
look alike nor do they think alike. It is a fact well understood in our
courts that two or three men viewing the same scene, see it so
differently that a disinterested person listening to their testimony
cannot but feel that some one is perjuring himself. Apparently, two sets
of factors come into action to produce this diversity of mind and
consciousness:

First, the *quality* of life from which the thought is formed. Second,
the *beliefs* of the person.

But, in reality, the quality of life, that is, the character of the
consciousness—or vital-thought just defined—is determined by the
*beliefs* of the person according to his sphere of use; for the beliefs
govern the inspirations which in turn give quality to the life. The
plant gathers to itself the elements for use in its growth and
preservation; but the human mind, being more highly developed, may
gather as wide a diversity of qualities as it has diversity of desire,
that is, it may gather any quality that it believes to be useful.

The consciousness of the individual, being an aggregate of qualities of
universal consciousness, bound or ensphered for a purpose, for use, the
individual is acting under a law which enables him

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

to gather within himself, ensphere as an added consciousness, the
element of any vital-thought that he believes to be useful.

It is intimated in the early portion of this chapter, and we believe it
is generally admitted, that the activities of the reasoning mind spring
from this inner selfhood, that which we have termed the vital-thought.
Why could not our ancestors in the early stages of the race reason so
clearly as we of modern times? Were they not drawing and living from the
same great fountains from which we live?—Certainly they were, but
experience had not matured more perfect brain organs, broader beliefs,
and wider sympathies and desires. It has been well said by one of the
ancients that "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he."

At this point we meet the coincidence of *reason* and *religion*. Can we
divorce them? Are they not a dual manifestation of the same underlying
principle?—They are, most unquestionably. *Religion* has as a base love,
desire. *Reason* is the phenomenon of love. The difference is that
religion opens up the life toward its Cause, and reason directs life
into the active phenomena of forming, or, better still, of being formed
into images of which the sensory nerves of the brain take cognizance,
when they become conscious thought. But the quality of the thought, as
well as the quality of the love, depends upon the quality of the life,
and all these depend upon the underlying phenomena

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

of the foundation belief. Why did Jesus the Christ hold so firmly and
continuously before the people the importance of *belief*, and of right
belief? Not only so, but he insisted upon the fact that *belief* without
a *doubt* would give power to control physical nature around one. So
extreme was his utterance as to claim that by the means of this belief
mountains could be removed from their place. A careful investigator may
experiment in the everyday walks of life upon this power of belief in
its control of the inspirations of the person.

There are a people among us denominated *Spiritualists*. The major part
of these people are the legitimate outcome of religious devotion on the
part of their parents. Spiritualistic mediums are such by organic
structure, which leads them to open up their life-centers to the psychic
currents around them. In order to be mediums they must be perfectly
passive to these influences. Now do not say that mediums are frauds. It
is true that some of them are, but many of them are working with forces
of which they have no understanding.

If you wish to experiment in this direction, sit before a medium and
call into activity some point of belief that is latent within you. The
medium will probably go into a trance, bring up the subject most active
in your mind and begin to ingather and present evidences of the truth of
that in which you believe. It matters not whether it is true or not, the
medium will inspire, formulate and give

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

you evidences of its truth. Have you not observed the fact that the more
a man thinks on a subject of his belief, the more firmly convinced is he
of its truth, so that nothing short of the most absolute proof can shake
his confidence? Usually this proof must be so overwhelming as to carry
conviction to every sense of his entire nature.

Because of this law governing human mind and consciousness, *religion*
should be based upon the conclusions of the clearest *reason*, in which
case *belief*, the principle underlying the two, will be correct—not
specific belief, but belief in its relation to general principles. But
to be sure of reliable conclusions, reason must be able to command
reliable premises. For what to the world have been the centuries of
scientific investigation, the vast resources spent in scientific
appliances, if not to discover facts and laws upon which Reason may base
correct conclusions? Thus giving Reason and Religion the sure foundation
of correct *beliefs* upon which to rest. Truly, he who neglects to
improve the wealth of opportunity, born of such labor and expenditure of
means, is remiss in the duty he owes to himself and to his fellow men.

Because of the enlightenment of the race, Reason and Religion must
hereafter go forth hand in hand, must stand bosom to bosom, as most
lovingly devoted counterparts.

Religion is the outflowing, the opening up, of the love toward an object
which is believed to be the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

most desirable, and when man has learned intelligently to open the soul
toward its Cause, he will then find the fountains of all knowledge. And
he has that in him which enables him to draw in—inspire—and cause to act
upon the sensorium of his brain the very essence of all there is. When
the fundamental principle of belief is properly laid, then the reasoning
brain will take these essences and form them into images, and these
images will become living-stones in the construction of that temple of
knowledge in which will dwell God, formed as the immortal soul, and
man—the knowing intelligence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Conscience](goal08.md)
