[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal12)  [Next](goal14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

#### THE MANIFESTATION OF YAHVEH.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the preceding chapter we considered
the great name "<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>," "<span
class="smallcaps">I will be what I will to be</span>," from its historic
point of view. We will now endeavor to consider it in its manifestation
in, and in its relation to mind exhibited in the human organism; and
also in its great, general manifestation throughout the known and the
unknown universe.

It is manifested in the human organism as will. In the wilt of man
resides his only power, and may we not ask: Is there any known power in
the whole universe that is not will-power? What means this wondrous
activity in everything?—in the small and in the great, in the telescopic
and in the microscopic, in what is infinitely beyond the microscopic as
well as what is infinitely beyond the telescopic?

We quote the following from Camille Flammarion:

“Thus stars, suns, planets, worlds, comets, shooting stars,
aerolites—all the bodies that compose this vast universe, in a word—are
resting, not on solid bases, as seemed to be demanded by the primitive
and childish conceptions of our ancestors,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

but on the invisible and immaterial forces which rule and direct their
motions. These millions and millions of heavenly bodies are endowed with
their respective motions for the sake of stability and are mutually
supported by each other across the gulf that separates them

“In fact, the entire cortege is moving, flying, falling, rolling,
rushing through space, but at such relative distances that all appear to
be at rest. . .

“Now the constitution of the sidereal universe is formed on the same
model as that of bodies which we designate as material. All bodies,
organic or inorganic, man, animal, plant, stone, iron, bronze, are
composed of molecules that are perpetually in motion and never touch.
These molecules are themselves composed of atoms which do not touch.
Each of these atoms is infinitely small and invisible, not only to the
eye, not only to the microscope, but even to the thought, since it is
possible that these atoms may be nothing more than centers of force. The
calculation has been made that in the head of a pin there are no less
than eight sextillions of atoms, or eight thousand times a thousand
millions multiplied by a thousand million, and that in a cubic
centimeter of air there is a sextillion of molecules. All these atoms,
all these molecules, are in motion under the influence of directing
forces, and, relatively to their dimensions, are separated from each
other by wide distances. We may even believe that there is in principle
but one description of atoms, and that it is the number of primitive
atoms, essentially simple and homogeneous,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

their manner of arrangement and their motion which determine the
diversity of molecules; a molecule of gold or iron differing from a
molecule of sulphur, of oxygen, of hydrogen, etc., only in the number,
the disposition and the motion of the primitive atoms of which it is
composed; each molecule being a system, a microcosm.

“Whatever idea we may adopt, however, of the essential constitution of
bodies, the truth that is recognized to-day and cannot henceforth be
contested is, that the motionless point that our imagination has been
seeking has no existence anywhere. Archimedes may vainly clamor for a
place to stand so that he may move the world. Worlds, like atoms, repose
on the invisible, on immaterial force; everything is in motion,
solicited by the force of attraction and as if in search of that
motionless point which flies from us as we pursue it and which has no
existence, since in the infinite the center is everywhere and nowhere.
The so-called positivists, who declare with so much assurance that
'Matter alone reigns with its properties,' and who smile with disdain
upon the researches of thinking men, should first tell us what they mean
by that famous word 'matter.' If they did not stop at the surface of
things, if they had any idea that appearances may serve as a cloak for
intangible realities, they would doubtless be a little more modest.

“As for ourselves, who seek the truth with no preconceived ideas and
unbiased in favor of any system, it seems to us that the essence of
matter

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

remains to us as mysterious as the essence of force, the visible
universe being something entirely different from the form under which it
presents itself to our senses. In fact, this visible universe is
composed of invisible atoms; it rests in apparently void space and the
forces which guide and direct it are themselves immaterial and
invisible. It would be a less daring speculation to affirm that matter
has no existence, that all is dynamism, than to pretend to declare the
existence of a universe that is exclusively material. As to the material
support of the world, it is a sufficiently piquant remark to make that
it disappeared at exactly the same time that the science of mechanics
gained its victories proclaiming the triumph of the invisible. . . . .
the highest effort of our intelligence has for its last resting place,
for its supreme reality, the Infinite!"

When Flammarion wrote this it was considered very fanciful, but
physicists by experimenting with radio-active substances have discovered
many things concerning the atom which less than thirty years ago they
were unable to prove by a single scientific experiment.

The atom has always been considered indestructible and indivisible,
using Flammarion's language, "too small for thought," but the doctrine
of the immutability of the atom, which has held sway for almost two
thousand years, has ceased to exist.

Sir Oliver Lodge says:

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

“. . . . it is noteworthy how very small these electrical particles
\[particles smaller than atoms, called 'electrons'\] are compared with
the atoms of matter to which they are attached. If an *electron* is
represented by a sphere an inch in diameter, the diameter of an atom of
matter on the same scale is a mile and a half. . . . An atom is not a
large thing, but if composed of electrons, the spaces between them are
enormous compared with their size—as great relatively as the spaces
between the planets in the solar system And it becomes a reasonable
hypothesis to surmise that the whole of the atom may be built up of
positive and negative electrons interleaved together . . . . The
oppositely charged electrons are to be thought of in this hypothesis as
flying about inside the atom, as a few thousand specks like full stops
\[periods\] might fly about inside this hall forming a kind of cosmic
system under their strong mutual forces, and occupying the otherwise
empty region of space which we call the atom—occupying it in the same
sense that a few scattered but armed soldiers can occupy a
territory—occupying it by forceful activity, not by bodily bulk, or
according to Lord Kelvin, ‘rotating with inconceivable velocity.’”

The hypothesis of Flammarion and many other eminent scientists, that
"the atom may be nothing but a center of force," seems to have been
proved by Professor Rutherford of Montreal. He has shown that the main
fact of radio-activity consists

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

in the throwing away with great violence actual atoms of matter, such as
may be stopped by a thin sheet of paper; of this Sir Oliver Lodge says:

"Their speed, indeed, far exceeds that of any cannon ball that ever
existed, being as much faster than a cannon ball as that is faster than
a snail's crawl; a hundred times faster than the fastest flying star,
these atomic projectiles constitute the fastest moving matter known
There is every reason to believe that a minute scrap of radium, scarcely
perceptible to the eye may go on emitting these energetic projectiles
for hundreds of years."

And our experience coincides with Sir Oliver's:

"That whatever hypothesis and speculation we may frame, we cannot exceed
the reality in genuine wonder; and believe that the simplicity and
beauty of the truth concerning even the material universe, when we know
it, will be such as to elicit feelings of reverent awe and adoration."

Using a very different process of investigation from what these noted
physicists have used, we have reached the same conclusion, namely, that,
what we call matter is in reality composed of invisible substance, and
what we call the atom is only a tremendous reservoir of energy.

Even as far back as the time of Descartes we find that he "rejected the
atomic hypothesis, holding that there could be no vacuum in the
universe,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

and making matter essentially synonymous with extension." The most
illustrious of our modern physicists, Lord Kelvin, considers ether as
"an elastic solid filling all space."

If the huge cables that hold up the East River bridge in New York are
composed of atoms each revolving in its sphere as the planets and suns
of the universe, and each atom in itself is a minute solar system
comprising a central part, around which a thousand or many more
particles revolve, then the questions arise: What is the great strength
holding up that mighty structure? What is the power that holds those
cables together? What is this apparently "solid substance" composing the
bridge? Why do these electrons always hold their orderly positions? What
is this invisible ether through which they fly with such inconceivable
velocity? To answer, we are thrown back upon the revelation of that
great name, namely, the power of the great name—the <span
class="smallcaps">will</span>, the <span class="smallcaps">I will be
what I will to be</span>.

The same question may be asked concerning all material substances, but
there is no response from modern research but the echoing question—"What
is it?"

If we take the Bible Revelation, namely, that God, in the beginning,
created the heaven and the earth, and again that God created these
things by a word, we then conclude that all is mind, spirit.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We know that a
"word" is the expression of a thought sent out by the will, endowed with
the potentiality of the will. In the creation of the world this Word
must have been endowed with the potentiality of the Spirit—the Will,
"<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>." The Word had the power in
itself to make a world make itself; for, from scientific investigation,
it has been shown that there is a general trend to the
formative-processes in all nature. For example, the tiny seed-germ in
the earth has in it the power to gather to itself material to construct
a body according to its kind, character, and quality, and this body,
like all other bodies, has the power to hold its own structural
integrity. The body of man, which is constantly undergoing a material
change, still holds its form until the will fails, or is overcome by a
stronger force, then death comes.

What is death?—We say it is the absence of life.—Yes.—What is life?—This
has been the question of all the ages, and the answer has never been
found.—Why?—-Because there is no comparison. Life is, and there is
nothing like it. In the Scriptures God said, "I am, and there is none
like unto me," and if God, the Soul of the universe, is life, life is,
and there is nothing like it; and since we can know the qualities of
things only by comparison and there is nothing with which to compare
life, it is impossible to answer the question: What is life?

Tennyson realized this truth when he wrote these beautiful lines:

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  "Flower in the crannied wall,  
I pluck you out of the crannies;—  
  Hold you here, root and all, in my hand,  
Little flower—but if I could understand  
  What you are, root and all, and all in all,  
I should know what God and man is."

</div>

In trying to answer the question, What is life? we cannot stop with
organized life as we know it, for there is abundant evidence that all
space and all substance is filled with quivering, dancing, sparkling
life. "Inanimate matter," a phrase much used twenty-five years ago, has
now given place to "the life of matter." M. Bose, whose ingenious
experiments we have before mentioned, has shown that matter reveals more
and more the qualities which were formerly attributed to living beings
only.

Gustave Le Bon says:

"Physiologists measure, as is well known, the sensitiveness of a being
by the degree of excitation necessary in order to obtain from it a
reaction. The being is considered very sensitive, when it acts under
slight stimuli. Applying similar tests to brute matter we can show that
the most rigid substance and the least sensitive in appearance, a bar of
metal, for example, is really incredibly sensitive."

We know that when the body dies something leaves it. The materialists
say that the life dies, but whom shall we believe, the materialists, who
are few in number compared with those who believe

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

in spirit, or the great majority of mankind that believe in the
existence of the soul after the dissolution of the body?

"The very scientific materialism of our day," writes Professor Hyslop,
in *The North American Review*, "points definitely to the possibility,
or at least the rationality of supposing the possibility, of a future
life. . . ."

"Physical science admits the existence of a supersensible world of
reality which had not been suspected or proved until within recent
years. We may instance Roentgen rays, the various forms of radio-active
energy whose whole gamut is not yet known, and the speculations about
ions and electrons that take us far beyond the world of Lucretian atoms
into the measureless ether, whose properties make it impossible to apply
the term 'matter' to it, without removing the antagonism of matter to
the spiritual. All these discoveries represent realities quite as
supersensible as the Christian conception of the immaterial, and we
escape calling them spiritual only because the development of human
thought has come to confine the connotation of 'spirit' to implications
of consciousness as its necessary and only function. It is this and this
alone that prevents us from claiming that the outcome of physical
science is the proof of a spiritual world. We have so defined the nature
and problem of spirit as implicative of personal consciousness that
there can be no proof of its reality apart from the animal organism and
its functions until we show that consciousness

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and personal identity can survive death. All that the discovery of
supersensible forms of energy proves is that the limitations of reality
are not confined to the material world as we directly know it, but that
there may be vast regions of energy which can be inferred or known only
by its effects in the physical cosmos."

I am satisfied that more than three-fourths of all men and women have
had positive proof, if they would accept it, of the existence of spirit.
I say positive proof if they would accept it, because skepticism has
become so popular and universal that men have been taught to deny their
own senses, but among those that are not ready to deny the evidence of
their own senses are a great majority who in their hearts can say, "I
know there is such a thing as spirit existence," and even those who
claim to be the strongest materialists have evidence within themselves
that they are wrong.

Yes, everything has life. All life is motion, and it is the life in the
body that keeps the body intact, supports it, and maintains it; and if
we examine carefully this life, not only in our body, but in everything
that is, we find even the smallest insect and plant acting according to
the law of mind, evidencing that it thinks or that thought is active in
it. If this be true then can we help concluding that all is mind? Then
we justify the Scriptural declaration that God by mind, by a word,
created the world.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

In examining our own minds we find we have reasons for action, but
however powerful the thoughts or reasons may be, unless we will to act,
we remain motionless. Then the will to act seems to be another quality
in us, which quality, when called into action by the other faculties of
the mind, tenses the muscles, and causes motion.—We will to act. This
again brings us to the revelation of the name of the Infinite, <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the "<span class="smallcaps">I will be
what I will to be</span>," or the <span class="smallcaps">will</span> of
the universe.

Since we are dependent upon our own will for the power to act, then is
not action—no matter in what form it may be found—the result of the
power of will? Again, according to the strength of a man's will is the
strength of his body. Let a man become angry, see how the red blood
obeys the mandates of his will. Men have often been heard to say, "When
I am angry I am stronger than under any other circumstances." What is
anger?—It is the excitement of the will. In the ordinary individual the
will may be excited to such an extent that it actually controls the
intellect, and when this power is sufficiently excited to take control
of the reasoning powers then we say the individual has lost his reason,
or he is mad.

It is the function of all will-power to obey the intellect, in other
words, to be a servant, but when the understanding is set aside by the
will, then evil is manifest. Since these things are true, is there

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

any evil in the world except that resulting from the will dominating the
intellect?—We believe not.

Let us return to the potentiality of the will. We have seen that the
strength of man depends upon the strength of will, and if <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> is the Will of the universe, then He or
It is the strength of all that is. We know that when the mind leaves the
body, the body rapidly disintegrates, that so long as the will and all
the faculties of the mind are kept active, the body is healthy, strong,
and vigorous.

What is it that holds together the atoms or centers of force in the body
of man, in the mighty cable, in the great beam, in the keen edge of the
sword? As we look at these objects and examine them with our senses we
cannot but believe that they are dense, hard, and solid. Since they are
not, what is it that appears dense, hard, and solid in this seething,
moving mass?—Is it not the same power that enables you to reach out your
arm and lay hold of a weight of twenty-five, fifty or a hundred pounds
and lift it by bending your arm?—You will, and the arm moves and lifts
ponderable objects, then it is the will that moves the arm, is it not?
Since God is the creator of all things, the Power of the universe, and
his name is <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, "<span
class="smallcaps">I will be what I will to be</span>," and since all is
life and that life is served by the will, then the strength of your arm,
of that piece of steel, of that beam, of that mighty cable, is the
strength of the will of the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Infinite. It is the manifestation of the Will—<span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>. From the solution of the infinitely
small may we not arrive at the solution of the infinitely great? In the
limitless universe the same Will holds all worlds, suns, and systems in
their place.

Since all is life, boundless, quivering, moving, active life; and since
what we call individualized substances—a piece of steel, a crystal, a
plant, an animal, a man—are individualized centers of thought; and since
all these centers of thought and forces unite to make up one grand body
that we call our planet; and since our planet earth is only one
"electron," as it were, of our solar system, which is a great, grand
atom, and since our universe is made up of multitudes of these atoms,
then is it not possible that multitudes of universes make one great
body? We are told that there are no bounds to space, that there is no
limit to God's universe, so we may reasonably conclude that all these
universes are molecules, as it were, making up one grand body, and this
body is the life, the substance of Divinity, that all these universes
are governed by the indwelling mind which we call God, that all the
movements of the heavenly bodies, as well as earthly bodies, telescopic
as well as microscopic, are by virtue of the Infinite Will?

The strength in the cable is the strength of the Almighty will, the
strength, the power, that gives to everything its bounds. "He gave to
the sea its bound, that the waters should not pass his commandment."
(Prov. viii. 29. R. V.)

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Therefore the
revelation that the name of the Almighty is <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the "<span class="smallcaps">I will be
what I will to be</span>" has furnished a conception by which we may
form at least an idea of the all-pervading mind and executive will of
the God of all systems, if not universes.

We know something of the actions of will in the body. Is something the
matter with the foot, the mind takes cognizance of it and sends to the
foot will-power. How does it send that will from the head to the
extremities of the body? Can you tell us?—Ah, we may talk of nerve
force, of electric currents, and so on, but how little we know of that
which we call electricity! We see a man who lives a highly moral life,
so filled with electricity that by a little friction he can light the
gas with his fingers, and this force <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3)
seems to be the same that has been harnessed to run our railroads, and
to serve in our various industries, and this Will, <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the God of the universe, may express

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Himself, Itself,
from one end of the universe to the other, by the agency that we call
electricity, or some element to us more subtile, and cause to be or not
to be according to Infinite Law, in the same way that we take charge of
and control our own bodies.

Thus, in considering <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> to be the God
and Power of the universe, we may safely say that as in the minute, man,
the microcosm, so in God the macrocosm—the mind that fills all space,
all worlds, all systems, the one God, the one mind, the one force,
making up all that we call separate individuals, or universes.

<span class="small">The quotations in this chapter come from the ablest
minds of our time and they unite in proving that the best thoughts of
the age come to about the same conclusions that Revelation came to
centuries ago, and they thus give circumstantial proof of the truth of
Revelation. They also give evidence that the human mind, if left free to
act from its higher self is led by that higher and spiritual
individuality to the same conclusions that were announced by prophets
and seers in the ages past. The only thing that now remains is for the
scientists to recognize the language. For now "Science" and "Revelation"
meet as strangers from a far country, but one day they will meet as
friends, then they will see eye to eye and rejoice in the mutual light
of each other's mentality—a light which neither can claim as all his
own.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[111:\*](goal13.htm#fr_3) There is another force
in nature that acts very much like electricity; it will give a spark of
light, but has in it no heat. This is as yet a comparatively unknown
force. It acts quicker than electricity and is as much stronger and as
much more potential than electricity as electricity is more potential
than water. This marvelous force is interior to all the forces that we
thus far know and utilize, and is waiting the higher development of our
race for its discovery and utilization. It fills all space, and is next
beyond electricity in [ethereality](errata.htm#10) and is the most
potent of any element that can be made sensible to the human
consciousness. As it evidently governs the action of electricity we have
given it the name of *electro-archon* in order that the thought of it
may have a standing in the minds of the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Mind-Centers](goal14)
