[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal08)  [Next](goal10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### CHAPTER V.

#### EVOLUTION.

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> are many difficulties in the way of
the universal acceptance of evolution as an established fact, as an
obvious law of nature; and, at the foundation of these difficulties, is
the Christian belief, which underlies our civilization.

The Christian world has believed it to be a literal fact that in six
days God created the world and everything in it, and then ceased from
the work of creation. Recently, however, there has been such an
accumulation of evidence disproving this statement that the majority of
thinkers are rejecting the old form of belief, and it is now generally
accepted that, in place of six days, we must understand six periods of
time—cycles. This is in accord with the words of the Christ who, when he
was rebuked for working on the Sabbath day, replied, "My Father worketh
even until now, and I work." (John v. 17.)

If God had not ceased from his work at the time of Christ, we have no
reason to think that he has ceased at the present time. On the contrary,
we see progression all around us, in every department

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

of life. If a nation ceases to progress—renew its life and constantly
unfold higher characteristics—it soon perishes and passes away, and the
individual is subject to the same law. We have but to look back fifty
years to see the marked progress, not only in science, art, and
mechanics, but in the actual brain-power and organic quality of the
people.

Another difficulty in the way of accepting the theory of *evolution* is,
that the work of archaeologists has revealed indications of a high state
of civilization which antedates history. It has been urged—and we think
reasonably—that there are evidences of an early civilization more
advanced than our own. We should remember that there are a few isolated
cases in which even the American Indian has obtained knowledge of
certain things that we do not possess, and certainly more should be
expected of old nations that had reached a comparatively high state of
civilization.

RACIAL EVOLUTION

It has been said, and it is a historic fact, that "the star of empire
westward takes its course." We have before us to-day the great, old
nation of China, embodying the civilization of a remote period. Next, in
order of time and place, come India, Egypt and the countries east of the
Mediterranean—Palestine—where our Lord gave the revelation of the
Christian religion. This religion has traveled westward over the
continent of Europe

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

until it has reached the Atlantic coast, and has crossed to America,
where its light shines from the Atlantic to the Pacific, the dawn of
which is beginning to break over China and India.

Again, civilization in its nature is cumulative; like the winding of a
thread upon a ball, as in a sense, it overlaps itself, it buries beneath
the surface the old, only that it may establish the new upon ever higher
ground.

When we look for an immediate cause for the successive rise and
decadence of nations and their civilization, we find that each nation,
having reached in its turn a comparatively high state of development,
probably as high as it was capable of reaching, was overcome and
destroyed by nations less advanced than itself. For history makes the
fact clear that, as man ascends in the scale of development he sees the
folly of war, combat, and struggle. He tires of struggling and arranges
an order of peace, and thus soon loses the ability to protect himself,
when the lower races come in and. destroy him.

We also find that the civilization of a nation has been led out always
by some special principle. In the case of the Greeks it was the love of
beauty and the perfection of physical manhood. We may say that art was
the center of their civilization.

With the Romans it was conquest and love of power, which degenerated
into self-indulgence and oppression, until finally they lost their power
and fell.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

The center around which the civilization of Egypt gathered, was magic,
the laws of nature, the psychic forces in the human family.

Thus, could we possess the history in detail of every nation that has
risen and fallen, we should find that, like vegetable life, each
possessed its own specific quality. Each grew and matured a special
quality of mind which, like the husk of the grain of wheat, enveloped
some great truth, and when maturity came and its work was accomplished,
the nation passed away as a form of vegetable life that had borne its
ripe fruitage.

However, we find that the civilization of the present age has reached a
point where science and mechanics have obliterated space and, in a
sense, time. The whole world, the ancient and the modern, is rapidly
being spread before the public gaze, and our race of to-day is eagerly
gathering all the grains of wheat, the great central truths that have
matured in the mind of civilizations from earliest times throughout its
successive stages to the present. Libraries, so ancient that history has
no record of the people that made them, are now being unearthed.
Nations, so far removed in the dim twilight of the past that we have no
means of knowing the time of their existence, are now presenting the
very details of their domestic life to our scrutiny. All these things
demonstrate the fact that the race has now reached a state of
development where it feels the need of, and consequently

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

is about to gather, the ripe fruitage of all ages.

The race is delving into the quarries of the present and of the past,
that, from the work of the hewers of all nations and all times, it may
construct a temple of knowledge transcending Solomon's in all its glory,
transcending anything that has ever existed upon the planet.

While the accumulating of knowledge has been going on so rapidly during
the last century, the mind of the scientist has been intently fixed upon
material manifestation. He has searched wisely and diligently for
causation in every physical direction, until he has reached the last
residuum of matter, a mere "point of force," and he can go no further
until he recognizes the source and nature of this force.

As there are small cycles of national development and race development,
so there are great cycles of world development—planetary cycles. If we
had a history of the Grand Cycle preceding the present one—"the elder
world" (ii. Esdras vii. 13), to which there are numerous incidental
references in our Bible and of which the sacred books of the East speak
so positively, then we should find that, while its people reached a high
state of maturity and spirituality, they were a race-round lower than
the present humanity.

EVOLUTION OF THE PLANET

Modern scientists run back in the history of the earth to the time
supposed to have existed when

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the planet was nebulous matter floating in space, and there they must
stop; for, in following theories relative to the formation of the earth,
many of them ignore the idea of a God, a Creator, and say that
everything is the outcome of natural law. In the very presence of a
disaster like the great earthquake in San Francisco, even the clergy
unite in saying that God had nothing to do with it, that it was simply a
natural phenomenon. This is as much as to say that God has nothing to do
with the affairs of nations or of men, that natural law and the
phenomena of nature are all there is. They do not think sufficiently to
ask what is meant by natural law.

It is true that everything follows a certain sequence—cause and effect
run through everything that we know. But let us trace back a little
further. Let us turn the telescope upon space. Way yonder we see a
nebulous mass, bright and luminous as a flaming sun, but, as we
carefully observe it, we find that we can look through it at some great
sun in the far distance, as if the nebula were but a thin veil over the
face of the star; thus proving beyond question that this nebulous matter
is what has been denominated "luminous gas."

Many theories have been advanced concerning this luminous substance, and
many have concluded that it is gas heated to great intensity. At the
same time they tell us that it is floating in a medium a hundred, if not
a thousand times colder than the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

temperature at the north pole. But no one has attempted to tell us why
this luminous gas interpenetrated by and floating in such cold can
remain heated to the intensity claimed. They may philosophize and try to
explain how it is possible for intense heat to be retained when
interpenetrated and surrounded by intense cold, but the fact remains
that nothing that is known to man makes it possible for a cloud of gas
to remain heated for one second in a medium so contrary to heat—to say
nothing of the untold years that it is supposed to have remained in this
state.

In order to account for its luminosity under such conditions, we must
look for something beyond the experience of every-day life. The recent
discovery of radium, however, evinces the fact that it is possible for
an element of nature to remain in a luminous state, and actually heated
to a certain. degree, which even the cold of liquid air cannot
extinguish. Is this new-found element on the borderline between Spirit
and the natural world? If we interrogate the Bible, we find there
numerous accounts of visitations from the spirit-world, sometimes in a
flame of fire, as God appeared to Moses in a burning bush, and the bush
was not consumed. At other times, the person of the visitant was said to
be as shining as the light, or as bright as the sun. When a Holy One
from the spirit-world enters a man's presence, though it be in the
darkness of the night, in the darkest room, the darkness is at

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

once dissipated and all is bright and luminous. The luminous brightness
is not seen merely with the spiritual eye but with the natural eye as
well. We read that God is Spirit and dwells in the light that no man can
approach. Again, the assertion is emphatic that by the word of God the
worlds were made, and surely we cannot believe that God created
something from nothing, therefore God created from himself. And this
nebulous matter of which worlds are formed is the substance of spirit, a
substance which is the emanation of a thought of Divinity.

We think, form conclusions, and when the conclusions are reached we
express them in words and acts. When we say that we express them, we
mean that there goes out from us the thought-form. In like manner, when,
in connection with the other creative words, the Elohim said, "Let us
make man," the thought was formed in the mind and sent out into space.
The substance of his own great nature appeared luminous and bright—as
the body of an angel—which scientists call "cosmic gas." As this cosmic
gas was a thought of Divinity, its mind-power became what is known as
the laws of nature, and, in the aeons of time, formed our earth, and has
carried forward evolutionary development of individual organisms, step
by step, to the present time.

Here we are met by two apparent discrepancies:

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

First, that Spirit is invisible to man. Second, that planets are born
from their parent suns.

Both of these objections resolve themselves into one, and in reply it
may be said that, if God created the world and what is in it from
himself, and if God is Spirit, then all that is must be a condition of
Spirit. Man, the product of that Creative Mind, is able to recognize
through the five senses that only which is upon a plane similar to his
own. Therefore, as the Spirit appears to us in the creation of worlds,
it first manifests itself as light, and also as heat, because of the
intensity of its vibration. Thus it is in this form that the word of God
appears in the very beginnings of material substance.

In regard to the second objection—that God cannot be the creator of
worlds if they are born from their parent suns—it may be further
suggested that, if God is the Producer of all things, the Life and
Substance of all substance, the Soul of all souls, then wherever God
works there is form and function. Worlds and suns are in form, and their
inhabitants that have become the embodiment of Spirit, the Elohim, are
his function. God works in man and woman in the creation of offspring,
and should we deny that he is working in the creation of worlds through
their parent suns?

JOINT EVOLUTION OF PLANET AND RACE

The purpose in the creation of the planet, as announced in the account
of Genesis, was to make

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

man in his image and like God. If, therefore, this was the purpose in
the thought—the word, which became the creative law in all nature—then
it is obvious that all things must move together toward the
accomplishing of the one definite object. Even the old philosopher,
Plato, saw the image of the thought of Divinity, as a man stretched in
the heavens. And to-day it is a demonstrated fact that the tendency of
all creation, of all growth and development, is toward man.

This being so, we see man, the most perfect manifestation of creative
law, a conscious, thinking, voluntary existence. The religionist says
that man is a special creation. Science says that man is the product of
the creative laws of the earth. Both are right, for although we read in
the revelation that God said "Let us make man," and that he made man,
yet this was in connection with, and a part of, the creative words from
which the worlds were made. (See Genesis i.)

Man is a special creation because he is the special purpose and the
result of all creative law. The apostle said, "For we know that the
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. And
not only so, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the
adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body" (Romans viii. 22, 23).
Yes, truly, the whole creation travaileth, and this travail of nature is
to

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

bring forth man. The spirit of life in the grass to-day will be the man
that will walk the planet in the far-off to-morrow. But the fact is not
changed—man was created by the thought of God, and so was the world, and
the two are conjoined as one.

There is within man an instinctive recognition of his Source and
destiny. The tendencies of his unbiased nature are toward God and his
likeness. It has been closely observed and well said that, from his
incipient stages of development, man has been a religious being. A race
of savages scarcely has been found so low in development that they have
not had some form of religious worship or recognition of God, the Source
of their being.

At the present time, however, as a result of his selfishness,
self-gratification and intellectual egotism, man has so completely
turned his back upon God and divine law that he has begun to repel the
very fountain from which he derives his life. The effects of this
discordant condition of man and his repellent attitude toward the Source
of his life are obvious. He, being the ultimate of planetary law, is in
position to dominate all nature, for the declared purpose was "Let them
have dominion over all the earth." From a physical standpoint, the
dominion of man over the earth is even now being recognized, but the
materialistic tendencies of the race have prevented a recognition of the
fact that the passions, emotions, desires, together with the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

loves and hates of the people, are a controlling principle producing its
effect throughout creative manifestation.

Man is the mind-center of the planet and his body is one with the earth
elements, joined to them by the mental currents that formed all things,
therefore, as the bodies of the race have become diseased through
perversion, disease and disturbance have entered also into the very
life-currents of the earth. And we may reasonably expect volcanic
eruptions; earthquakes, producing great destruction; fires, becoming
fiends, refusing to be quenched by ordinary methods; storms and
cyclones. We may expect the earth to manifest the same conditions that
our own bodies manifest when suffering from different phases of what we
call disease; and if this should continue the very condition of the
planet will cause death—dissolution.

If the perversion of man's nature diseases and destroys the planet, the
reverse must be also true; that is, divine order and harmony manifested
in the individual are a saving power to the earth. Our Lord recognized
this law when he said to his followers, "Ye are the salt of the earth:
but if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is
thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under
foot of men." (Mat. v. 13.)

We are told in the Revelation of Jesus Christ, sent to John on Patmos,
that there are to be

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 144,000 of the
first ripe fruit of the earth, who are to be gathered and brought into
perfect oneness and harmony with God, and to be made priests and kings
unto God and reign on the earth. As the Spirit said to Obadiah, "And
saviors shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the
kingdom shall be <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh's</span>.

History, Science, and Revelation point down to a time—the present time,
or the near future—when, notwithstanding the fact that man has forgotten
God, notwithstanding the diseased state of the planet, the upheavals and
the destruction of life and property, which will almost depopulate the
earth, there will be a saving power in a people. And this people, by the
power of unity with the mind of God, the Producer of all things, will
hold the earth as a vital-center, preserve its life, heal it of all
disease, rejuvenate it, and repopulate it with a higher race of men. As
Jesus was the great healer of all manner of disease, so this body of
144,000 will become the great healers, not only of the interior natures
of the people, but of their physical bodies, and of the spirit of the
life of the planet.

From the foregoing presentation of the ultimate toward which the life of
the planet tends—that is, to bring into manifestation a Godlike manhood
which is to dominate the earth—it becomes evident that a slow growth and
unfoldment, evolution, has been the process of nature from the beginning
of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the world to the present time. If this were not true the following and
many similar questions which arise in the mind of the reasonable thinker
would remain unanswerable; namely:

If there is a God, why does he permit so much anxiety, labor, and sorrow
to exist in the world? If there is to be a future existence, a paradise
of joy and peace, why the necessity of these thousands of generations
being doomed to sorrow and death? Why did not God in the beginning make
man perfect, and place him in that paradise; and endow him with wisdom,
knowledge and understanding, so that he could not fall and plunge the
race into misery for all these centuries? Why was not this kingdom of
righteousness, spoken of in the Revelation of Jesus Christ—commonly
called The Apocalyptic Vision—ultimated in the beginning?

The only answer to such questions is that knowledge in its very nature
is experience. Every father and mother knows, that before their sons are
fitted to go out to meet the world, they must have knowledge gained from
experience. The Christ announced that knowledge of the truth was to be
the savior (John viii. 32); and knowledge can come into existence and
form, only through multifarious experiences in many lives.

The present exposition of the object and processes of evolution has been
as condensed as possible—merely suggestive of the several lines of
thought and investigation connected therewith. But, we

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

think, it is sufficient to make clear the fact that the very spirit of
the life of the planet has in it a purpose, an object, and all
manifestation of life, all activity, has moved steadily toward the
ultimating of that purpose; namely, to bring into existence a. Godlike
humanity—Emanuel, God with us, God manifest in the flesh—angel men, sons
of God.

When we say "angel men" or "sons of God" the words are practically
meaningless from the world's present understanding of God and his
angels. It is therefore necessary to take a general view of the
scientific knowledge of the universe and of the revelation given to men
of God and his angels, so that the reader will bear with me if I seem to
diverge from the general thought of this work and to examine into the
material universe, its cause, its scope and immensity, its origin and
quality, into the nature of God, the soul of the universe, his
manifestation in organic form, as well as the object of our existence
and the ultimate toward which we with all nature are being led.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Other Worlds Than Ours](goal10.md)
