[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal20)  [Next](goal22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

### CHAPTER XVII.

#### THE LIKENESS OF GOD

#### *THE OFFICE OF THE CHRIST*.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> mystery of the ages is involved in
the consummating of the purpose of God—to make man in his *image* and
*likeness*, in the preparing of man to become heir of God and joint-heir
with Christ. In order to obtain a clear understanding of this subject,
it becomes necessary to consider:

1\. What is man?

2\. How man is brought into the Divine Likeness. In the effort to answer
the question

WHAT IS MAN?

it is necessary to consider the earth as it appears to our physical
senses, because it is a reality to all physical existence. We find that
man is limited to his planet; he lives from it, and without it he would.
immediately perish—man cannot live without food, water, and air. We
find, too, that if the brain is diseased, the man becomes insane, and
the change is as radical as if he were another being. This is evidence
to the materialistic mind that man has no life beyond animal life, and
this is true in itself and

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

is in accord with the teachings of Christ, for he said to those around
him, "Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am
not of this world." Thus he drew the line of distinction very clearly.

Again, he said concerning his life, and the life of men, "My time is not
yet come: but your time is alway ready," thus emphatically implying that
during the existence of the "carnal man," upon earth, he is subject to
accident, disease and death, so that he may pass out of the body at any
time.

In order to rise superior to such conditions there must be something
superadded, to which Jesus referred in the words: "Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have not life in
yourselves," and to those who objected, "How can this man give us his
flesh to eat?" he explained this eating of his flesh and drinking of his
blood by saying, "It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth
nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are
life." Thus he did away with the thought that the bread, or wafer, and
the wine are the actual flesh and blood of the Lord; and left us to the
indubitable conclusion that the eating of the wafer and the drinking of
the wine, are simply symbolism, a memorial of the fulness of times when
that which is symbolized will be realized.

But the great point under consideration is the emphatic utterance, "Ye
have not life in yourselves."

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Has man no life in
himself? Christ said in another place, "For as the Father hath life in
himself; so hath he given to the son to have life in himself," implying
that the son did not have life in himself, until it was given to him by
the Father.

Evidences are abundant all around us that man has no life in himself,
that he is dependent for his existence, as we have said, upon the food
he eats, the water he drinks, and the air he breathes. And yet this is
not all the life that animates men and animals, the *spirit* of the
*mundane* is the life of all creatures. We have seen in former chapters
that the planet earth was created by a word, that all is spirit, mind;
this being so, all there is of man comes from the creative-word active
in the earth.

Each world is a separate thought of God. A man thinks of his office,
then of his farm, and each is separate from the other, and so it is with
God's thoughts in the creation of worlds.

In the thought of creating the planet earth and man upon it, was the
potentiality to make a world make itself, the potentiality of all
creative-law; so that, when we speak of the *spirit* of the *mundane*,
we refer to this one, definite, thought of the Creative Mind, which
involves the process of bringing man out from the invisible and passing
him through all the experiences of an earthly life—generation, labor,
sorrow and death.

The fact that the Holy Spirit is separate from

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

the earth is set forth in the teachings of the Scriptures. Man is there
spoken of as having been separated from God, as being purely of the
earth, earthy, of the *spirit* of the *mundane*, the *creative spirit*.
It is there shown that he must be redeemed from the power of the
mundane—in order to have any life in himself he must be made partaker of
the Holy Spirit, the Spirit that is above all. (See John iii. 31.)

From these conclusions it may be inferred that there is no immortality
in man's existence. This is both true and untrue, for we read, "I know
that what God doeth it shall be forever; nothing can be put to it, nor
anything taken from it: and God doeth it, that man should fear before
him."

As God created man, therefore man exists forever, and the very earth
that he lives on, the very *spirit* of the *mundane* from which his
thoughts are derived, is of God, is of Spirit, but it is one thought of
the Infinite Mind—to create this world and man in His *likeness*. This
thought of creating the world—the mundane—is separate from all the other
thoughts of the Infinite, in the same way that one of our thoughts is
separate from all other thoughts, or is devoted to a specific object.

It is a well-known fact that when a man's mind is centered and he works
on one idea at a time, he is more efficient than when he tries to grasp
too much at once, for then he accomplishes little. The same is true in
regard to this earthly sphere. In

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

order that man may go on developing and fulfilling the object for which
he was created, he is limited to his surroundings and to his earthly
needs, and he must necessarily be limited and bound to this existence
until he has finished growing and unfolding and has reached the
condition where he feels the need of a higher life, a superior
consciousness.

We have seen that reincarnation is a law, that the real man, the soul
which is made up of the memories of a lifetime, survives the body and
returns by reincarnating until it is sufficiently mature to recognize
God, its Father. Here seems to be a direct contradiction—man dies and
the memory-body is reincarnated and yet man does not remember his former
life.

That the memory-body does not die, however, but is reincarnated and
persists in man, has been brought to light by the hypnotist; for a very
illiterate person is frequently found, when under hypnotic influence, to
be highly educated. The interior individual has had a superior
education, for he is able to speak different languages and to converse
in the most perfect diction; but when the hypnotic spell is removed, the
consciousness returns to the same illiteracy. The explanation of this is
found in the fact of reincarnation, that is, there is a memory-body
latent within the personality which is incapable of uniting with the
external consciousness.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

We have seen that man has no life in himself, and even this memory-body
has no life in itself, but lives from spirit. It must, however, live
from the spirit of its own sphere; that is to say, a stream cannot rise
above its source, neither can the memory-body, or the physical body, do
more than to act from its own qualities or from the sphere from which
its own qualities have been derived. Now, as all that constitutes the
memory-body has been derived from the experiences of a material
existence in the physical world, it must continue to exist from that
world, which means that it must continue to live from and express the
*spirit* of the *mundane*, and as there is nothing in the *spirit* of
the *mundane* that has any power to perpetuate the physical structure,
therefore there is no immortality in the individual consciousness, for
man is of the earth, earthy.

The work of the *spirit* of the *mundane* is unfinished work; it is
merely preparatory, or preliminary, to the ultimate purpose of creation.
The earth is a thought expressed for a purpose, and the purpose, or
trend of the creative activities, is to make man in "The Image of God"
and in "<span class="smallcaps">The Likeness of God</span>."

We have presented man as a creature of earth, subject to all the
vicissitudes of an earthly existence, to all the changes that are
constantly taking place on the earth; a creature subject to all the laws
governing an earthly existence, without

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

any capacity at his command to perpetuate himself. He has no life in
himself, but is dependent for life upon the planet and upon the *spirit*
of the *mundane*; he is carried forward by the work of evolution,
generation after generation. He has a free-will, it is true; he is free
to act his real nature; he can get the will to do nothing more, nothing
less. So is every animal free, but every creature must act in accordance
with its nature. It is accepted by many psychologists that man cannot
even think that which is not in himself; he cannot think a thought, the
qualities of which are not within.

Jesus often expressed the same thought, "He that is of God heareth God's
words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God;" and
again, "But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said
unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me."
Here Jesus seemed to carry out the idea that they were of the earth,
earthy, and could think only the thoughts of earth. Again, he said to
Nicodemus, "If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how
shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things?" The earthly things
of which Christ was speaking were in relation to the rebirth, the being
born from above, for he said, "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and
thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and
whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit."

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

Having viewed man as of the earth, earthy, we come now to a
consideration of

HOW MAN IS BROUGHT INTO THE DIVINE LIKENESS

That man has nothing directly to do with being begotten from above, is
clearly brought out in the text last quoted. We merely recognize that
the wind blows. We know not why it blows, where it comes from, or where
it goes.

When man through growth and development has reached the point where he
is capable of receiving a higher influx from the Spirit, the Spirit
flows into him as naturally as the flower gathers to itself the added
qualities that make up the blossom, or as the fruit-tree gathers the
qualities that make the luscious fruit—perhaps through an unsavory
quality of sap that nourishes the tree. This, in vegetable life, is a
manifestation of that wondrous law of being begotten from above. A
wonderful metamorphosis takes place in the tree when, after it has grown
year after year and has reached maturity, it puts forth beautiful
blossoms, a thing never known of it before. The blossoms drop their
petals and the fruit appears, which finally ripens and becomes pleasant
to the eye and to the taste and is good for food.

So man has been growing, generation after generation, throughout the
cycles of the world's existence, until now isolated individuals put
forth the blossom of spiritual desire—a blossom which

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

is by virtue of the inflowing of an added quality, a quality that did
not exist in man before.

What did Jesus mean by declaring, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves"? A question he
partially answers by saying, "The words that I have spoken unto you, are
spirit, and are life"—as much as to say, That is what I am talking
about; not the flesh, not the blood, but the *spirit*, for "the flesh
profiteth nothing." Here the mystery deepens. Why does not man become a
partaker of the Holy Spirit long before he does? Is it because the
Spirit is not present?—The Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, fills all
things, all space. There is no space in the whole universe that is not
filled with the Holy Spirit; but we cannot touch Spirit; to Spirit, man
is but a shadow.

That which is in a lower sphere is always but a shadow to that which is
in a higher sphere. Therefore, though the higher is all-pervading, it
can never touch the lower except through intermediaries. Like can touch
like only, and the consciousness can be conscious only of that which is
like itself.

As we move about the Spirit passes through us as if we were not, and
there is nothing in man to give him even a consciousness of the
existence of Spirit. Consequently some of the brightest minds of the day
are denying the existence of God and Spirit and of everything beyond
their own conscious life.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

Because of this law that like can touch like only, it was necessary that
God should send to earth one who had gained the right to be called <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim—one of the masters that had
passed beyond the need of a physical body—to take on the flesh of man.
Paul said, "he took on him the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things
it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren." Having been clothed
upon with flesh, but being a master in his real essence and substance,
he knew God, Spirit. He knew the Holy Spirit from past experience. He
was begotten of that Holy Spirit. He was a son of God and God's Spirit
was the substance of his being. He was able, therefore, absolutely to
control the physical body, to inspire the Spirit of the Father, the Holy
Spirit, and passing it through the brain-organs, he clothed the Spirit
with the substance of the physical mind. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md)

In order to make the Spirit of God accessible to the vital currents and
mentality of man, it became essential that a spiritual being clothe
himself with a body of flesh, and by the power of the Spirit within him,
transmute the flesh and fit it to become the clothing of the spiritual
germ. As a seed clothes the vital germ and fits it to be planted in the
earth, so Christ fitted the spiritual substance to be planted in his
people. Man could never have known the things of God unless there had
been such a

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

mediator, such a nature, to stand immediately between the Spirit, God,
and the brain-power of the race, so that man should be enabled to
partake of the things of God and to materialize them, so to speak, into
his fleshly substance—thus giving them clothing like those things that
the human mind is accustomed to handling.

Certain experiences in modern life suggest this law; for instance, a
person who is spiritually minded falls asleep and during the sleep state
he dreams concerning spiritual things. The dream interests him intensely
and it is so clear and so well defined that when he awakens he thinks he
shall be able to recall it all to mind, but he finds that he cannot
recall any of the particulars, the powers of re-collection cannot touch
them. He feels the influence of the dream and seems to have drawn in a
certain substance, but yet the mind cannot touch it. What does this
mean?

It means simply that the soul-consciousness has become almost, but not
quite, able to control the physical consciousness. When the physical is
dormant, the soul can think from the soul-world, but when the physical
comes into activity, the qualities of the substance of which these
thoughts are formed are too subtile for the action of the brain, and
therefore they cannot be called into the brain. They can not obey the
call of the desire-mind.

Jesus came a member of that world of immortality, a world where the
inhabitants live from the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

substance of the Spirit. "He took on him the seed of Abraham;" he lived
in that fleshly body, he thought in it, controlled it and thus
qualitated it by the power of the Spirit. He made for that Spirit a
covering of the transmuted substance of flesh and blood, thus clothing
the Spirit of God—making it a seed.

We plant a kernel of wheat, composed apparently of very material
substance, and it springs forth and grows. The material substance dies
and disintegrates; but the life that is in it, that subtile, invisible,
intangible something, gathers to itself like qualities and makes for
itself a new body.

So the Christ came that he might take of the flesh and the blood of man
to create a seed whose substance was spirit. This seed was planted in
his people on the day of Pentecost, and like the kernel of wheat (See
John xii. 24) it grew, matured and multiplied and will continue to grow
until the fulness of time comes, when the "harvest of the world" is
gathered in—the harvest of the first planting of Christ, the Seed-man.
(See Mark iv. 26-29.)

Thus Christ generated in the world, through the unity of Spirit and
flesh, a quality that did not exist therein until his time—a superior
quality belonging to a plane next beyond the plane of creative-life, or
the *spirit* of the *mundane*. As the prophet said of him, "He shall see
his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> shall prosper in his hand." (Is. liii.
10.)

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

The force of the prophet's words, "He shall see his seed," was
strengthened when he said, "More are the children of the desolate than
the children of the married wife, saith <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>;" for ultimately more will be the seed
of the Christ-life—the *union* of *Spirit* with *matter* that took place
in his body, by which sons and daughters of God are born—than the spirit
of generation.

Again, "that which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born
of the Spirit is spirit"—that which was begotten in the Christ was
spirit clothed with the substance of flesh. This subtile element of the
thought-qualities of the Christ, planted in the race, in the lives of
men and women, being a quality purer, higher, holier and therefore more
potential, than had before existed in the race, made the spiritual
potency of man more tenacious. Through this potency, and through this
only, can immortality be attained; through it, and through it only, can
mind be formed in man that will be able to know spirit and, at the same
time, to know the things of earth. Through it man, recognizing the
Father, will unite with the Spirit of God, and become Immanuel, God with
us, or God in us, God manifest in the flesh—"The Likeness of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[215:\*](goal21.htm#fr_12.md) We know that the
thoughts that we think partake of the qualities of the body, because
thinking exhausts the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Likeness of God: Three Steps](goal22.md)
