[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal11)  [Next](goal13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

#### THE GREAT NAME, <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> have seen in preceding chapters that
the physicists have searched diligently into the character and nature of
matter from a physical standpoint; but in their last analysis, viz.,
their investigations into the molecule, atom, ion, and electron, and
their deductions that, after all, the smallest particles of matter may
be only "centers of force," they have invaded the realm of the
[metaphysical](errata.htm#7). At this point the physicist stops to look
around him for a base, a substantial foundation, to which he may unite
his forces with the metaphysician's in pursuit of causation.

If we assume the task to find that base, that center, and herein present
it, it will necessitate investigations into that broad field of thought
that has been denominated "Revelation," as well as investigations into
nature.

We have assumed the existence of God, of an intelligent, creative
Mind-power that is able to cause to be, and—as we shall see in following
chapters—to bring into existence mind-centers to be the expression of
its own nature or, in other

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

words, mind-centers through which this Universal Mind expresses itself.

Theology has gathered around the word "Revelation" so much debris that
it is necessary first to clear away the rubbish in order to get at the
real meaning. Revelation in its essence means simply an angel-hand
placing in a dark and dangerous passage a bright light. From this we
assume that there is an angel, an intelligent being, who would cause us
to know that which is necessary to be known in order that we may avoid
pitfalls and dangerous errors, and that our mind may grow into the
Divine Likeness—into the likeness of its Source.

If we were passing through a dark and dangerous passage, and a hand
placed there a light, should we, like the moth, be so absorbed in the
existence of the light, that we stumble and fall and perhaps destroy
ourselves? No, as intelligent beings understanding the use of light,
instead of looking at the lamp, we look around us and examine our
pathway, and the light reveals to us the condition that
[surrounds](errata.htm#8) us. This, then, is an illustration of what
*Revelation* is, and all revelation from the beginning of the world down
to the present time is nothing more, nothing less, than a *light* in a
dark place. One of the greatest lights that has ever been set in this
dark world, is the *revelation* of the *meaning* of the great name of
God.

Modern usage gives a mere word-sound to

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

represent an object, but in divine order a name expresses quality. In
the *meaning* of the great name of God is the *light* that illuminates
that dark passage between the material world and the world of
metaphysics, or the world of mind.

The great name of God was known from the earliest history of man to the
time when Moses was called to deliver Israel from Egyptian bondage: but,
like the name of the present day, it was to those early people only a
word-sound or an appellation referring to a certain deity. But when
Moses was commissioned to deliver [Israel](errata.htm#9) he was not
given the name only, but he was given to know the meaning also, as we
shall see further on.

The name <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>—translated *Jehovah* a
few times—occurs many times throughout the Hebrew Scriptures and is
translated <span class="smallcaps">Lord</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">God</span>. But in order to distinguish this the name
of God from the other names of God in the Authorized Version, the
translators have nearly always put it in capitals. Concerning the name
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, we give the following references:

"And God said unto Moses, <span class="smallcaps">I will be that I will
be</span>: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel,
<span class="smallcaps">I will be</span> hath sent me unto you." (Exodus
iii. 14, Rabbi Leeser's translation.)

"And God said unto Moses, <span class="smallcaps">I am that I am</span>
\[Heb. *ehyeh asher ehyeh*\]; and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the
children of Israel, <span class="smallcaps">I am</span> hath sent me
unto

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

you. That this passage is intended to indicate the etymology of Jehovah
as understood by the Hebrews, no one has ventured to doubt—it is in fact
the key to the whole mystery. But, though it certainly supplies the
etymology, the interpretation must be determined from other
considerations. Jehovah must be the third person, singular, masculine,
future, of the substantive verb *hayah* to be. We accept Yahveh as the
more probable punctuation."—"Dictionary of the Bible," by Dr. William
Smith.

"Although we may not be able to give with perfect certainty the literal
meaning of this name, yet at least we will no longer designate it by the
barbarous form 'Jehovah' (which was produced only three centuries ago
through Christian aggravation of a Jewish superstition), but we will
restore its real sound *Hahve*, were it only as a sign that Hebrew
antiquity is now springing up among us out of the grave of ages, endowed
with fresh life."—Heinrich Ewald.—"History of Israel," translated by
Russell Martineau.

"So far as the interests of criticism are concerned all scholars are now
agreed. Gesenius and Ewald on the side of Philologists; Hengstenberg,
Tholuck, Lutz, etc., on the side of theologians, are united for once.
They all agree in giving it the form <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> and the *future* tense, as its literal
rendering."—"Yahveh Christ," by Alexander McWhorter.

These quotations show that scholars are to a great extent agreed as to
the pronunciation of the name,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

that some have even discovered its true surface meaning, and that the
name relates to the one God, the God of the universe, the all-pervading
Spirit. We read in Exodus iii. 13, 14 and 15:

"And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children of
Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me
unto you: and they shall say unto me, What is his name? what shall I say
unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I will be what I will to be: and he said, Thus
shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, <span class="smallcaps">I
will be what I will to be</span> hath sent me unto you.

And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children
of Israel, The <span class="smallcaps">Lord</span> God \[Yahveh Elohim\]
of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name forever and this is my
memorial unto all generations."

The fourteenth verse is intended to present to Moses the true
signification of the divine name, the name of the all-pervading,
all-intelligent God of all the universe, but the words capitalized and
translated in the Authorized Version—"<span class="smallcaps">I am that
I am</span>" are given in the Revised Version of the Old Testament in
three different ways, namely, "<span class="smallcaps">I am because I
am</span>," or, "<span class="smallcaps">I am who I am</span>," or
"<span class="smallcaps">I will be that I will be</span>." The last form
is undoubtedly the most nearly correct. Surely, to anybody that accepts
the Scriptures as authority, the words, "This is my name forever and
this is my memorial

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

unto all generations," are plain enough that this is the name, and the
only name, applying to God, and that all other forms are incorrect.

There are many evidences that this name began to be known to other
nations about the time of Moses, and in the fourth verse of the second
chapter of Genesis the name occurs the first time. Then what may we
understand as the meaning of the words in Exodus vi. 2 and 3: "And God
spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>: and I appeared unto Abraham, unto
Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty \[Heb. *El
Shaddai*\], but by my name <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> was I
not known to them"?

The declaration here that the children of Israel did not know God's name
must inevitably imply that while they knew and used the word, they did
not know its meaning, nor the fulness of its import, and that this
revelation to Moses was a revelation of the true meaning and import of
the divine name, for surely a word-sound has no value of itself, and
this word-sound it seems was known and used by other people, as well as
by Israel.

But when we take the meaning of the word "Yahveh" as "<span
class="smallcaps">I will be what I will to be</span>," it brings to us a
potentiality, a power, all unknown to the world, even at the present
time; for the name carries with it the thought that he who spoke the
word and caused the world to form and to produce itself by the potency
of that Infinite Mind,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

did so by the power of his will, and when we as creatures of earth muse
much upon the signification of that name, the "<span class="smallcaps">I
will</span>," and the second part of it, "<span class="smallcaps">to be
what I will to be</span>," or "<span class="smallcaps">as I will to
be</span>," we get a realization of that unlimited power, and a
certainty that there is no power in the world, nay, in the universe, but
the power of the <span class="smallcaps">will</span>.

Since it is accepted by the Christian world that man is the offspring of
the Almighty, it follows that man, being made in the image of God, has
attributes similar to those of his Creator, his Father. When man's will
has been surrendered, yea, rather has been united to the Divine Will,
then man and God become one, for the mind of man is nothing; it has no
power of action without the will.

Man always does that which he wills to do, although sometimes there are
found in the man two wills active at the same time—the will of the
flesh, or the will arising from the impulses, desires, and passions, and
a will that arises from the conclusions of the reasoning faculties. But
whatever will controls the person, that the person is for the time
being; for the will decides all that a person is.

If we accept the statement that each organ of the brain is the seat of a
separate faculty, then we may say that all the faculties of the brain
are like a congress of persons in conference one with another and that
the will, the supreme power, positioned

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

in the center and upper part of the brain, is the king or president, the
executor of the decisions of all the faculties.

In the same manner we may say that the Divine Will is King of kings and
Lord of lords. It is the potency that holds all worlds and systems of
worlds in their places, that governs all life upon them, and that gives
direction and potentiality to all forms of existence and to all laws
manifested in nature. It is because of this that man in his return to
God is taught to pray, "Let thy will be done," or in other words, this
prayer means that the desire of the heart must be that the will of the
finite become the will of the Infinite.

When man has become absolutely subordinate to the Divine Will, then it
will be correct to say of him, as was said of the angel that was sent to
Aaron when the children of Israel were about to enter the promised land,
"My name is in him," for, as soon as the man unites his will, his
desire, and his purpose in life with God, he is one with Him, God's name
is in him, God's will is his will, he moves under the potentiality and
power of that will, and to all intents and purposes the will becomes the
man. In other words, the Infinite Mind and its conclusions, which are
the purpose concerning man in the creation of the world, become the will
of the man; thus man becomes the manifestation of God—of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

As we shall see hereafter, those who were wholly consecrated to God and
had reached high attainments in their unity with the Father, were called
"<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>" by Moses. Jesus, the Christ,
said, "I and my Father are one." We know that our Christian brethren
thinking upon this without further light have concluded that Christ was
one of the triune Godhead. That is true, because God has a threefold
manifestation. First, as the Father or Producer of all that is—the
Creator. Second, as the Holy Spirit, translated the Holy Ghost, the
active agency. Third, as manifested in human form, the son of God. We
read of Christ that he was manifest that he might bring many sons unto
God.

Again he said in regard to that oneness in his notable prayer: "Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in
me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us." Here Jesus makes it
plain that there are not many Gods, but one, but that there are many
manifestations of God in the form of his sons.

But as soon as a man becomes truly a son of God, his will becomes one
with the Father's will, thus they are no more two, but one. For all
there is of life, of existence, of being, is the mind, for God produced
all things by a word, viz., a thought formed in the mind, a decision
reached and sent out

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

by the force of the will, endowing the thought-form with potentiality
capable of working out and bringing into manifestation the thing decided
upon.

Jesus was the last messenger who stood before the world as the ultimate
embodiment of that creative-word, a finished man, a son of God, a man in
whom God was incarnated and through whom he found complete expression,
as Christ said, "I can do nothing of myself, the Father that dwelleth in
me, He doeth the works." Thus the name of God is the name of the divine
attribute or active agency that produced all manifestation and lies
beyond, beneath and overrules all action. Here words fail to express
fully the deep, comprehensive meaning of that great name, but he that
would be wise and strong and godlike should muse much upon the
signification of this wondrous name of the God of the universe, <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>—the "<span class="smallcaps">I will be
what I will to be</span>."

We have here endeavored to give a little of the history of that wondrous
name and of its relatedness to the active agency in the human organism,
but the world is in the habit of looking to authority, and if the
authority for a thought, according to its judgment, is found
insufficient, the thought is thrown aside as worthless. But we wish to
impress upon the reader that the authority for this name in itself
amounts to nothing. We have likened revelation to a light, mere
authority has no light in it,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

but the thought embodied in the word-formation is the *light*.

In carefully examining our own bodies we find that we cannot move a
muscle without the consent of the will. We find also that while
physiologists discourse very learnedly about the mechanical structure of
the voluntary and involuntary muscles of the human organism, yet the
real factor is not understood. What physiologist has been able to
describe the *modus operandi* of the mind and the will upon the muscular
system? A dead body has no power to use its muscles. Electricians have
experimented upon the bodies of men just executed and have been able to
cause them to throw the limbs about in a reckless, uncertain manner, but
they applied a power outside of and beyond the power of the mind—this
power had no knowledge or order to guide it.

Experiment with your own body. Take hold of an object weighing ten,
twenty or fifty pounds and lift it by bending your arm. Observe
carefully where the power comes from. By careful observation you will
find that the power is in the brain, and by still more careful analysis
you will find that the power is in the will. We will, and then we act,
or we will to act.

Herein is a manifestation of the name of God in our own organism. Whence
did we get that will power, that power to act?—From the creative-source,
did we not?—Certainly. As we look out

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

into the broad realm of nature we see the noble horse pulling a great
load; we see his muscles contract and expand. What power is it that is
pulling the load?—<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> the will of the
universe—this power is one manifestation of the great name. But as we
shall consider in succeeding chapters its manifestation in all its
wondrous ramifications, we wish here only to impress upon the mind of
the reader the force and function of the will, of that revealed power,
the <span class="smallcaps">I will be what I will to be</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Manifestation of Yahveh](goal13)
