[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal04)  [Next](goal06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE GOAL OF LIFE

###### OR

## SCIENCE AND REVELATION

### CHAPTER I.

#### DEVELOPMENT.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> beginnings of organized life act from
instinct without brain-power to define and guide the impulse. The insect
moves about apparently without aim, a little way in one direction, and
back, then in another. Universal Life runs it in accordance with its
form and quality, as the water runs the waterwheel. But as experience is
gathered from hunger, meeting enemies, and the general struggle for
existence, brain-powers begin to develop, and with the developing of the
brain the general nervous structure develops and refines. In this way
Universal Mind takes of the elements of the earth and organizes for
itself a body through which to find expression, through which to carry
forward a line of growth toward the fulness of manhood.

In its early history, the race was largely dominated by the instincts,
because it was without sufficient

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

brain-power correctly to define the mental impulses from the cause-side.
It was not until a comparatively advanced stage of racial progress that
the higher light of intuition appeared. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md)

Because mind always turns toward its source, consciousness toward its
origin, man has always been a religious being; but before the reasoning
faculties were sufficiently developed to have an intelligent recognition
of the impulses of the Universal Mind, his religion was as immature as
his mentality and he worshipped the sun, moon, and stars, and images of
his own ideals.

During this period the intellect was slowly unfolding, and as an aid to
its growth, "Revelation," in the external types and shadows of its
manifestation, was given to the people as they could receive it, for it
was in this form that the earlier revelations came to the race.

It is a law that thought suggested to the mind, though not understood,
much less comprehended, builds itself into the organism, so that when
the building is complete the meaning of the thought is grasped.
Therefore revelation came first in types and shadows, the external form
of the vital energy that was within.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

Added revelation was given as fast as the race developed sufficiently to
receive it, but the vital reality was always represented by some
material

symbol, and in the effort to interpret the revelation gross errors crept
in. In addition to this there were other fruitful sources of error.
Being largely under the control of the instincts, the people were
exceedingly superstitious—every manifestation of the incomprehensible,
the grand, or the sublime, was to them always through the direct
intervention of some unseen being. Thus, in addition to the
nature-forces, a multiplicity of gods took form in the popular mind, and
the pantheons of the different nations came into existence.

Again, the inclination of the human mind to seek cause readily developed
into a search for magic power. There is and always has been in the human
will a power entirely incomprehensible—a fact which led the earlier
nations into ceremonial magic, the black arts, and all the equipments of
a religious and superstitious mind. But the coming of the Christ to
earth lifted the race above this dark cloud of superstition; for it is
universally admitted that the Christian religion lies at the foundation
of the height and glory of our civilization.

Nevertheless, as the records of the past show that there was an
apparently darkened mental condition of the world at the time of the
revelation of our Bible, and because the mind of the day is turned
almost exclusively toward scientific investigation of

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the laws of nature, those mental states that led the race into the light
of revelation seem crude and repulsive. The present trend of the
mentality is to turn altogether from intuition and to depend wholly upon
the reasoning brain. A study of the record of racial experience during
the centuries of the past, especially of the nations immediately allied
to our own, and the present scientific investigation of a most
materialistic character, complete the education given in our colleges
and to our clergy. Ever is held up that frightful effigy of the darkened
mind of the past as a warning against credulity and superstition.

This effigy has intensified a materialistic mentality, and has caused
the educated classes to fear even to admit to their own souls the
possibility of revelation or the active principle of intuition. They
have practically shut out everything that savors in the slightest degree
of a manifestation of spiritual activity, and, consequently, spiritual
inspiration and added revelation are no longer possible.

The terms "inspiration" and "revelation" have been misapplied, and
therefore need definition: Inspiration bears to revelation the relation
of cause to effect. Inspiration is not necessarily the act of a human
agent becoming a medium of expression for a being in the spirit-world,
but it is a well-known phenomenon of every-day life. The act of
recalling a thought we call "re-collection;" that is, we have had an
experience and have forgotten it, a suggestion

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

comes to our mind of something concerning this experience and we wish to
recall it. The mind is at once concentrated upon the desired thought,
every other thought intruding itself is repelled, and the mind—held in
the attitude of desiring, reaching out for one definite thought—draws
in, inspires, the refined substance generated in the body and expressed
through the brain at the time of the experience.

This wonderful formative-principle, active in all growth throughout the
world, has its highest manifestation in the brain of man; and the subtle
elements, generated in the body by past experience of thinking, are
called again into the brain—recollected—and they are remembered. Every
part of the occurrence is put together again, member to member, and the
experience in all its original form and power stands out before the
consciousness which recognizes that which is past.

In like manner, when the heart is sad from a sense of something to be
known which is not known, the same faculty is called into activity and
reaches out into the realm of Universal Mind to gather that which is
desired. The sadness of heart produces a negative state in the inner
consciousness, and intensifies desire. Under such circumstances the
individual gathers from the unknown, and otherwise unknowable, the
knowledge of which the soul feels the need. The knowledge thus inspired,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

when formed in the mind, becoming a vivid realization, is a phase of
revelation.

Still another form of revelation is that received when God sees that a
man needs knowledge of something of importance to himself or to the
race. Under such circumstances—the inner attitude obtaining in the
mind—angels from the world of souls are frequently sent to him with
messages of truth and wisdom.

But in order to receive the message, the man, as the great teacher said,
must become as a little child—he must realize that he does not know and
earnestly desire to know. Because of this fact revelation from the
spirit-world is always preceded by a condition which breaks down the
selfish mentality, and produces in the individual an earnest, child-like
desire to know and to do the right. This destroys, for the time being,
all preconceived ideas; enabling the mind to be receptive and to listen.
Then the messenger who is sent from on high, all unknown to the
individual, draws near and unites his mentality with the mentality of
the one to whom he is sent, thus causing him to know even as the
messenger knows. Therefore, in place of a command from a controlling
mind, a loving unity is formed for the time and the man is treated as a
"friend of God."

But fear of every kind, even fear of error, fear of what people may say,
an undue appreciation of one's own mental capacity, a disposition to
criticize

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

anything that may not agree with preconceived ideas—everything not in
accordance with the thought of the messenger tends to repel him and to
reject his message.

The education of the present day is such that even the most devout and
earnest are afraid to receive revelation from God, and therefore the
door is practically closed between God in the spirit-world and man in
the material world. There are barriers set up against everything except
physical experience, and, consequently, new and added revelation of
spiritual truth cannot be received.

Not only is the "trained mind," barred in every direction except in the
direction of physical experience, but even here it must specialize; that
is, restrict itself to a particular line of a very limited department of
investigation. Thus the person atrophies by disuse every faculty of even
the external mind, except those necessary to the very narrow line of
activities to which he is confined. To those familiar with the faculties
of our great universities, the effect of this most absolute sacrifice of
the individual to the cause of popular education is very evident. The
broader intellectual interests are closed to its members, and, except in
the department of their own work, they are to a decided degree mentally
incapacitated. One can look into their faces and almost tell the line of
specialization each has chosen.

Not only do our leading educators, but the majority

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

of the men who lead in the research of the time, sacrifice themselves to
the advancement of science. But it is well known that if a man is to
attain marked success in any direction, he must focalize his whole mind
upon that subject; results are reached in this way that can be obtained
in no other.

The Cyclopean eye figures a reality of life referred to by our Lord when
he said: "If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of
light." (Matt. vi. 22.) For purposes of concentration upon one subject,
the physical eyes and the eyes of the mind become one—physically upon
the book before you, mentally upon the thought under consideration. And
when concentration is upon material things, the eye sees nothing else.
The Cyclopean eye of to-day has its development in the specialization of
the intellectual world. Therefore the education of modern times,
conforming the mind as it does to its present channels, is in itself
necessary and good, notwithstanding the fact that it narrows the range
of the intellectual vision.

A phenomenon of mind, before referred to, is that inspiration takes
place when the entire attention is focalized upon one subject to the
exclusion of every other. But in order to obtain this condition of
concentration, it is necessary to repel—which is a combative
attitude—every thought but the one sought. In our educational
institutions we find this necessary repulsion carried to an extreme of
an intolerance

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

which condemns and rules out the higher faculties of the human mind, the
faculties that lie at the very root, the foundation of consciousness,
and with them is excluded the spirit of devotion or recognition of God.

The accepted training of the mind is good in that it teaches the use of
the perceptive faculties, to formulate orderly thought in regard to
observable facts of physical nature, and gives control of the external
mentality, but, sad to say, the present methods array the entire
consciousness against God, the Spirit, and destroy the ability to reason
from cause to effect, training the mind to reason exclusively from
effect to cause, while, strange contradiction, cause is at the same time
ignored.

Some of our able men have noted the fact, that it takes but a year or
two in our theological institutions to eradicate the habit of religious
devotion, and in its place to imbue the mind with the spirit of
infidelity—infidelity to one's own highest attributes of mind and soul
consciousness, and infidelity in regard to the validity of Bible
Revelation.

If this is the course of instruction given by religious teachers, is it
surprizing that the religion of Christ is at such a low ebb in the world
to-day? The vital thought-currents of the race are despised, condemned
and repelled, and only those faculties recognized which have unfolded
through the struggle of animal existence from its lowest form up to the
present highly developed animal part of human

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

nature. Then we are asked: If the things of which we are about to write
are true, why have they not been known before?—The reason is obvious in
the fact that we, as civilized nations, have been working so diligently
to close the door to all approaches from the cause-side.

These conditions have grown out of fear—perhaps justifiable fear; for,
in the absence of a mind that has surveyed the whole road and is capable
of grasping the problem of life and putting in order before the people
the broader outlines of truth—the great scheme of growth and
development—the prevailing materialistic intolerance has been the
protection against the grossest superstition and error. Under existing
circumstances the best thing possible has been done. Throughout can be
traced the general plan of the great Creative Mind that formed the world
and man upon it.

It is a well-known fact that a man can do but one piece of work at a
time. Therefore the Creator—or, if you please, the creative-forces
working in the growth of the different races in different periods of the
world's history—developed first a consciousness of the unseen and cause
world; but, as we have said, the incapacity of the brain correctly to
interpret causation made it necessary to take the race into the external
activities, and round out to completeness the capacities of the gray
matter in its relation to the physical world.

These capacities have been developed, and does

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

not the time, the stage of development, the need of the people, cause
the crying demand of the day for other and higher revelation?—a demand
that we go back, pick up, and carry forward that faculty of instinct
that lies at the very foundation of our being, that we take hold upon it
by the matured brain-power, and develop in the race the intuitional
power that will enable man to become more like his Creator—with a right
hand to grasp the material universe and its workings and a left hand to
grasp the spiritual forces and laws of causation, and thus blend his
spiritual nature into a well-rounded and complete manhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:\*](goal05.htm#fr_0.md) As the terms "instinct"
and "intuition" have been confused, it may be well to state briefly
their relative meanings. Instinct is the impulse produced upon an
organism by the Universal Mind. It becomes intuition when the
brain-power is sufficiently unfolded correctly to understand and to
define the thought embodied in the impulse, and the use to be served by
the act which is the result of the impulse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Existence of Higher Faculties](goal06.md)
