[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal05)  [Next](goal07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE EXISTENCE OF HIGHER FACULTIES.

<span class="smallcaps">Man</span> in his developing has become
overbalanced in the direction of the reasoning faculties, and, as
suggested in the preceding chapter, the harmony of a well-rounded
maturity demands that the intuitional faculties be understood and given
their full function. As intelligent, thinking beings, we find ourselves
here with but a vague idea of how we came to be here, or of what forces
projected us into being, and with less idea of the origin of conscious
intelligence.

In order to obtain a knowledge of such truths, we must have an adequate
conception of the immensity of the universe and of its eternal duration,
and a realization that we are integral parts of the universe, integral
parts of something we have discerned faintly, and vaguely defined as
law, nature. In the dark ages of human intelligence when it was
illuminated only from its source, this something about which so little
is known was called "God," a term which expressed the idea of power
only—all-mighty, all-comprehensive power.

From this very early phase of human experience,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

have come two modes of thought and action—the reasoning mentality and
the intuitional mind had their beginning in this period. That
intuitional mind has been termed the "subjective mind" and, in the
religious cults of the past, it has been mystically known as the mind of
the soul; and the inquiry as to what the soul is, has brought out many
answers uncertain and unsatisfactory to the mind analytic in its
tendencies. The nearest approach to a satisfactory definition is, that
it is the thinking part of man's nature, which is as far from
satisfactory as it is inadequate as a definition.

If we accept the Bible Revelation that God created the world and all
that is in it by a word, then we must accept as a fact also that we were
created by that word. This, at least, suggests the thought that we are
but a part of the Universal Mind, having been organized and given
limitations that we term the individual consciousness. These limitations
may be called the ego, and that which is limited, the soul.

For illustration, if we take an air-tight vessel and seal it up so that
no air can get in or out, then the air originally in the vessel will
remain, no matter where the vessel may be carried, even though it is
forced into the depths of the ocean. It is so with the original
consciousness of man's existence. It is part of the All-Mind and through
organization it has been shut in and given limitations, and these
limitations are determined by the uses arising in

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the necessity for maintenance of its individualized existence. This fact
makes it evident that the stronger the ego, the narrower are the
limitations of the individual. It follows, therefore, that in the
developing and in the expanding of the individual, there need be an
overcoming of self-love and the eradication of too much
self-appreciation, in order that the consciousness may become receptive
to the fountains from which it draws its existence.

We agree, therefore, in the assertion that individuality as such is an
organized condition of life, and we agree also in the belief that life
did not originate with us nor with our ancestors. This being true and
life being the source of our consciousness, the possibility of opening
up the limitations of the ego is again suggested to the mind, thus
giving free access to the inflow of the Universal Life.

Special methods bearing directly upon this subject characterize all the
teachings of Jesus of Nazareth.

Nevertheless the experiences of the past and of many persons at the
present time, demonstrate the fact that this letting go of the strength
of the ego, and being passive to the inflow of Universal Life have been
destructive to the individuality. Notable among such instances is the
spiritualistic medium who becomes passive and receptive to whatever may
flow in. As a matter of fact, there flows into such a person just what
he or she believes. And as these people believe in the existence of
spirits

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —disincarnate
souls—therefore individualities or thought-forms, dark and malicious
characteristics of their own lower natures, flow in and possess them
and, as Christ said, the last state of these people is worse than the
first.

Again, we have all seen the religious devotee who, without a knowledge
of God or of universal law, has relinquished the ego to a certain extent
and, opening himself to the Universal Mind, has become fanatical even to
the loss of his individuality—insane. The reasoning intelligence has
taken such examples as a warning against opening the selfhood to the
Universal Mind. Just here, however, we meet a law of mind so well known
as to have escaped critical inquiry, which is explained in what follows:

In the preceding chapter we referred to the law of inspiration, that we
draw in, inspire, whatever the mind is centered upon to the exclusion of
all else, and that the wonderful formative principle dominating human
consciousness at once makes an image, a thought-form, of that which is
indrawn. But in the process the principle of discrimination is called
into action—a principle which in vegetable life, being nearest the
creative source and therefore purest in character, expresses itself most
perfectly. When a seed is placed in the ground, the chemist knowing the
properties of the original plant is able to predict with absolute
certainty what chemical elements the growing seed will gather to

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

itself out of which to build a like organism. The same principle,
finding expression in the human consciousness, is taken control of by
the organized mentality and may be suspended in its action, directed in
its course, or intensified in its operation, and thus, being under the
control of the individual, produces manifold results. Therefore as soon
as the individual by means of the concentration previously noted, opens
himself to the inflow of Universal Life (we shall see further on, that
life and mind are synonymous terms) that in which he believes flows in
and its image takes form in the mind and becomes for the time his
consciousness.

It has been demonstrated that a person believing in a certain deranged
and consequently diseased condition of the body, actually produces this
condition; and there have been instances in which the physical body has
been destroyed by this means. Belief is an all-powerful factor in human
life and for this reason the necessity is imperative that the reasoning
mind or, if you please, the guiding intelligence derived from
experience, take control of the activities of the inner life and
consciousness.

When there exists correct knowledge of the workings of the intuitional
faculties, and the individual is able to take control of this function,
then it will be found that these higher faculties are the dominant
faculties of the real self, that they are that part of man's nature
which, even in the absence of conscious thought, knows that he exists

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and needs only an impulse of desire to call in from the Universal Mind
unformed thought-elements. These unformed thought-elements, when carried
to the reasoning brain, give it to know, both by inductive and deductive
methods, that which is beyond the ken of the mere reasoning mind or the
mere instinctive action.

From the foregoing, we may reasonably conclude that the higher
faculties, now dormant in the race, may be brought into activity at
will, and the consciousness allied to all that is in the Universal Mind
and that thus the individual may select therefrom whatever is needed. We
think, therefore, it has been made clear that in the evolvement of the
individual by means of the inflow of qualities of Universal Mind there
are active three factors:

First, the principle of *inspiration*, which draws in, causes to flow
in, the qualities of Universal Life, where all qualities exist. Second,
the *formative principle* of human intelligence, so perfect in its
workings, that any quality that is indrawn is at once put into its
proper form according to its specific quality. Third, *belief*, which
underlies these two principles and controls the result of their
activity, and determines the character or quality of the life inspired,
and consequently decides what form it takes in the individual
consciousness. Therefore belief decides the character of the intuition.

From what has been said, the thinking mind will

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

find suggestions which answer the question as to why such monstrous
errors, superstitions and evil results of every kind have overtaken
those who have depended exclusively upon the "inner consciousness," the
instinctive mentality. Because of the facts just presented, the great
religious teachers of the immediate past have emphasized the necessity
of the reasoning mind—of the knowing. We read in Hosea iv. 6, "My people
are destroyed for lack of knowledge," and also the words of the Lord
Christ (John viii. 32): "Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall
make you free"—free from those dangers that have beset the race from the
beginning to the present time.

But since belief, as we have seen, controls the inspiratory and
formative principles of the individual life, we have reached a point in
the growth of the race where mind, the reasoning mind, must discover
certain general principles of absolute truth in order that the faculties
of inspiration and intuition may be safely used, or, in the language of
the ancient mystics, in order that the individual may go out into the
realm of the Universal Mind, discover and obtain knowledge that the
advancing needs of the people are beginning to demand.

With this thought in mind we shall endeavor in the following pages to
expand our idea of human origin, of organized intelligence, of the
fountains of life, and the oneness of God, the Cause of all. We shall
suggest methods also by which we may gather

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

and incorporate within us a greater amount of the Universal Life,
methods by which that life may be refined, sensitized and intensified,
thus giving it enormous added capacity, and methods that will give
assurance of the correctness of the process from its beginning through
each step of its course.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Reason and Religion](goal07)
