[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joe)  [Next](oba) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Amos

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of Amos, who was among the
herdsmen of Tekoa; what he saw about Israel in the days of Uzziah, king
of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel,
two years before the earth-shock.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And he said, The Lord will give a lion's
cry from Zion, his voice will be sounding from Jerusalem; and the fields
of the keepers of sheep will become dry, and the top of Carmel will be
wasted away.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> These are the words of the Lord: For three
crimes of Damascus, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed;
because they have been crushing Gilead with iron grain-crushing
instruments.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And I will send a fire into the house of
Hazael, burning up the great houses of Ben-hadad.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And I will have the locks of the door of
Damascus broken, and him who is seated in power cut off from the valley
of Aven, and him in whose hand is the rod from the house of Eden; and
the people of Aram will go away as prisoners into Kir, says the Lord.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> These are the words of the Lord: For three
crimes of Gaza, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed;
because they took all the people away prisoners, to give them up to
Edom.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza,
burning up its great houses:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Him who is seated in power I will have cut
off from Ashdod, and him in whose hand is the rod from Ashkelon; and my
hand will be turned against Ekron, and the rest of the Philistines will
come to destruction, says the Lord God.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> These are the words of the Lord: For three
crimes of Tyre, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed;
because they gave up all the people prisoners to Edom, without giving a
thought to the brothers' agreement between them.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And I will send a fire on the wall of
Tyre, burning up its great houses.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> These are the words of the Lord: For
three crimes of Edom, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed;
because his sword was turned against his brother, without pity, and his
wrath was burning at all times, and he was angry for ever.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And I will send a fire on Teman, burning
up the great houses of Bozrah.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> These are the words of the Lord: For
three crimes of the children of Ammon, and for four, I will not let its
fate be changed; because in Gilead they had women with child cut open,
so that they might make wider the limits of their land.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And I will make a fire in the wall of
Rabbah, burning up its great houses, with loud cries in the days of war,
with a storm in the day of the great wind:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And their king will be made prisoner, he
and his captains together, says the Lord.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> These are the words of the Lord: For three
crimes of Moab, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed;
because he had the bones of the king of Edom burned to dust.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And I will send a fire on Moab, burning up
the great houses of Kerioth: and death will come on Moab with noise and
outcries and the sound of the horn:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I will have the judge cut off from
among them, and all their captains I will put to death with him, says
the Lord.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> These are the words of the Lord: For three
crimes of Judah, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed;
because they have given up the law of the Lord, and have not kept his
rules; and their false ways, in which their fathers went, have made them
go out of the right way.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And I will send a fire on Judah, burning up
the great houses of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> These are the words of the Lord: For three
crimes of Israel, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed;
because they have given the upright man for silver, and the poor for the
price of two shoes;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Crushing the head of the poor, and turning
the steps of the gentle out of the way: and a man and his father go in
to the same young woman, putting shame on my holy name:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> By every altar they are stretched on
clothing taken from those who are in their debt, drinking in the house
of their god the wine of those who have made payment for wrongdoing.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Though I sent destruction on the Amorite
before them, who was tall as the cedar and strong as the oak-tree,
cutting off his fruit from on high and his roots from under the earth.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And I took you up out of the land of
Egypt, guiding you for forty years in the waste land, so that you might
take for your heritage the land of the Amorite.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And some of your sons I made prophets,
and some of your young men I made separate for myself. Is it not even
so, O children of Israel? says the Lord.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But to those who were separate you gave
wine for drink; and to the prophets you said, Be prophets no longer.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> See, I am crushing you down, as one is
crushed under a cart full of grain.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And flight will be impossible for the
quick-footed, and the force of the strong will become feeble, and the
man of war will not get away safely:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And the bowman will not keep his place;
he who is quick-footed will not get away safely: and the horseman will
not keep his life.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And he who is without fear among the
fighting men will go in flight without his clothing in that day, says
the Lord.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Give ear to this word which the Lord has
said against you, O children of Israel, against all the family which I
took up out of the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> You only of all the families of the earth
have I taken care of: for this reason I will send punishment on you for
all your sins.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Is it possible for two to go walking
together, if not by agreement?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Will a lion give his loud cry in the
woodland when no food is there? will the voice of the young lion be
sounding from his hole if he has taken nothing?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Is it possible for a bird to be taken in a
net on the earth where no net has been put for him? will the net come up
from the earth if it has taken nothing at all?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> If the horn is sounded in the town will the
people not be full of fear? will evil come on a town if the Lord has not
done it?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Certainly the Lord will do nothing without
making clear his secret to his servants, the prophets.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> The cry of the lion is sounding; who will
not have fear? The Lord God has said the word; is it possible for the
prophet to keep quiet?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Give out the news in the great houses of
Assyria and in the land of Egypt, and say, Come together on the
mountains of Samaria, and see what great outcries are there, and what
cruel acts are done in it.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For they have no knowledge of how to do
what is right, says the Lord, who are storing up violent acts and
destruction in their great houses.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For this reason, says the Lord, an
attacker will come, shutting in the land on every side; and your
strength will come down and your great houses will be made waste.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> These are the words of the Lord: As the
keeper of sheep takes out of the mouth of the lion two legs or part of
an ear; so will the children of Israel be made safe, who are resting in
Samaria on seats of honour or on the silk cushions of a bed.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Give ear now, and give witness against
the family of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of armies;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For in the day when I give Israel
punishment for his sins, I will send punishment on the altars of
Beth-el, and the horns of the altar will be cut off and come down to the
earth.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I will send destruction on the winter
house with the summer house; the ivory houses will be falling down and
the great houses will come to an end, says the Lord.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Give ear to this word, you cows of Bashan,
who are in the hill of Samaria, by whom the poor are kept down, and
those in need are crushed; who say to their lords, Get out the wine and
give us drink.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The Lord God has taken an oath by his holy
name, that the days are coming when they will take you away with hooks,
and the rest of you with fish-hooks.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And you will go out through the broken
places, every one going straight before her, and you will be sent into
Harmon, says the Lord.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Come to Beth-el and do evil; to Gilgal,
increasing the number of your sins; come with your offerings every
morning and your tenths every three days:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Let that which is leavened be burned as a
praise-offering, let the news of your free offerings be given out
publicly; for this is pleasing to you, O children of Israel, says the
Lord.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> But in all your towns I have kept food from
your teeth, and in all your places there has been need of bread: and
still you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I have kept back the rain from you,
when it was still three months before the grain-cutting: I sent rain on
one town and kept it back from another: one part was rained on, and the
part where there was no rain became a waste.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> So two or three towns went wandering to one
town looking for water, and did not get enough: and still you have not
come back to me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> I have sent destruction on your fields by
burning and disease: the increase of your gardens and your vine-gardens,
your fig-trees and your olive-trees, has been food for worms: and still
you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> I have sent disease among you, as it was
in Egypt: I have put your young men to the sword, and have taken away
your horses; I have made the evil smell from your tents come up to your
noses: and still you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And I have sent destruction among you, as
when God sent destruction on Sodom and Gomorrah, and you were like a
burning stick pulled out of the fire: and still you have not come back
to me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> So this is what I will do to you, O
Israel: and because I will do this to you, be ready for a meeting with
your God, O Israel.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For see, he who gave form to the
mountains and made the wind, giving knowledge of his purpose to man, who
makes the morning dark, and is walking on the high places of the earth:
the Lord, the God of armies, is his name.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Give ear to this word, my song of sorrow
over you, O children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> The virgin of Israel has been made low,
never again to be lifted up: she is stretched out by herself on her
land; there is no one to put her on her feet again.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For these are the words of the Lord God:
The town which was able to send out a thousand, will have only a
hundred; and that which sent out a hundred, will have only ten, in
Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For these are the words of the Lord to the
children of Israel: Let your hearts be turned to me, so that you may
have life:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Do not be looking for help to Beth-el, and
do not go to Gilgal, or make your way to Beer-sheba: for Gilgal will
certainly be taken prisoner, and Beth-el will come to nothing.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Go to the Lord for help so that you may
have life; for fear that he may come like fire bursting out in the
family of Joseph, causing destruction, and there will be no one to put
it out in Beth-el.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> You who make the work of judging a bitter
thing, crushing down righteousness to the earth;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Go for help to him who makes Orion and the
Pleiades, by whom the deep dark is turned into morning, who makes the
day black with night; whose voice goes out to the waters of the sea,
sending them out over the face of the earth: the Lord is his name;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Who sends sudden destruction on the strong,
so that destruction comes on the walled town.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> They have hate for him who makes protest
against evil in the public place, and he whose words are upright is
disgusting to them.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> So because the poor man is crushed under
your feet, and you take taxes from him of grain: you have made for
yourselves houses of cut stone, but you will not take your rest in them;
the fair vine-gardens planted by your hands will not give you wine.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For I have seen how your evil-doing is
increased and how strong are your sins, you troublers of the upright,
who take rewards and do wrong to the cause of the poor in the public
place.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> So the wise will say nothing in that
time; for it is an evil time.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Go after good and not evil, so that life
may be yours: and so the Lord, the God of armies, will be with you, as
you say.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Be haters of evil and lovers of good, and
let right be done in the public place: it may be that the Lord, the God
of armies, will have mercy on the rest of Joseph.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So these are the words of the Lord, the
God of armies, the Lord: There will be weeping in all the open spaces;
and in all the streets they will say, Sorrow! sorrow! and they will get
in the farmer to the weeping, and the makers of sad songs to give cries
of grief.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> In all the vine-gardens there will be
cries of grief: for I will go through among you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Sorrow to you who are looking for the day
of the Lord! what is the day of the Lord to you? it is dark and not
light.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> As if a man, running away from a lion,
came face to face with a bear; or went into the house and put his hand
on the wall and got a bite from a snake.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Will not the day of the Lord be dark and
not light? even very dark, with no light shining in it?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Your feasts are disgusting to me, I will
have nothing to do with them; I will take no delight in your holy
meetings.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Even if you give me your burned offerings
and your meal offerings, I will not take pleasure in them: I will have
nothing to do with the peace-offerings of your fat beasts.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Take away from me the noise of your
songs; my ears are shut to the melody of your instruments.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> But let the right go rolling on like
waters, and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Did you come to me with offerings of
beasts and meal offerings in the waste land for forty years, O Israel?

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Truly, you will take up Saccuth your king
and Kaiwan your images, the star of your god, which you made for
yourselves.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And I will send you away as prisoners
farther than Damascus, says the Lord, whose name is the God of armies.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Sorrow to those who are resting in comfort
in Zion, and to those who have no fear of danger in the mountain of
Samaria, the noted men of the chief of the nations, to whom the people
of Israel come!

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Go on to Calneh and see; and from there go
to Hamath the great; then go down to Gath of the Philistines: are you
better than these kingdoms? or is your land wider than theirs?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> You who put far away the evil day, causing
the rule of the violent to come near;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Who are resting on beds of ivory, stretched
out on soft seats, feasting on lambs from the flock and young oxen from
the cattle-house;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Making foolish songs to the sound of corded
instruments, and designing for themselves instruments of music, like
David;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Drinking wine in basins, rubbing themselves
with the best oils; but they have no grief for the destruction of
Joseph.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> So now they will go away prisoners with the
first of those who are made prisoners, and the loud cry of those who
were stretched out will come to an end.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> The Lord God has taken an oath by himself,
says the Lord, the God of armies: the pride of Jacob is disgusting to
me, and I have hate for his great houses: so I will give up the town
with everything in it.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Then it will come about that if there are
still ten men in a house, death will overtake them.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And when a man's relation, even the one
who is responsible for burning his body, lifting him up to take his
bones out of the house, says to him who is in the inmost part of the
house, Is there still anyone with you? and he says, No; then he will
say, Keep quiet, for the name of the Lord may not be named.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> For see, at the order of the Lord the
great house will be full of cracks and the little house will be broken.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Is it possible for horses to go running
on the rock? may the sea be ploughed with oxen? for the right to be
turned by you into poison, and the fruit of righteousness into a bitter
plant?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> You whose joy is in a thing of no value,
who say, Have we not taken for ourselves horns by the strength which is
ours?

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For see, I will send against you a
nation, O Israel, says the Lord, the God of armies, ruling you cruelly
from the way into Hamath as far as the stream of the Arabah.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> This is what the Lord God let me see: and I
saw that, when the growth of the late grass was starting, he made
locusts; it was the late growth after the king's cutting was done.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And it came about that after they had taken
all the grass of the land, I said, O Lord God, have mercy: how will
Jacob be able to keep his place? for he is small.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> The Lord, changing his purpose about this,
said, It will not be.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> This is what the Lord let me see: and I saw
that the Lord God sent for a great fire to be the instrument of his
punishment; and, after burning up the great deep, it was about to put an
end to the Lord's heritage.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Then said I, O Lord God, let there be an
end: how will Jacob be able to keep his place? for he is small.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> The Lord, changing his purpose about this,
said, And this will not be.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> This is what he let me see: and I saw the
Lord stationed by a wall made straight by a weighted line, and he had a
weighted line in his hand.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the Lord said to me, Amos, what do you
see? And I said, A weighted line. Then the Lord said, See, I will let
down a weighted line among my people Israel; never again will my eyes be
shut to their sin:

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the high places of Isaac will be
unpeopled, and the holy places of Israel will be made waste; and I will
come up against the family of Jeroboam with the sword.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Then Amaziah, the priest of Beth-el, sent
to Jeroboam, king of Israel, saying, Amos has made designs against you
among the people of Israel: the land is troubled by his words.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For Amos has said, Jeroboam will be put
to the sword, and Israel will certainly be taken away as a prisoner out
of his land.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And Amaziah said to Amos, O seer, go in
flight into the land of Judah, and there get your living by working as a
prophet:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> But be a prophet no longer at Beth-el:
for it is the holy place of the king, and the king's house.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Then Amos in answer said to Amaziah, I am
no prophet, or one of the sons of the prophets; I am a herdman and one
who takes care of sycamore-trees:

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And the Lord took me from the flock, and
the Lord said to me, Go, be a prophet to my people Israel.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Now then, give ear to the word of the
Lord: You say, Be no prophet to Israel, and say not a word against the
people of Isaac.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> So this is what the Lord has said: Your
wife will be a loose woman in the town, and your sons and your daughters
will be put to the sword, and your land will be cut up into parts by a
line; and you yourself will come to your end in an unclean land, and
Israel will certainly be taken away a prisoner out of his land.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> This is what the Lord God let me see: and I
saw a basket of summer fruit.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And he said, Amos, what do you see? And I
said, A basket of summer fruit. Then the Lord said to me, The end has
come to my people Israel; never again will my eyes be shut to their sin.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And the songs of the king's house will be
cries of pain in that day, says the Lord God: great will be the number
of the dead bodies, and everywhere they will put them out without a
word.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Give ear to this, you who are crushing the
poor, and whose purpose is to put an end to those who are in need in the
land,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Saying, When will the new moon be gone, so
that we may do trade in grain? and the Sabbath, so that we may put out
in the market the produce of our fields? making the measure small and
the price great, and trading falsely with scales of deceit;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Getting the poor for silver, and him who is
in need for the price of two shoes, and taking a price for the waste
parts of the grain.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> The Lord has taken an oath by the pride of
Jacob, Truly I will ever keep in mind all their works.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Will not the land be shaking with fear
because of this, and everyone in it have sorrow? and all of it will be
overflowing like the River; and it will be troubled and go down again
like the River of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And it will come about in that day, says
the Lord God, that I will make the sun go down in the middle of the day,
and I will make the earth dark in daylight:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Your feasts will be turned into sorrow
and all your melody into songs of grief; everyone will be clothed with
haircloth, and the hair of every head will be cut; I will make the
weeping like that for an only son, and the end of it like a bitter day.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> See, the days are coming, says the Lord
God, when I will send times of great need on the land, not need of food
or desire for water, but for hearing the words of the Lord.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And they will go wandering from sea to
sea, and from the north even to the east, running here and there in
search of the word of the Lord, and they will not get it.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> In that day the fair virgins and the
young men will be feeble from need of water.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Those who make their oaths by the sin of
Samaria and say, By the life of your God, O Dan; and, By the living way
of Beer-sheba; even they will go down, never again to be lifted up.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I saw the Lord stationed by the side of the
altar, giving blows to the tops of the pillars so that the doorsteps
were shaking: and he said, I will let all of them be broken with
earth-shocks; I will put the last of them to the sword: if any one of
them goes in flight he will not get away, not one of them will be safe.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Even if they go deep into the underworld,
my hand will take them up from there; if they go up to heaven, I will
get them down:

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Though they take cover on the top of
Carmel, I will go in search of them and get them out; though they keep
themselves from my eyes in the bed of the sea, I will give orders to the
great snake there and he will give them a bite:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And though they are taken away as prisoners
by their attackers, even there will I give orders to the sword to put
them to death: my eyes will be fixed on them for evil and not for good.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For the Lord, the God of armies, is he at
whose touch the land is turned to water, and everyone in it will be
given up to sorrow; all of it will be overflowing like the River, and
will go down again like the River of Egypt;

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> It is he who makes his rooms in the heaven,
basing his arch on the earth; whose voice goes out to the waters of the
sea, and sends them flowing over the face of the earth; the Lord is his
name.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Are you not as the children of the
Ethiopians to me, O children of Israel? says the Lord. Have I not taken
Israel up out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistines from Caphtor,
and the Aramaeans from Kir?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> See, the eyes of the Lord are on the evil
kingdom, and I will put an end to it in all the earth; but I will not
send complete destruction on Jacob, says the Lord.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For see, I will give orders, and I will
have Israel moved about among all the nations, as grain is moved about
by the shaking of the tray, but not the smallest seed will be dropped on
the earth.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> All those sinners among my people will be
put to the sword who say, Evil will not overtake us or come face to face
with us.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> In that day I will put up the tent of
David which has come down, and make good its broken places; and I will
put up again his damaged walls, building it up as in the past;

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> So that the rest of Edom may be their
heritage, and all the nations who have been named by my name, says the
Lord, who is doing this.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> See, the days will come, says the Lord,
when the ploughman will overtake him who is cutting the grain, and the
crusher of the grapes him who is planting seed; and sweet wine will be
dropping from the mountains, and the hills will be turned into streams
of wine.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And I will let the fate of my people
Israel be changed, and they will be building up again the waste towns
and living in them; they will again be planting vine-gardens and taking
the wine for their drink; and they will make gardens and get the fruit
of them.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And I will have them planted in their
land, and never again will they be uprooted from their land which I have
given them, says the Lord your God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah](oba)
