[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co1)  [Next](gal.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 2 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the
purpose of God, and Timothy the brother, to the church of God which is
in Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Who gives us comfort in all our troubles,
so that we may be able to give comfort to others who are in trouble,
through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For as we undergo more of the pain which
Christ underwent, so through Christ does our comfort become greater.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But if we are troubled, it is for your
comfort and salvation; or if we are comforted, it is for your comfort,
which takes effect through your quiet undergoing of the same troubles
which we undergo:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And our hope for you is certain; in the
knowledge that as you take part in the troubles, so you will take part
in the comfort.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For it is our desire that you may not be
without knowledge of our trouble which came on us in Asia, that the
weight of it was very great, more than our power, so that it seemed that
we had no hope even of life:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Yes, we ourselves have had the answer of
death in ourselves, so that our hope might not be in ourselves, but in
God who is able to give life to the dead:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Who gave us salvation from so great a
death: on whom we have put our hope that he will still go on to give us
salvation;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> You at the same time helping together by
your prayer for us; so that for what has been given to us through a
number of persons, praise may go up to God for us from all of them.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For our glory is in this, in the
knowledge which we have that our way of life in the world, and most of
all in relation to you, has been holy and true in the eyes of God; not
in the wisdom of the flesh, but in the grace of God.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For in our letters we say no other things
to you, but those which you are reading, and to which you give
agreement, and, it is my hope, will go on doing so to the end:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Even as you have been ready, in part, to
say that we are your glory, in the same way that you are ours, in the
day of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And being certain of this, it was my
purpose to come to you before, so that you might have a second grace;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And by way of Corinth to go into
Macedonia, and from there to come back again to you, so that you might
send me on my way to Judaea.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> If then I had such a purpose, did I seem
to be changing suddenly? or am I guided in my purposes by the flesh,
saying, Yes, today, and, No, tomorrow?

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> As God is true, our word to you is not
Yes and No.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, whom we
were preaching among you, even I and Silvanus and Timothy, was not Yes
and No, but in him is Yes.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For he is the Yes to all the undertakings
of God: and by him all the words of God are made certain and put into
effect, to the glory of God through us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Now he who makes our faith strong
together with you, in Christ, and has given us of his grace, is God;

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And it is he who has put his stamp on us,
even the Spirit, as the sign in our hearts of the coming glory.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But God is my witness that it was in pity
for you that I did not come to Corinth at that time.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Not that we have authority over your
faith, but we are helpers of your joy: for it is faith which is your
support.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But it was my decision for myself, not to
come again to you with sorrow.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if I give you sorrow, who then will
make me glad, but he who is made sad by me?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I said this very thing in my letter,
for fear that when I came I might have sorrow from those from whom it
was right for me to have joy; being certain of this, that my joy is the
joy of you all.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For out of much trouble and pain of heart
and much weeping I sent my letter to you; not to give you sorrow, but so
that you might see how great is the love which I have to you.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But if anyone has been a cause of sorrow,
he has been so, not to me only, but in some measure to all of you (I say
this that I may not be over-hard on you).

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Let it be enough for such a man to have
undergone the punishment which the church put on him;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So that now, on the other hand, it is right
for him to have forgiveness and comfort from you, for fear that his
sorrow may be over-great.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For which cause my desire is that you will
make your love to him clear by your acts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And for the same reason I sent you a letter
so that I might be certain of your desire to do my orders in all things.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But if you give forgiveness to anyone, I
do the same: for if I have given forgiveness for anything, I have done
it because of you, in the person of Christ;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> So that Satan may not get the better of
us: for we are not without knowledge of his designs.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now when I came to Troas for the good
news of Christ, and there was an open door for me in the Lord,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I had no rest in my spirit because Titus
my brother was not there: so I went away from them, and came into
Macedonia.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But praise be to God who makes us strong
to overcome in Christ, and makes clear through us in every place the
value of the knowledge of him.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For we are a sweet perfume of Christ to
God in those who are getting salvation and in those who are going to
destruction;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To the one it is a perfume of death to
death; to the other a perfume of life to life. And who is enough for
such things?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For we are not like the great number who
make use of the word of God for profit: but our words are true, as from
God, being said as before God in Christ.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Do we seem to be again attempting to put
ourselves in the right? or have we need, as some have, of letters of
approval to you or from you?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> You yourselves are our letter, whose
writing is in our heart, open for every man's reading and knowledge;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For you are clearly a letter of Christ, the
fruit of our work, recorded not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God; not in stone, but in hearts of flesh.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And this is the certain faith which we have
in God through Christ:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Not as if we were able by ourselves to do
anything for which we might take the credit; but our power comes from
God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who has made us able to be servants of a
new agreement; not of the letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter
gives death, but the Spirit gives life.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For if the operation of the law, giving
death, recorded in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the eyes
of the children of Israel had to be turned away from the face of Moses
because of its glory, a glory which was only for a time:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Will not the operation of the Spirit have a
much greater glory?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For if the operation of the law, producing
punishment, had its glory, how much greater will be the operation of the
Spirit causing righteousness?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For the glory of the first no longer
seems to be glory, because of the greater glory of that which comes
after.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For if the order which was for a time had
its glory, much more will the eternal order have its glory.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Having then such a hope, we keep nothing
back,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And are not like Moses, who put a veil on
his face, so that the children of Israel might not see clearly to the
end of the present order of things:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But their minds were made hard: for to
this very day at the reading of the old agreement the same veil is still
unlifted; though it is taken away in Christ.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But to this day, at the reading of the
law of Moses, a veil is over their heart.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But when it is turned to the Lord, the
veil will be taken away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now the Lord is the Spirit: and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there the heart is free.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But we all, with unveiled face giving
back as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord who is the Spirit.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> For this reason, because we have been made
servants of this new order, through the mercy given to us, we are
strong:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And we have given up the secret things of
shame, not walking in false ways, and not making use of the word of God
with deceit; but by the revelation of what is true, as before God, we
have the approval of every man's sense of right and wrong.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But if our good news is veiled, it is
veiled from those who are on the way to destruction:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Because the god of this world has made
blind the minds of those who have not faith, so that the light of the
good news of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, might not be
shining on them.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For our preaching is not about ourselves,
but about Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants through
Jesus.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Seeing that it is God who said, Let light
be shining out of the dark, who has put in our hearts the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But we have this wealth in vessels of
earth, so that it may be seen that the power comes not from us but from
God;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Troubles are round us on every side, but we
are not shut in; things are hard for us, but we see a way out of them;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> We are cruelly attacked, but not without
hope; we are made low, but we are not without help;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> In our bodies there is ever the mark of
the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may be seen in our bodies.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For, while living, we are still being
given up to death because of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may be
seen in our flesh, though it is under the power of death.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> So then, death is working in us, but life
in you.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But having the same spirit of faith, as
it is said in the Writings, The words of my mouth came from the faith in
my heart; in the same way, our words are the outcome of our faith;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Because we are certain that he who made
the Lord Jesus come back from the dead, will do the same for us, and
will give us a place in his glory with you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For we go through all things on account
of you, because the greater the number to whom the grace is given, the
greater is the praise to the glory of God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For which cause we do not give way to
weariness; but though our outer man is getting feebler, our inner man is
made new day by day.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For our present trouble, which is only
for a short time, is working out for us a much greater weight of glory;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> While our minds are not on the things
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for the things
which are seen are for a time; but the things which are not seen are
eternal.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For we are conscious that if this our tent
of flesh is taken down, we have a building from God, a house not made
with hands, eternal, in heaven.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For in this we are crying in weariness,
greatly desiring to be clothed with our house from heaven:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> So that our spirits may not be unclothed.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For truly, we who are in this tent do give
out cries of weariness, for the weight of care which is on us; not
because we are desiring to be free from the body, but so that we may
have our new body, and death may be overcome by life.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now he who has made us for this very thing
is God, who has given us the Spirit as a witness of what is to come.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> So, then, we are ever without fear, and
though conscious that while we are in the body we are away from the
Lord,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> (For we are walking by faith, not by
seeing,)

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> We are without fear, desiring to be free
from the body, and to be with the Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For this reason we make it our purpose, in
the body or away from it, to be well-pleasing to him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For we all have to come before Christ to
be judged; so that every one of us may get his reward for the things
done in the body, good or bad.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Having in mind, then, the fear of the
Lord, we put these things before men, but God sees our hearts; and it is
my hope that we may seem right in your eyes.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> We are not again requesting your
approval, but we are giving you the chance of taking pride in us, so
that you may be able to give an answer to those whose glory is in
seeming, and not in the heart.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For if we are foolish, it is to God; or
if we are serious, it is for you.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For it is the love of Christ which is
moving us; because we are of the opinion that if one was put to death
for all, then all have undergone death;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And that he underwent death for all, so
that the living might no longer be living to themselves, but to him who
underwent death for them and came back from the dead.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> For this reason, from this time forward
we have knowledge of no man after the flesh: even if we have had
knowledge of Christ after the flesh, we have no longer any such
knowledge.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> So if any man is in Christ, he is in a
new world: the old things have come to an end; they have truly become
new.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But all things are of God, who has made
us at peace with himself through Christ, and has given to us the work of
making peace;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> That is, that God was in Christ making
peace between the world and himself, not putting their sins to their
account, and having given to us the preaching of this news of peace.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> So we are the representatives of Christ,
as if God was making a request to you through us: we make our request to
you, in the name of Christ, be at peace with God.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For him who had no knowledge of sin God
made to be sin for us; so that we might become the righteousness of God
in him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> We then, working together with God, make
our request to you not to take the grace of God to no purpose.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> (For he says, I have given ear to you at a
good time, and I have been your helper in a day of salvation: see, now
is the good time; now is the day of salvation):

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Giving no cause for trouble in anything, so
that no one may be able to say anything against our work;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But in everything making it clear that we
are the servants of God, in quiet strength, in troubles, in need, in
sorrow,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> In blows, in prisons, in attacks, in hard
work, in watchings, in going without food;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> In a clean heart, in knowledge, in long
waiting, in being kind, in the Holy Spirit, in true love,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> In the true word, in the power of God; with
the arms of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> By glory and by shame, by an evil name and
a good name; as untrue, and still true;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Unnoted, but still kept fully in mind; as
near to death, but still living; as undergoing punishment, but not put
to death;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> As full of sorrow, but ever glad; as
poor, but giving wealth to others; as having nothing, but still having
all things.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Our mouth is open to you, O Corinthians,
our heart is wide.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> It is not our feelings to you which are
narrow, but yours to us.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Now to give me back payment of the same
sort (I am talking as to my children), let your hearts be wide open to
me.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Do not keep company with those who have
not faith: for what is there in common between righteousness and evil,
or between light and dark?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And what agreement is there between
Christ and the Evil One? or what part has one who has faith with one who
has not?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And what agreement has the house of God
with images? for we are a house of the living God; even as God has said,
I will be living among them, and walking with them; and I will be their
God, and they will be my people.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For which cause, Come out from among
them, and be separate, says the Lord, and let no unclean thing come near
you; and I will take you for myself,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And will be a Father to you; and you will
be my sons and daughters, says the Lord, the Ruler of all.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Because God, then, will give us such
rewards, dear brothers, let us make ourselves clean from all evil of
flesh and spirit, and become completely holy in the fear of God.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Let your hearts be open to us: we have done
no man wrong, no man has been damaged by us, we have made no profit out
of any man,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> It is not with the purpose of judging you
that I say this: for I have said before that you are in our hearts for
life and death together.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> My words to you are without fear, I am full
of pride on account of you: I have great comfort and joy in all our
troubles.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For even when we had come into Macedonia
our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; there were
fightings outside and fears inside.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But God who gives comfort to the poor in
spirit gave us comfort by the coming of Titus;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And not by his coming only, but by the
comfort which he had in you, while he gave us word of your desire, your
sorrow, your care for me; so that I was still more glad.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For though my letter gave you pain, I have
no regret for it now, though I had before; for I see that the letter
gave you pain, but only for a time.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Now I am glad, not that you had sorrow, but
that your sorrow was the cause of a change of heart; for yours was a
holy sorrow so that you might undergo no loss by us in anything.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For the sorrow which God gives is the
cause of salvation through a change of heart, in which there is no
reason for grief: but the sorrow of the world is a cause of death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For you see what care was produced in you
by this very sorrow of yours before God, what clearing of yourselves,
what wrath against sin, what fear, what desire, what serious purpose,
what punishment. In everything you have made it clear that you are free
from sin in this business.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> So though I sent you a letter, it was not
only because of the man who did the wrong, or because of him to whom the
wrong was done, but so that your true care for us might be made clear in
the eyes of God.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> So we have been comforted: and we had the
greater joy in our comfort because of the joy of Titus, for his spirit
had been made glad by you all.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For I was not put to shame in anything in
which I may have made clear to him my pride in you; but as we said
nothing to you but what was true, so the good things which I said to
Titus about you were seen by him to be true.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And his love to you is the more increased
by his memory of you all, how you gave way to his authority, and how you
took him to your hearts with fear and honour.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> It gives me great joy to see you
answering to my good opinion of you in every way.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And now we give you news, brothers, about
the grace of God which has been given to the churches of Macedonia;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> How while they were undergoing every sort
of trouble, and were in the greatest need, they took all the greater joy
in being able to give freely to the needs of others.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For I give them witness, that as they were
able, and even more than they were able, they gave from the impulse of
their hearts,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Seriously requesting us that they might
have a part in this grace of being servants to the needs of the saints:

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And going even farther than our hope, they
first gave themselves to the Lord and to us after the purpose of God.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> So that we made a request to Titus that, as
he had made a start before, so he might make this grace complete in you.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And that as you are full of every good
thing, of faith, of the word, of knowledge, of a ready mind, and of love
to us, so you may be full of this grace in the same way.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> I am not giving you an order, but using the
ready mind of others as a test of the quality of your love.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For you see the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, how though he had wealth, he became poor on your account, so
that through his need you might have wealth.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And in this I give my opinion: for it is
to your profit, who were the first to make a start a year before, not
only to do this, but to make clear that your minds were more than ready
to do it.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Then make the doing of it complete; so
that as you had a ready mind, you may give effect to it as you are able.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For if there is a ready mind, a man will
have God's approval in the measure of what he has, and not of what he
has not.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And I am not saying this so that others
may get off free, while the weight comes on you:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> But so that things may be equal; that
from those things of which you have more than enough at the present time
their need may be helped, and that if you are in any need they may be a
help to you in the same way, making things equal.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> As it says in the Writings, He who had
taken up much had nothing over and he who had little had enough.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But praise be to God, who puts the same
care for you into the heart of Titus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For while he gladly gave ear to our
request, he was interested enough to go to you from the impulse of his
heart.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And with him we have sent a brother whose
praise in the good news has gone through all the churches;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And not only so, but he was marked out by
the churches to go with us in the grace of this giving which we have
undertaken to the glory of the Lord and to make clear that our mind was
ready:

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And so that no man might be able to say
anything against us in the business of this giving which has been put
into our hands:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> For the business has been so ordered by
us as to have the approval, not only of the Lord, but of men.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And we have sent with them our brother,
whose ready spirit has been made clear to us at times and in ways
without number, but it is now all the more so because of the certain
faith which he has in you.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> If any question comes up about Titus, he
is my brother-worker, working with me for you; or about the others, they
are the representatives of the churches to the glory of Christ.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Make clear then to them, as
representatives of the churches, the quality of your love, and that the
things which we have said about you are true.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> But there is no need for me to say anything
in my letter about the giving to the saints:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For I have before made clear to those of
Macedonia my pride in your ready mind, saying to them that Achaia has
been ready for a year back; and a great number have been moved to do the
same by your example.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> But I have sent the brothers, so that the
good things we said about you may be seen to be true, and that, as I
said, you may be ready:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For fear that, if any from Macedonia come
with me, and you are not ready, we (not to say, you) might be put to
shame in this thing.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> So it seemed to me wise for the brothers to
go before, and see that the amount which you had undertaken to give was
ready, so that it might be a cause for praise, and not as if we were
making profit out of you.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But in the Writings it says, He who puts in
only a small number of seeds, will get in the same; and he who puts them
in from a full hand, will have produce in full measure from them.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Let every man do after the purpose of his
heart; not giving with grief, or by force: for God takes pleasure in a
ready giver.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And God is able to give you all grace in
full measure; so that ever having enough of all things, you may be full
of every good work:

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> As it is said in the Writings, He has sent
out far and wide, he has given to the poor; his righteousness is for
ever.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And he who gives seed for putting into
the field and bread for food, will take care of the growth of your seed,
at the same time increasing the fruits of your righteousness;

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Your wealth being increased in
everything, with a simple mind, causing praise to God through us.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For this work of giving not only takes
care of the needs of the saints, but is the cause of much praise to God;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For when, through this work of giving,
they see what you are, they give glory to God for the way in which you
have given yourselves to the good news of Christ, and for the wealth of
your giving to them and to all;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> While their hearts go out to you in love
and in prayer for you, because of the great grace of God which is in
you.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Praise be to God for what he has given,
which words have no power to say.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now I, Paul, myself make request to you
by the quiet and gentle behaviour of Christ, I who am poor in spirit
when with you, but who say what is in my mind to you without fear when I
am away from you:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Yes, I make my request to you, so that
when I am with you I may not have to make use of the authority which may
be needed against some to whom we seem to be walking after the flesh.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For though we may be living in the flesh,
we are not fighting after the way of the flesh

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> (For the arms with which we are fighting
are not those of the flesh, but are strong before God for the
destruction of high places);

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Putting an end to reasonings, and every
high thing which is lifted up against the knowledge of God, and causing
every thought to come under the authority of Christ;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Being ready to give punishment to
whatever is against his authority, after you have made it clear that you
are completely under his control.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Give attention to the things which are
before you. If any man seems to himself to be Christ's, let him keep in
mind that we are as much Christ's as he is.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For though I might take pride in our
authority (which the Lord gave for building you up, and not for your
destruction), it will not be a cause of shame to me:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> That I may not seem to have the desire of
causing you fear by my letters.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For his letters, they say, have weight
and are strong; but in body he is feeble, and his way of talking has
little force.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Let those who say this keep in mind
that, what we are in word by letters when we are away, so will we be in
act when we are present.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For we will not make comparison of
ourselves with some of those who say good things about themselves: but
these, measuring themselves by themselves, and making comparison of
themselves with themselves, are not wise.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> We will not give glory to ourselves in
over-great measure, but after the measure of the rule which God has
given us, a measure which comes even to you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For we have no need to make ourselves
seem more than we are, as if our authority did not come as far as to
you: for we came even as far as you with the good news of Christ:

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Not taking credit to ourselves for what
is not our business, that is, for the work of others; but having hope
that, with the growth of your faith, we may get the credit for an
increase which is the effect of our work,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> So that we may be able to go on and
take the good news to countries still farther away than you are, and not
take credit for another man's work in making things ready to our hand.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But whoever has a desire for glory, let
his glory be in the Lord.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For the Lord's approval of a man is not
dependent on his opinion of himself, but on the Lord's opinion of him.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Put up with me if I am a little foolish:
but, truly, you do put up with me.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For I have a very great care for you:
because you have been married by me to one husband, and it is my desire
to give you completely holy to Christ.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I have a fear, that in some way, as
Eve was tricked by the deceit of the snake, your minds may be turned
away from their simple and holy love for Christ.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For if anyone comes preaching another
Jesus from the one whose preachers we are, or if you have got a
different spirit, or a different sort of good news from those which came
to you, how well you put up with these things.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For in my opinion, I am in no way less
than the most important of the Apostles.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But though I am rough in my way of
talking, I am not so in knowledge, as we have made clear to all by our
acts among you.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Or did I do wrong in making myself low so
that you might be lifted up, because I gave you the good news of God
without reward?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> I took money from other churches as
payment for my work, so that I might be your servant;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And when I was present with you, and was
in need, I let no man be responsible for me; for the brothers, when they
came from Macedonia, gave me whatever was needed; and in everything I
kept myself from being a trouble to you, and I will go on doing so.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> As the true word of Christ is in me, I
will let no man take from me this my cause of pride in the country of
Achaia.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Why? because I have no love for you?
let God be judge.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But what I do, that I will go on doing,
so that I may give no chance to those who are looking for one; so that,
in the cause of their pride, they may be seen to be the same as we are.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For such men are false Apostles,
workers of deceit, making themselves seem like Apostles of Christ.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And it is no wonder; for even Satan
himself is able to take the form of an angel of light.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> So it is no great thing if his servants
make themselves seem to be servants of righteousness; whose end will be
the reward of their works.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> I say again, Let me not seem foolish to
anyone; but if I do, put up with me as such, so that I may take a little
glory to myself.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> What I am now saying is not by the
order of the Lord, but as a foolish person, taking credit to myself, as
it seems.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Seeing that there are those who take
credit to themselves after the flesh, I will do the same.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For you put up with the foolish gladly,
being wise yourselves.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> You put up with a man if he makes
servants of you, if he makes profit out of you, if he makes you
prisoners, if he puts himself in a high place, if he gives you blows on
the face.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> I say this by way of shaming ourselves,
as if we had been feeble. But if anyone puts himself forward (I am
talking like a foolish person), I will do the same.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they of
Israel? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Are they servants of Christ? (I am
talking foolishly) I am more so; I have had more experience of hard
work, of prisons, of blows more than measure, of death.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Five times the Jews gave me forty blows
but one.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Three times I was whipped with rods,
once I was stoned, three times the ship I was in came to destruction at
sea, a night and a day I have been in the water;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> In frequent travels, in dangers on
rivers, in dangers from outlaws, in dangers from my countrymen, in
dangers from the Gentiles, in dangers in the town, in dangers in the
waste land, in dangers at sea, in dangers among false brothers;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> In hard work and weariness, in frequent
watchings, going without food and drink, cold and in need of clothing.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> In addition to all the other things,
there is that which comes on me every day, the care of all the churches.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Who is feeble and I am not feeble? who
is in danger of falling, and I am not angry?

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> If I have to take credit to myself, I
will do so in the things in which I am feeble.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be praise for ever, is witness that the things which I
say are true.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> In Damascus, the ruler under Aretas the
king kept watch over the town of the people of Damascus, in order to
take me:

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And being let down in a basket from the
wall through a window, I got free from his hands.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> As it is necessary for me to take glory
to myself, though it is not a good thing, I will come to visions and
revelations of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> I have knowledge of a man in Christ,
fourteen years back (if he was in the body, or out of the body, I am not
able to say, but God only), who was taken up to the third heaven.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And I have knowledge of such a man (if he
was in the body, or out of the body, I am not able to say, but God
only),

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> How he was taken up into Paradise, and
words came to his ears which may not be said, and which man is not able
to say.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> On account of such a one I will have
glory: for myself I will take no glory, but only in my feeble body.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For if I had a desire to take credit to
myself, it would not be foolish, for I would be saying what is true: but
I will not, for fear that I might seem to any man more than he sees me
to be, or has word from me that I am.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And because the revelations were so very
great, in order that I might not be overmuch lifted up, there was given
to me a thorn in the flesh, one sent from Satan to give me pain.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And about this thing I made request to
the Lord three times that it might be taken away from me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said to me, My grace is enough for
you, for my power is made complete in what is feeble. Most gladly, then,
will I take pride in my feeble body, so that the power of Christ may be
on me.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> So I take pleasure in being feeble, in
unkind words, in needs, in cruel attacks, in troubles, on account of
Christ: for when I am feeble, then am I strong.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> I have been forced by you to become
foolish, though it was right for my praise to have come from you: for in
no way was I less than the chief of the Apostles, though I am nothing.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Truly the signs of an Apostle were done
among you in quiet strength, with wonders and acts of power.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For what is there in which you were
made less than the other churches, but in the one thing that I was not a
trouble to you? Let me have forgiveness for this wrong.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> This is now the third time that I am
ready to come to you; and I will not be a trouble to you: my desire is
for you, not for your property: for it is not the children's business to
make store for their fathers, but the fathers for the children.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And I will gladly give all I have for
your souls. If I have the more love for you, am I to be loved the less?

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But let it be so, that I was not a
trouble to you myself; but (someone may say) being false, I took you
with deceit.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Did I make a profit out of you by any
of those whom I sent to you?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> I gave orders to Titus, and I sent the
brother with him. Did Titus make any profit out of you? were we not
guided by the same Spirit, in the same ways?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> It may seem to you that all this time
we have been attempting to put ourselves in the right; but we are saying
these things before God in Christ. For all things, dear brothers, are
for your profit.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For I have a fear that, when I come,
you may not be answering to my desire, and that I may not be answering
to yours; that there may be fighting, hate, angry feeling, divisions,
evil talk about others, secrets, thoughts of pride, outbursts against
authority;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And that when I come again, my God may
put me to shame among you, and I may have grief for those who have done
wrong before and have had no regret for their unclean ways, and for the
evil desires of the flesh to which they have given way.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> This is the third time that I am coming
to you. From the mouth of two or three witnesses will every word be made
certain.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> I said before, and still say it before I
come, as being present for the second time, though I am still away from
you, to those who have done wrong before, and to all the others, that if
I come again I will not have pity;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Seeing that you are looking for a sign of
Christ giving out his word in me; who is not feeble in relation to you,
but is strong in you:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For he was feeble in that he was put to
death on the cross, but he is living by the power of God. And we are
feeble in him, but we will be living with him through the power of God
in relation to you.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Make a test of yourselves, if you are in
the faith; make certain of yourselves. Or are you not conscious in
yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you, if you are truly Christ's?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> But it is my hope that you will have no
doubt that we are truly Christ's.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Now our prayer to God is that you may do
no evil; not in order that it may be put to our credit, but so that you
may do what is right, whatever we may seem.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Because we are able to do nothing against
what is true, but only for it.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For we are glad when we are feeble and
you are strong: and this is our prayer, even that you may be made
complete.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> For this cause I am writing these
things while I am away, so that there may be need for me, when I am
present, to make use of sharp measures, by the authority which the Lord
has given me for building up and not for destruction.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Let this be my last word, brothers; be
glad; be complete; be comforted; be of the same mind; be at peace with
one another: and the God of love and peace will be with you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Give one another a holy kiss.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> All the saints send their love to you.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the harmony of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians](gal.md)
