[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eze)  [Next](hos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Daniel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the third year of the rule of Jehoiakim,
king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem,
shutting it in with his forces.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the Lord gave into his hands Jehoiakim,
king of Judah, with some of the vessels of the house of God; and he took
them away into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he put
the vessels into the store-house of his god.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And the king gave orders to Ashpenaz, the
captain of his unsexed servants, to take in some of the children of
Israel, certain of the king's family, and those of high birth;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Young men who were strong and healthy,
good-looking, and trained in all wisdom, having a good education and
much knowledge, and able to take positions in the king's house; and to
have them trained in the writing and language of the Chaldaeans.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And a regular amount of food and wine every
day from the king's table was ordered for them by the king; and they
were to be cared for for three years so that at the end of that time
they might take their places before the king.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And among these there were, of the children
of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the captain of the unsexed servants
gave them names; to Daniel he gave the name of Belteshazzar, to Hananiah
the name of Shadrach, to Mishael the name of Meshach, and to Azariah the
name of Abed-nego.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Daniel had come to the decision that he
would not make himself unclean with the king's food or wine; so he made
a request to the captain of the unsexed servants that he might not make
himself unclean.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And God put into the heart of the captain
of the unsexed servants kind feelings and pity for Daniel.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the captain of the unsexed servants
said to Daniel, I am in fear of my lord the king, who has given orders
about your food and your drink; what if he sees you looking less happy
than the other young men of your generation? then you would have put my
head in danger from the king.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then Daniel said to the keeper in whose
care the captain of the unsexed servants had put Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Put your servants to the test for ten
days; let them give us grain for our food and water for our drink.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Then take a look at our faces and the
faces of the young men who have food from the king's table; and, having
seen them, do to your servants as it seems right to you.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> So he gave ear to them in this thing and
put them to the test for ten days.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And at the end of ten days their faces
seemed fairer and they were fatter in flesh than all the young men who
had their food from the king's table.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> So the keeper regularly took away their
meat and the wine which was to have been their drink, and gave them
grain.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now as for these four young men, God gave
them knowledge and made them expert in all book-learning and wisdom: and
Daniel was wise in all visions and dreams.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now at the end of the time fixed by the
king for them to go in, the captain of the unsexed servants took them in
to Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the king had talk with them; and
among them all there was no one like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah; so they were given places before the king.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And in any business needing wisdom and
good sense, about which the king put questions to them, he saw that they
were ten times better than all the wonder-workers and users of secret
arts in all his kingdom.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And Daniel went on till the first year of
King Cyrus.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> In the second year of the rule of
Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar had dreams; and his spirit was troubled
and his sleep went from him.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Then the king gave orders that the
wonder-workers, and the users of secret arts, and those who made use of
evil powers, and the Chaldaeans, were to be sent for to make clear to
the king his dreams. So they came and took their places before the king.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the king said to them, I have had a
dream, and my spirit is troubled by the desire to have the dream made
clear to me.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Then the Chaldaeans said to the king in the
Aramaean language, O King, have life for ever: give your servants an
account of your dream, and we will make clear to you the sense of it.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The king made answer and said to the
Chaldaeans, This is my decision: if you do not make clear to me the
dream and the sense of it, you will be cut in bits and your houses made
waste.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But if you make clear the dream and the
sense of it, you will have from me offerings and rewards and great
honour: so make clear to me the dream and the sense of it.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> A second time they said in answer, Let the
king give his servants an account of his dream, and we will make clear
the sense.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The king made answer and said, I am certain
that you are attempting to get more time, because you see that my
decision is fixed;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> That if you do not make my dream clear to
me there is only one fate for you: for you have made ready false and
evil words to say before me till the times are changed: so give me an
account of the dream, and I will be certain that you are able to make
the sense of it clear.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Then the Chaldaeans said to the king in
answer, There is not a man on earth able to make clear the king's
business; for no king, however great his power, has ever made such a
request to any wonder-worker or user of secret arts or Chaldaean.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The king's request is a very hard one,
and there is no other who is able to make it clear to the king, but the
gods, whose living-place is not with flesh.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Because of this the king was angry and
full of wrath, and gave orders for the destruction of all the wise men
of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> So the order went out that the wise men
were to be put to death; and they were looking for Daniel and his
friends to put them to death.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then Daniel gave an answer with wisdom
and good sense to Arioch, the captain of the king's armed men, who had
gone out to put to death the wise men of Babylon;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> He made answer and said to Arioch, O
captain of the king, why is the king's order so cruel? Then Arioch gave
Daniel an account of the business.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And Daniel went in and made a request to
the king to give him time and he would make clear the sense of his dream
to the king.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And Daniel went to his house and gave his
friends Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah the news:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> So that they might make a request for the
mercy of the God of heaven in the question of this secret; so that
Daniel and his friends might not come to destruction with the rest of
the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Then the secret was made clear to Daniel
in a vision of the night. And Daniel gave blessing to the God of heaven.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And Daniel said in answer, May the name
of God be praised for ever and ever: for wisdom and strength are his:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> By him times and years are changed: by
him kings are taken away and kings are lifted up: he gives wisdom to the
wise, and knowledge to those whose minds are awake:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> He is the unveiler of deep and secret
things: he has knowledge of what is in the dark, and the light has its
living-place with him.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> I give you praise and worship, O God of
my fathers, who have given me wisdom and strength, and have now made
clear to me what we were requesting from you: for you have given us
knowledge of the king's business.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> For this reason Daniel went to Arioch, to
whom the king had given orders for the destruction of the wise men of
Babylon, and said to him, Do not put to death the wise men of Babylon:
take me in before the king and I will make clear to him the sense of the
dream.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Then Arioch quickly took Daniel in before
the king, and said to him, Here is a man from among the prisoners of
Judah, who will make clear to the king the sense of the dream.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The king made answer and said to Daniel,
whose name was Belteshazzar, Are you able to make clear to me the dream
which I saw and its sense?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Then Daniel said in answer to the king,
No wise men, or users of secret arts, or wonder-workers, or readers of
signs, are able to make clear to the king the secret he is searching
for;

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> But there is a God in heaven, the
unveiler of secrets, and he has given to King Nebuchadnezzar knowledge
of what will take place in the last days. Your dreams and the visions of
your head on your bed are these:

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> As for you, O King, the thoughts which
came to you on your bed were of what will come about after this: and the
unveiler of secrets has made clear to you what is to come.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> As for me, this secret is not made clear
to me because of any wisdom which I have more than any living man, but
in order that the sense of the dream may be made clear to the king, and
that you may have knowledge of the thoughts of your heart.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> You, O King, were looking, and a great
image was there. This image, which was very great, and whose glory was
very bright, was placed before you: its form sent fear into the heart.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> As for this image, its head was made of
the best gold, its breast and its arms were of silver, its middle and
its sides were of brass,

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Its legs of iron, its feet were in part
of iron and in part of potter's earth.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> While you were looking at it, a stone was
cut out, but not by hands, and it gave the image a blow on its feet,
which were of iron and earth, and they were broken in bits.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Then the iron and the earth, the brass
and the silver and the gold, were smashed together, and became like the
dust on the floors where grain is crushed in summer; and the wind took
them away so that no sign of them was to be seen: and the stone which
gave the image a blow became a great mountain, covering all the earth.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> This is the dream; and we will make clear
to the king the sense of it.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> You, O King, king of kings, to whom the
God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, and the strength, and
the glory,

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> Wherever the children of men are living;
into whose hands he has given the beasts of the field and the birds of
heaven, and has made you ruler over them all, you are the head of gold.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> And after you another kingdom, lower than
you, will come to power; and a third kingdom, of brass, ruling over all
the earth.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And the fourth kingdom will be strong as
iron: because, as all things are broken and overcome by iron, so it will
have the power of crushing and smashing down all the earth.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> And as you saw the feet and toes, part of
potter's work and part of iron, there will be a division in the kingdom;
but there will be some of the strength of iron in it, because you saw
the iron mixed with the potter's earth.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And as the toes of the feet were in part
of iron and in part of earth, so part of the kingdom will be strong and
part of it will readily be broken.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> And as you saw the iron mixed with earth,
they will give their daughters to one another as wives: but they will
not be united one with another, even as iron is not mixed with earth.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And in the days of those kings, the God
of heaven will put up a kingdom which will never come to destruction,
and its power will never be given into the hands of another people, and
all these kingdoms will be broken and overcome by it, but it will keep
its place for ever.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> Because you saw that a stone was cut out
of the mountain without hands, and that by it the iron and the brass and
the earth and the silver and the gold were broken to bits, a great God
has given the king knowledge of what is to take place in the future: the
dream is fixed, and its sense is certain.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> Then King Nebuchadnezzar, falling down on
his face, gave worship to Daniel, and gave orders for an offering and
spices to be given to him;

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> And the king made answer to Daniel and
said, Truly, your God is a God of gods and a Lord of kings, and an
unveiler of secrets, for you have been able to make this secret clear.

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> Then the king made Daniel great, and gave
him offerings in great number, and made him ruler over all the land of
Babylon, and chief over all the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> And at Daniel's request, the king gave
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego authority over the business of the land
of Babylon: but Daniel was kept near the king's person.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of
gold, sixty cubits high and six cubits wide: he put it up in the valley
of Dura, in the land of Babylon.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to get
together all the captains, the chiefs, the rulers, the wise men, the
keepers of public money, the judges, the overseers, and all the rulers
of the divisions of the country, to come to see the unveiling of the
image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had put up.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Then the captains, the chiefs, the rulers,
the wise men, the keepers of public money, the judges, the overseers,
and all the rulers of the divisions of the country, came together to see
the unveiling of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had put up; and
they took their places before the image which Nebuchadnezzar had put up.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then one of the king's criers said in a
loud voice, To you the order is given, O peoples, nations, and
languages,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> That when the sound of the horn, pipe,
harp, trigon, psaltery, bagpipe, and all sorts of instruments, comes to
your ears, you are to go down on your faces in worship before the image
of gold which Nebuchadnezzar the king has put up:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And anyone not falling down and worshipping
will that same hour be put into a burning and flaming fire.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> So at that time, all the people, when the
sound of the horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery, and all sorts of
instruments, came to their ears, went down on their faces in worship
before the image of gold which Nebuchadnezzar the king had put up.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> At that time certain Chaldaeans came near
and made a statement against the Jews.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> They made answer and said to Nebuchadnezzar
the king, O King, have life for ever.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> You, O King, have given an order that
every man, when the sound of the horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery,
bagpipe, and all sorts of instruments, comes to his ears, is to go down
on his face in worship before the image of gold:

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And anyone not falling down and
worshipping is to be put into a burning and flaming fire.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> There are certain Jews whom you have put
over the business of the land of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego; these men have not given attention to you, O King: they are
not servants of your gods or worshippers of the gold image which you
have put up.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar in his wrath and
passion gave orders for Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego to be sent for.
Then they made these men come in before the king.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Nebuchadnezzar made answer and said to
them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, that you will not
be servants of my god or give worship to the image of gold which I have
put up?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Now if you are ready, on hearing the
sound of the horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery, bagpipe, and all sorts
of instruments, to go down on your faces in worship before the image
which I have made, it is well: but if you will not give worship, that
same hour you will be put into a burning and flaming fire; and what god
is there who will be able to take you out of my hands?

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego,
answering Nebuchadnezzar the king, said, There is no need for us to give
you an answer to this question.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> If our God, whose servants we are, is
able to keep us safe from the burning and flaming fire, and from your
hands, O King, he will keep us safe.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But if not, be certain, O King, that we
will not be the servants of your gods, or give worship to the image of
gold which you have put up.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar was full of wrath,
and the form of his face was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego: and he gave orders that the fire was to be heated up seven
times more than it was generally heated.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And he gave orders to certain strong men
in his army to put cords on Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego and put them
into the burning and flaming fire.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Then these men had cords put round them
as they were, in their coats, their trousers, their hats, and their
clothing, and were dropped into the burning and flaming fire.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And because the king's order was not to
be put on one side, and the heat of the fire was so great, the men who
took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were burned to death by the
flame of the fire.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abed-nego, with the cords about them, went down into the burning and
flaming fire.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then King Nebuchadnezzar, full of fear
and wonder, got up quickly, and said to his wise men, Did we not put
three men in cords into the fire? and they made answer and said to the
king, True, O King.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> He made answer and said, Look! I see four
men loose, walking in the middle of the fire, and they are not damaged;
and the form of the fourth is like a son of the gods.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar came near the door of
the burning and flaming fire: he made answer and said, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego, you servants of the Most High God, come out and
come here. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego came out of the fire.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And the captains, the chiefs, and the
rulers, and the king's wise men who had come together, saw these men,
over whose bodies the fire had no power, and not a hair of their heads
was burned, and their coats were not changed, and there was no smell of
fire about them.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Nebuchadnezzar made answer and said,
Praise be to the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who has sent
his angel and kept his servants safe who had faith in him, and who put
the king's word on one side and gave up their bodies to the fire, so
that they might not be servants or worshippers of any other god but
their God.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> And it is my decision that any people,
nation, or language saying evil against the God of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abed-nego, will be cut to bits and their houses made waste: because
there is no other god who is able to give salvation such as this.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Then the king gave Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego even greater authority in the land of Babylon.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king, to all the
peoples, nations, and languages living in all the earth: May your peace
be increased.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> It has seemed good to me to make clear the
signs and wonders which the Most High God has done with me.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> How great are his signs! and how full of
power are his wonders! his kingdom is an eternal kingdom and his rule
goes on from generation to generation.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in my place,
and all things were going well for me in my great house:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> I saw a dream which was a cause of great
fear to me; I was troubled by the images of my mind on my bed, and by
the visions of my head.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And I gave orders for all the wise men of
Babylon to come in before me so that they might make clear to me the
sense of my dream.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then the wonder-workers, the users of
secret arts, the Chaldaeans, and the readers of signs came in to me: and
I put the dream before them but they did not make clear the sense of it
to me.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> But at last Daniel came in before me, he
whose name was Belteshazzar, after the name of my god, and in whom is
the spirit of the holy gods: and I put the dream before him, saying,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> O Belteshazzar, master of the
wonder-workers, because I am certain that the spirit of the holy gods is
in you, and you are troubled by no secret; this is the dream which I
saw: make clear to me its sense.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> On my bed I saw a vision: there was a
tree in the middle of the earth, and it was very high.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And the tree became tall and strong,
stretching up to heaven, and to be seen from the ends of the earth:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Its leaves were fair and it had much
fruit, and in it was food enough for all: the beasts of the field had
shade under it, and the birds of heaven were resting in its branches,
and it gave food to all living things.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> In the visions of my head on my bed I saw
a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Crying out with a loud voice; and this is
what he said: Let the tree be cut down and its branches broken off; let
its leaves be taken off and its fruit sent in every direction: let the
beasts get away from under it and the birds from its branches:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But keep its broken end and its roots
still in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass; let him have the
young grass of the field for food, and let him be wet with the dew of
heaven, and let his part be with the beasts.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Let his heart be changed from that of a
man, and the heart of a beast be given to him; and let seven times go by
him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> This order is fixed by the watchers, and
the decision is by the word of the holy ones: so that the living may be
certain that the Most High is ruler over the kingdom of men, and gives
it to any man at his pleasure, lifting up over it the lowest of men.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> This dream I, King Nebuchadnezzar, saw;
and do you, O Belteshazzar, make clear the sense of it, for all the wise
men of my kingdom are unable to make the sense of it clear to me; but
you are able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in you.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar,
was at a loss for a time, his thoughts troubling him. The king made
answer and said, Belteshazzar, do not be troubled by the dream or by the
sense of it. Belteshazzar, answering, said, My lord, may the dream be
about your haters, and its sense about those who are against you.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> The tree which you saw, which became tall
and strong, stretching up to heaven and seen from the ends of the earth;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Which had fair leaves and much fruit, and
had in it food for all; under which the beasts of the field were living,
and in the branches of which the birds of heaven had their
resting-places:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> It is you, O King, who have become great
and strong: for your power is increased and stretching up to heaven, and
your rule to the end of the earth.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And as for the vision which the king saw
of a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven, saying, Let the tree
be cut down and given to destruction;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> This is the sense of it, O King, and it
is the decision of the Most High which has come on my lord the king:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> That they will send you out from among
men, to be with the beasts of the field; they will give you grass for
your food like the oxen, and you will be wet with the dew of heaven, and
seven times will go by you, till you are certain that the Most High is
ruler in the kingdom of men, and gives it to any man at his pleasure.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And as they gave orders to let the broken
end and the roots of the tree be, so your kingdom will be safe for you
after it is clear to you that the heavens are ruling.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For this cause, O King, let my suggestion
be pleasing to you, and let your sins be covered by righteousness and
your evil-doing by mercy to the poor, so that the time of your
well-being may be longer.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> All this came to King Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> At the end of twelve months he was
walking on the roof of his great house in Babylon.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> The king made answer and said, Is this
not great Babylon, which I have made for the living-place of kings, by
the strength of my power and for the glory of my honour?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> While the word was still in the king's
mouth, a voice came down from heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to
you it is said: The kingdom has gone from you:

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And they will send you out from among
men, to be with the beasts of the field; they will give you grass for
your food like the oxen, and seven times will go by you, till you are
certain that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and gives it
to any man at his pleasure.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> That very hour the order about
Nebuchadnezzar was put into effect: and he was sent out from among men,
and had grass for his food like the oxen, and his body was wet with the
dew of heaven, till his hair became long as eagles' feathers and his
nails like those of birds.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And at the end of the days, I,
Nebuchadnezzar, lifting up my eyes to heaven, got back my reason, and,
blessing the Most High, I gave praise and honour to him who is living
for ever, whose rule is an eternal rule and whose kingdom goes on from
generation to generation.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And all the people of the earth are as
nothing: he does his pleasure in the army of heaven and among the people
of the earth: and no one is able to keep back his hand, or say to him,
What are you doing?

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> At the same time my reason came back to
me; and for the glory of my kingdom, my honour and my great name came
back to me; and my wise men and my lords were turned to me again; and I
was made safe in my kingdom and had more power than before.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, give worship and
praise and honour to the King of heaven; for all his works are true and
his ways are right: and those who go in pride he is able to make low.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Belshazzar the king made a great feast for
a thousand of his lords, drinking wine before the thousand.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Belshazzar, while he was overcome with
wine, gave orders for them to put before him the gold and silver vessels
which Nebuchadnezzar, his father, had taken from the Temple in
Jerusalem; so that the king and his lords, his wives and his other
women, might take their drink from them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then they took in the gold and silver
vessels which had been in the Temple of the house of God at Jerusalem;
and the king and his lords, his wives and his other women, took wine
from them.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> They took their wine and gave praise to the
gods of gold and silver, of brass and iron and wood and stone.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In that very hour the fingers of a man's
hand were seen, writing opposite the support for the light on the white
wall of the king's house, and the king saw the part of the hand which
was writing.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Then the colour went from the king's face,
and he was troubled by his thoughts; strength went from his body, and
his knees were shaking.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The king, crying out with a loud voice,
said that the users of secret arts, the Chaldaeans, and the readers of
signs, were to be sent for. The king made answer and said to the wise
men of Babylon, Whoever is able to make out this writing, and make clear
to me the sense of it, will be clothed in purple and have a chain of
gold round his neck, and will be a ruler of high authority in the
kingdom.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Then all the king's wise men came in: but
they were not able to make out the writing or give the sense of it to
the king.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then King Belshazzar was greatly troubled
and the colour went from his face, and his lords were at a loss.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The queen, because of the words of the
king and his lords, came into the house of the feast: the queen made
answer and said, O King, have life for ever; do not be troubled by your
thoughts or let the colour go from your face:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> There is a man in your kingdom in whom is
the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of your father, light and
reason like the wisdom of the gods were seen in him: and King
Nebuchadnezzar, your father, made him master of the wonder-workers, and
the users of secret arts, and the Chaldaeans, and the readers of signs;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Because a most special spirit, and
knowledge and reason and the power of reading dreams and unfolding dark
sayings and answering hard questions, were seen to be in him, even in
Daniel (named Belteshazzar by the king): now let Daniel be sent for, and
he will make clear the sense of the writing.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Then they took Daniel in before the king;
the king made answer and said to Daniel, So you are that Daniel, of the
prisoners of Judah, whom my father took out of Judah.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And I have had news of you, that the
spirit of the gods is in you, and that light and reason and special
wisdom have been seen in you.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And now the wise men, the users of secret
arts, have been sent in before me for the purpose of reading this
writing and making clear to me the sense of it: but they are not able to
make clear the sense of the thing:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And I have had news of you, that you have
the power of making things clear, and of answering hard questions: now
if you are able to make out the writing and give me the sense of it, you
will be clothed in purple and have a gold chain round your neck and be a
ruler of high authority in the kingdom.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Then Daniel made answer and said to the
king, Keep your offerings for yourself, and give your rewards to
another; but I, after reading the writing to the king, will give him the
sense of it.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> As for you, O King, the Most High God
gave to Nebuchadnezzar, your father, the kingdom and great power and
glory and honour:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And because of the great power he gave
him, all peoples and nations and languages were shaking in fear before
him: some he put to death and others he kept living, at his pleasure,
lifting up some and putting others down as it pleased him.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> But when his heart was lifted up and his
spirit became hard with pride, he was put down from his place as king,
and they took his glory from him:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And he was sent out from among the sons
of men; and his heart was made like the beasts', and he was living with
the asses of the fields; he had grass for his food like the oxen, and
his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till he was certain that the
Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and gives power over it to
anyone at his pleasure.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And you, his son, O Belshazzar, have not
kept your heart free from pride, though you had knowledge of all this;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> But you have been lifting yourself up
against the Lord of heaven, and they have put the vessels of his house
before you, and you and your lords, your wives and your women, have
taken wine in them; and you have given praise to gods of silver and
gold, of brass and iron and wood and stone, who are without the power of
seeing or hearing, and without knowledge: and to the God in whose hand
your breath is, and whose are all your ways, you have not given glory;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Then the part of the hand was sent out
from before him, and this writing was recorded.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And this is the writing which was
recorded, Mene, tekel, peres.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> This is the sense of the words: Mene;
your kingdom has been numbered by God and ended.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Tekel; you have been put in the scales
and seen to be under weight.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Peres; your kingdom has been cut up and
given to the Medes and Persians.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Then, by the order of Belshazzar, they
put a purple robe on Daniel, and a gold chain round his neck, and a
public statement was made that he was to be a ruler of high authority in
the kingdom.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> That very night Belshazzar, the king of
the Chaldaeans, was put to death.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And Darius the Mede took the kingdom,
being then about sixty-two years old.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Darius was pleased to put over the kingdom
a hundred and twenty captains, who were to be all through the kingdom;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And over them were three chief rulers, of
whom Daniel was one; and the captains were to be responsible to the
chief rulers, so that the king might undergo no loss.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Then this Daniel did his work better than
the chief rulers and the captains, because there was a special spirit in
him; and it was the king's purpose to put him over all the kingdom.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Then the chief rulers and the captains were
looking for some cause for putting Daniel in the wrong in connection
with the kingdom, but they were unable to put forward any wrongdoing or
error against him; because he was true, and no error or wrong was to be
seen in him.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then these men said, We will only get a
reason for attacking Daniel in connection with the law of his God.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then these chief rulers and the captains
came to the king and said to him, O King Darius, have life for ever.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> All the chief rulers of the kingdom, the
chiefs and the captains, the wise men and the rulers, have made a common
decision to put in force a law having the king's authority, and to give
a strong order, that whoever makes any request to any god or man but
you, O King, for thirty days, is to be put into the lions' hole.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Now, O King, put the order in force,
signing the writing so that it may not be changed, like the law of the
Medes and Persians which may not come to an end.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> For this reason King Darius put his name on
the writing and the order.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Daniel, on hearing that the writing
had been signed, went into his house; (now he had windows in his room on
the roof opening in the direction of Jerusalem;) and three times a day
he went down on his knees in prayer and praise before his God, as he had
done before.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then these men were watching and saw
Daniel making prayers and requesting grace before his God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Then they came near before the king and
said, O King, have you not put your name to an order that any man who
makes a request to any god or man but you, O King, for thirty days, is
to be put into the lions' hole? The king made answer and said, The thing
is fixed by the law of the Medes and Persians which may not come to an
end.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then they made answer and said before the
king, Daniel, one of the prisoners of Judah, has no respect for you, O
King, or for the order signed by you, but three times a day he makes his
prayer to God.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> When this thing came to the king's ears,
it was very evil to him, and his heart was fixed on keeping Daniel safe,
and till the going down of the sun he was doing everything in his power
to get him free.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Then these men said to the king, Be
certain, O King, that by the law of the Medes and Persians no order or
law which the king has put into force may be changed.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Then the king gave the order, and they
took Daniel and put him into the lions' hole. The king made answer and
said to Daniel, Your God, whose servant you are at all times, will keep
you safe.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Then they got a stone and put it over the
mouth of the hole, and it was stamped with the king's stamp and with the
stamp of the lords, so that the decision about Daniel might not be
changed.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Then the king went to his great house,
and took no food that night, and no ... were placed before him, and his
sleep went from him.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Then very early in the morning the king
got up and went quickly to the lions' hole.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And when he came near the hole where
Daniel was, he gave a loud cry of grief; the king made answer and said
to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is your God, whose
servant you are at all times, able to keep you safe from the lions?

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then Daniel said to the king, O King,
have life for ever.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> My God has sent his angel to keep the
lions' mouths shut, and they have done me no damage: because I was seen
to be without sin before him; and further, before you, O King, I have
done no wrong.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Then the king was very glad, and gave
orders for them to take Daniel up out of the hole. So Daniel was taken
up out of the hole and he was seen to be untouched, because he had faith
in his God.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And at the king's order, they took those
men who had said evil against Daniel, and put them in the lions' hole,
with their wives and their children; and they had not got to the floor
of the hole before the lions overcame them and all their bones were
broken.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Then King Darius sent a letter to all the
peoples, nations, and languages, living in all the earth: May your peace
be increased.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> It is my order that in all the kingdom of
which I am ruler, men are to be shaking with fear before the God of
Daniel: for he is the living God, unchanging for ever, and his kingdom
is one which will never come to destruction, his rule will go on to the
end.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> He gives salvation and makes men free
from danger, and does signs and wonders in heaven and earth, who has
kept Daniel safe from the power of the lions.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> So this Daniel did well in the kingdom of
Darius and in the kingdom of Cyrus the Persian.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> In the first year of Belshazzar, king of
Babylon, Daniel saw a dream, and visions came into his head on his bed:
then he put the dream in writing.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> I had a vision by night, and saw the four
winds of heaven violently moving the great sea.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And four great beasts came up from the sea,
different one from another.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The first was like a lion and had eagle's
wings; while I was watching its wings were pulled off, and it was lifted
up from the earth and placed on two feet like a man, and a man's heart
was given to it.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And I saw another beast, like a bear, and
it was lifted up on one side, and three side-bones were in its mouth,
between its teeth: and they said to it, Up! take much flesh.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> After this I saw another beast, like a
leopard, which had on its back four wings like those of a bird; and the
beast had four heads, and the power of a ruler was given to it.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> After this, in my vision of the night, I
saw a fourth beast, a thing causing fear and very troubling, full of
power and very strong; and it had great iron teeth: it took its food,
crushing some of it to bits and stamping down the rest with its feet: it
was different from all the beasts before it; and it had ten horns.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I was watching the horns with care, and I
saw another coming up among them, a little one, before which three of
the first horns were pulled up by the roots: and there were eyes like a
man's eyes in this horn, and a mouth saying great things.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I went on looking till the seats of kings
were placed, and one like a very old man took his seat: his clothing was
white as snow, and the hair of his head was like clean wool; his seat
was flames of fire and its wheels burning fire.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> A stream of fire was flowing and coming
out from before him: a thousand thousands were his servants, and ten
thousand times ten thousand were in their places before him: the judge
was seated and the books were open.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Then I saw--because of the voice of the
great words which the horn said--I saw till the beast was put to death,
and its body was given to destruction, and the beast was given to the
burning of fire.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> As for the rest of the beasts, their
authority was taken away: but they let them go on living for a measure
of time.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> I saw in visions of the night, and there
was coming with the clouds of heaven one like a man, and he came to the
one who was very old, and they took him near before him.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And to him was given authority and glory
and a kingdom; and all peoples, nations, and languages were his
servants: his authority is an eternal authority which will not come to
an end, and his kingdom is one which will not come to destruction.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> As for me, Daniel, my spirit was pained
because of this, and the visions of my head were troubling me.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I came near to one of those who were
waiting there, questioning him about what all this was. And he said to
me that he would make clear to me the sense of these things.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> These great beasts are four kings who
will be cut off from the earth.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> But the saints of the Most High will take
the kingdom, and it will be theirs for ever, even for ever and ever.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Then it was my desire to have certain
knowledge about the fourth beast, which was different from all the
others, a cause of great fear, whose teeth were of iron and his nails of
brass; who took his food, crushing some of it to bits and stamping on
the rest with his feet;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And about the ten horns on his head and
the other which came up, causing the fall of three; that horn which had
eyes, and a mouth saying great things, which seemed to be greater than
the other horns.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And I saw how that horn made war on the
saints and overcame them,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Till he came, who was very old, and the
decision was made and the authority was given to the saints of the Most
High; and the time came when the saints took the kingdom.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> This is what he said: The fourth beast is
a fourth kingdom which will come on earth, different from all the
kingdoms, and it will overcome all the earth, crushing it down and
smashing it.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And as for the ten horns, out of this
kingdom ten kings will come to power; and after them another will come
up: he will be different from the first ones and will put down three
kings.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And he will say words against the Most
High, attempting to put an end to the saints of the Most High; and he
will have the idea of changing times and law; and the saints will be
given into his hands for a time and times and half a time.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> But the judge will be seated, and they
will put an end to his authority, to overcome it and send complete
destruction on it.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And the kingdom and the authority and the
power of the kingdoms under all the heaven will be given to the people
of the saints of the Most High: his kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and
all powers will be his servants and do his pleasure.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Here is the end of the account. As for
me, Daniel, I was greatly troubled by my thoughts, and the colour went
from my face: but I kept the thing in my heart.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> In the third year of the rule of Belshazzar
the king, a vision was seen by me, Daniel, after the one I saw at first.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I saw in the vision; and when I saw it,
I was in the strong town Shushan, which is in the country of Elam; and
in the vision I was by the water-door of the Ulai.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And lifting up my eyes, I saw, there before
the stream, a male sheep with two horns: and the two horns were high,
but one was higher than the other, the higher one coming up last.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I saw the sheep pushing to the west and to
the north and to the south; and no beasts were able to keep their place
before him, and no one was able to get people out of his power; but he
did whatever his pleasure was and made himself great.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And while I was giving thought to this, I
saw a he-goat coming from the west over the face of all the earth
without touching the earth: and the he-goat had a great horn between his
eyes.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he came to the two-horned sheep which I
saw before the stream, rushing at him in the heat of his power.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And I saw him come right up to the sheep,
and he was moved with wrath against him, attacking the sheep so that his
two horns were broken; and the sheep had not strength to keep his place
before him, but was pushed down on the earth and crushed under his feet:
and there was no one to get the sheep out of his power.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the he-goat became very great: and when
he was strong, the great horn was broken, and in its place came up four
other horns turned to the four winds of heaven.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And out of one of them came another horn, a
little one, which became very great, stretching to the south and to the
east and to the beautiful land.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And it became great, even as high as the
army of heaven, pulling down some of the army, even of the stars, to the
earth and crushing them under its feet.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> It made itself great, even as great as
the lord of the army; and by it the regular burned offering was taken
away, and the place overturned and the holy place made waste.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> ... against the regular burned offering;
and ... crushed down to the earth, and it did its pleasure and things
went well for it.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then there came to my ears the voice of a
holy one talking; and another holy one said to that certain one who was
talking, How long will the vision be while the regular burned offering
is taken away, and the unclean thing causing fear is put up, and the
holy place crushed under foot?

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he said to him, For two thousand,
three hundred evenings and mornings; then the holy place will be made
clean.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And it came about that when I, Daniel,
had seen this vision, I had a desire for the sense of it to be unfolded;
and I saw one before me in the form of a man.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And the voice of a man came to my ears
between the sides of the Ulai, crying out and saying, Gabriel, make the
vision clear to this man.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> So he came and took his place near where
I was; and when he came, I was full of fear and went down on my face:
but he said to me, Let it be clear to you, O son of man; for the vision
has to do with the time of the end.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now while he was talking to me, I went
into a deep sleep with my face to the earth: but touching me, he put me
on my feet where I had been.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And he said, See, I will make clear to
you what is to come in the later time of the wrath: for it has to do
with the fixed time of the end.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> The sheep which you saw with two horns,
they are the kings of Media and Persia.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the he-goat is the king of Greece:
and the great horn between his eyes is the first king.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And as for that which was broken, in
place of which four came up, four kingdoms will come up from his nation,
but not with his power.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And in the later years of their kingdom,
when their evil doings have become complete, there will come up a king
full of pride and expert in dark sayings.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And his power will be great, and he will
be purposing strange things. And all will go well for him and he will do
his pleasure; and he will send destruction on the strong ones.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And his designs will be turned against
the holy people, causing deceit to do well in his hand; in his heart he
will make himself great, and send destruction on numbers who are living
unconscious of their danger; and he will put himself up against the
prince of princes; but he will be broken, though not by men's hands.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And the vision of evenings and mornings
which has been talked of is true: and keep the vision secret; for it has
to do with the far-off future.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And I, Daniel, was ill for some days;
then I got up and did the king's business: and I was full of wonder at
the vision, but no one was able to give the sense of it.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> In the first year of Darius, the son of
Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who was made king over the kingdom
of the Chaldaeans;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> In the first year of his rule, I, Daniel,
saw clearly from the books the number of years given by the word of the
Lord to the prophet Jeremiah, in which the making waste of Jerusalem was
to be complete, that is, seventy years.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And turning my face to the Lord God, I gave
myself up to prayer, requesting his grace, going without food, in
haircloth and dust.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And I made prayer to the Lord my God,
putting our sins before him, and said, O Lord, the great God, greatly to
be feared. keeping your agreement and mercy with those who have love for
you and do your orders;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> We are sinners, acting wrongly and doing
evil; we have gone against you, turning away from your orders and from
your laws:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> We have not given ear to your servants the
prophets, who said words in your name to our kings and our rulers and
our fathers and all the people of the land.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> O Lord, righteousness is yours, but shame
is on us, even to this day; and on the men of Judah and the people of
Jerusalem, and on all Israel, those who are near and those who are far
off, in all the countries where you have sent them because of the sin
which they have done against you.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> O Lord, shame is on us, on our kings and
our rulers and our fathers, because of our sin against you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> With the Lord our God are mercies and
forgiveness, for we have gone against him;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And have not given ear to the voice of
the Lord our God to go in the way of his laws which he put before us by
the mouth of his servants the prophets.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And all Israel have been sinners against
your law, turning away so as not to give ear to your voice: and the
curse has been let loose on us, and the oath recorded in the law of
Moses, the servant of God, for we have done evil against him.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he has given effect to his words
which he said against us and against those who were our judges, by
sending a great evil on us: for under all heaven there has not been done
what has been done to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> As it was recorded in the law of Moses,
all this evil has come on us: but we have made no prayer for grace from
the Lord our God that we might be turned from our evil doings and come
to true wisdom.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> So the Lord has been watching over this
evil and has made it come on us: for the Lord our God is upright in all
his acts which he has done, and we have not given ear to his voice.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And now, O Lord our God, who took your
people out of the land of Egypt with a strong hand and made a great name
for yourself even to this day; we are sinners, we have done evil.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> O Lord, because of your righteousness,
let your wrath and your passion be turned away from your town Jerusalem,
your holy mountain: because, through our sins and the evil-doing of our
fathers, Jerusalem and your people have become a cause of shame to all
who are round about us.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And now, give ear, O our God, to the
prayer of your servant and to his request for grace, and let your face
be shining on your holy place which is made waste, because of your
servants, O Lord.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> O my God, let your ear be turned and give
hearing; let your eyes be open and see how we have been made waste and
the town which is named by your name: for we are not offering our
prayers before you because of our righteousness, but because of your
great mercies.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> O Lord, give ear; O Lord, have
forgiveness; O Lord, take note and do; let there be no more waiting; for
the honour of your name, O my God, because your town and your people are
named by your name.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And while I was still saying these words
in prayer, and putting my sins and the sins of my people Israel before
the Lord, and requesting grace from the Lord my God for the holy
mountain of my God;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Even while I was still in prayer, the man
Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at first when my weariness was
great, put his hand on me about the time of the evening offering.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And teaching me and talking to me he
said, O Daniel, I have come now to give you wisdom.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> At the first word of your prayer a word
went out, and I have come to give you knowledge; for you are a man
dearly loved: so give thought to the word and let the vision be clear to
you.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Seventy weeks have been fixed for your
people and your holy town, to let wrongdoing be complete and sin come to
its full limit, and for the clearing away of evil-doing and the coming
in of eternal righteousness: so that the vision and the word of the
prophet may be stamped as true, and to put the holy oil on a most holy
place.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Have then the certain knowledge that from
the going out of the word for the building again of Jerusalem till the
coming of a prince, on whom the holy oil has been put, will be seven
weeks: in sixty-two weeks its building will be complete, with square and
earthwork.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And at the end of the times, even after
the sixty-two weeks, one on whom the holy oil has been put will be cut
off and have no ...; and the town and the holy place will be made waste
together with a prince; and the end will come with an overflowing of
waters, and even to the end there will be war; the making waste which
has been fixed.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And a strong order will be sent out
against the great number for one week; and so for half of the week the
offering and the meal offering will come to an end; and in its place
will be an unclean thing causing fear; till the destruction which has
been fixed is let loose on him who has made waste.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> In the third year of Cyrus, king of
Persia, a secret was unfolded to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar;
and the thing was true, even a hard work: and he had knowledge of it,
and the vision was clear to him.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> In those days I, Daniel, gave myself up
to grief for three full weeks.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> I had no pleasing food, no meat or wine
came into my mouth, and I put no oil on my body till three full weeks
were ended.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And on the twenty-fourth day of the first
month I was by the side of the great river;

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And lifting up my eyes I saw the form of
a man clothed in a linen robe, and round him there was a band of gold,
of the best gold:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And his body was like the beryl, and his
face had the look of a thunder-flame, and his eyes were like burning
lights, and his arms and feet like the colour of polished brass, and the
sound of his voice was like the sound of an army.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And I, Daniel, was the only one who saw
the vision, for the men who were with me did not see it; but a great
shaking came on them and they went in flight to take cover.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> So I was by myself, and I saw this great
vision, and all my strength went from me; and the colour went from my
face.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> But the sound of his words came to my
ears, and on hearing his voice I went into a deep sleep with my face to
the earth.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Then a hand gave me a touch, awaking
me, and putting me on my knees and my hands.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he said to me, O Daniel, you man
dearly loved, take in the sense of the words I say to you and get up on
to your feet: for to you I am now sent; and when he had said this to me
I got on to my feet, shaking with fear.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Then he said to me, Have no fear,
Daniel; for from the first day when you gave your heart to getting
wisdom and making yourself poor in spirit before your God, your words
have come to his ears: and I have come because of your words.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But the angel of the kingdom of Persia
put himself against me for twenty-one days; but Michael, one of the
chief angels, came to my help; and when I came he was still there with
the angel of the kings of Persia.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Now I have come to give you knowledge
of the fate of your people in the later days; for there is still a
vision for the days.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And after he had said these words to
me, I kept my face turned to the earth and was unable to say anything.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Then one whose form was like the sons
of men put his finger on my lips; and opening my mouth, I said to him
who was before me, O my lord, because of the vision my pains have come
on me, and I have no more strength.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For how may this servant of my lord
have talk with my lord? for, as for me, straight away my strength went
from me and there was no breath in my body.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then again one having the form of a man
put his hand on me and gave me strength.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And he said to me, O man greatly loved,
have no fear: peace be with you, be strong and let your heart be lifted
up. And at his words I became strong, and said, Let my lord say on, for
you have given me strength.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Then he said, It is clear to you why I
have come to you. And now I will give you an account of what is recorded
in the true writings:

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But I am going back to make war with
the angel of Persia, and when I am gone, the angel of Greece will come.
And there is no one on my side against these, but Michael, your angel.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And as for me, in the first year of
Darius the Mede I was on his side to make his position safe and make him
strong.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And now I will make clear to you what is
true. There are still three kings to come in Persia, and the fourth will
have much greater wealth than all of them: and when he has become strong
through his wealth, he will put his forces in motion against all the
kingdoms of Greece.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And a strong king will come to power,
ruling with great authority and doing whatever is his pleasure.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And when he has become strong, his
kingdom will be broken and parted to the four winds of heaven; but not
to his offspring, for it will be uprooted; and his kingdom will be for
the others and not for these: but not with the same authority as his.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the king of the south will be strong,
but one of his captains will be stronger than he and will be ruler; and
his rule will be a great rule.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And at the end of years they will be
joined together; and the daughter of the king of the south will come to
the king of the north to make an agreement: but she will not keep the
strength of her arm; and his offspring will not keep their place; but
she will be uprooted, with those who were the cause of her coming, and
her son, and he who took her in those times.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But out of a branch from her roots one
will come up to take his place, who will come against the army, forcing
his way into the strong place of the king of the north, and he will take
them in hand and overcome them:

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And their gods and their metal images and
their fair vessels of silver and gold he will take away into the south;
and for some years he will keep away from the king of the north.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And he will come into the kingdom of the
king of the south, but he will go back to his land.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And his son will make war, and will get
together an army of great forces, and he will make an attack on him,
overflowing and going past: and he will again take the war even to his
strong place.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And the king of the south will be moved
with wrath, and will come out and make war on him, on this same king of
the north: and he will get together a great army, but the army will be
given into his hand.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the army will be taken away, and
his heart will be uplifted: he will be the cause of the downfall of tens
of thousands, but he will not be strong.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And again the king of the north will
get together an army greater than the first; and he will make an attack
on him at the end of years, with a great army and much wealth.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> In those times, a number will take up
arms against the king of the south: and the children of the violent
among your people will be lifting themselves up to make the vision come
true; but it will be their downfall.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> So the king of the north will come, and
put up earthworks and take a well-armed town: and the forces of the king
of the south will make an attempt to keep their position, even the best
of his army, but they will not have strength to do so.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And he who comes against him will do
his pleasure, and no one will be able to keep his place before him: he
will take up his position in the beautiful land and in his hand there
will be destruction.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And it will be his purpose to come with
the strength of all his kingdom, but in place of this he will make an
agreement with him; and he will give him the daughter of women to send
destruction on it; but this will not take place or come about.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> After this, his face will be turned to
the islands, and he will take a number of them: but a chief, by his
destruction, will put an end to the shame offered by him; and more than
this, he will make his shame come back on him.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Then his face will be turned to the
strong places of his land: but his way will be stopped, causing his
downfall, and he will not be seen again.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then his place will be taken by one who
will send out a man with the glory of a king to get wealth together; but
after a short time destruction will overtake him, but not in wrath or in
the fight.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And his place will be taken by a low
person, to whom the honour of the kingdom had not been given: but he
will come in time of peace and will get the kingdom by fair words.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And his forces will be completely taken
away from before him and broken; and even the ruler of the agreement
will have the same fate.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And from the time when they make an
agreement with him, he will be working falsely: for he will take up arms
suddenly with a small force,

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Against fertile places, and will make
waste a part of the country; and he will do what his fathers have not
done, or his fathers' fathers; he will make distribution among them of
goods taken in war and by force, and of property: he will even make
designs against the strong places for a time.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And he will put in motion his power and
his strength against the king of the south with a great army; and the
king of the south will go to war with a very great and strong army: but
he will be forced to give way, because of their designs against him;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And his fears will overcome him and be
the cause of his downfall, and his army will come to complete
destruction, and a great number will be put to the sword.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And as for these two kings, their
hearts will be fixed on doing evil and they will say false words at one
table; but it will come to nothing: for the end will be at the time
fixed.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And he will go back to his land with
great wealth; and his heart will be against the holy agreement; and he
will do his pleasure and go back to his land.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> At the time fixed he will come back and
come into the south; but in the later time it will not be as it was
before.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For those who go out from the west will
come against him, and he will be in fear and will go back, full of wrath
against the holy agreement; and he will do his pleasure: and he will go
back and be united with those who have given up the holy agreement.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And armies sent by him will take up
their position and they will make unclean the holy place, even the
strong place, and take away the regular burned offering and put in its
place an unclean thing causing fear.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And those who do evil against the
agreement will be turned to sin by his fair words: but the people who
have knowledge of their God will be strong and do well.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And those who are wise among the people
will be the teachers of the mass of the people: but they will come to
their downfall by the sword and by the flame, being made prisoners and
undergoing loss for a long time.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Now at the time of their downfall they
will have a little help, but numbers will be joined to them in the town,
and in their separate heritages.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And some of those who are wise will
have wisdom in testing themselves and making themselves clean, till the
time of the end: for it is still for the fixed time.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And the king will do his pleasure; he
will put himself on high, lifting himself over every god, and saying
things to be wondered at against the God of gods; and all will be well
for him till the wrath is complete; for what has been purposed will be
done.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> He will have no respect for the gods of
his fathers or for the god desired by women; he will have no respect for
any god: for he will put himself on high over all.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> But in place of this he will give
honour to the god of armed places, and to a god of whom his fathers had
no knowledge he will give honour with gold and silver and jewels and
things to be desired.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And he will make use of the people of a
strange god to keep his strongest places; to those whom he takes note of
he will give high honour: and he will make them rulers over the mass of
the people, and will make division of the land for a price.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> And at the time of the end, the king of
the south will make an attack on him: and the king of the north will
come against him like a storm-wind, with war-carriages and horsemen and
numbers of ships; and he will go through many lands like overflowing
waters.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> And he will come into the beautiful
land, and tens of thousands will be overcome: but these will be kept
from falling into his hands: Edom and Moab and the chief of the children
of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> And his hand will be stretched out on
the countries: and the land of the south will not be safe from him.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> But he will have power over the stores
of gold and silver, and over all the valued things of the south: and the
Libyans and the Ethiopians will be at his steps.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> But he will be troubled by news from
the east and from the north; and he will go out in great wrath, to send
destruction on, and put an end to, great numbers.

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> He will put the tents of his great
house between the sea and the beautiful holy mountain: but he will come
to his end with no helper.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And at that time Michael will take up his
place, the great angel, who is the supporter of the children of your
people: and there will be a time of trouble, such as there never was
from the time there was a nation even till that same time: and at that
time your people will be kept safe, everyone who is recorded in the
book.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And a number of those who are sleeping in
the dust of the earth will come out of their sleep, some to eternal life
and some to eternal shame.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And those who are wise will be shining
like the light of the outstretched sky; and those by whom numbers have
been turned to righteousness will be like the stars for ever and ever.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> But as for you, O Daniel, let the words
be kept secret and the book rolled up and kept shut till the time of the
end: numbers will be going out of the way and troubles will be
increased.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Then I, Daniel, looking, saw two others,
one at the edge of the river on this side and one at the edge of the
river on that side.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And I said to the man clothed in linen,
who was over the waters of the river, How long will it be to the end of
these wonders?

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Then in my hearing the man clothed in
linen, who was over the river, lifting up his right hand and his left
hand to heaven, took an oath by him who is living for ever that it would
be a time, times, and a half; and when the power of the crusher of the
holy people comes to an end, all these things will be ended.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And the words came to my ears, but the
sense of them was not clear to me: then I said, O my lord, what is the
sense of these things?

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said, Go on your way, Daniel: for
the words are secret and shut up till the time of the end;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Till a number are tested and make
themselves clean; and the evil-doers will do evil; for not one of the
evil-doers will have knowledge; but all will be made clear to those who
are wise.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And from the time when the regular
burned offering is taken away, and an unclean thing causing fear is put
up, there will be a thousand, two hundred and ninety days.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> A blessing will be on the man who goes
on waiting, and comes to the thousand, three hundred and thirty-five
days.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> But you, go on your way and take your
rest: for you will be in your place at the end of the days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea](hos)
