[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gal)  [Next](phi.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Ephesians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus by the
purpose of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and those who have
faith in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has given us every blessing of the Spirit in the
heavens in Christ:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Even as he made selection of us in him from
the first, so that we might be holy and free from all evil before him in
love:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> As we were designed before by him for the
position of sons to himself, through Jesus Christ, in the good pleasure
of his purpose,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> To the praise of the glory of his grace,
which he freely gave to us in the Loved One:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> In whom we have salvation through his
blood, the forgiveness of our sins, through the wealth of his grace,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Which he gave us in full measure in all
wisdom and care;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Having made clear to us the secret of his
purpose, in agreement with the design which he had in mind, to put into
his hands

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The ordering of the times when they are
complete, so that all things might come to a head in Christ, the things
in heaven and the things on the earth; in him, I say,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> In whom we have a heritage, being marked
out from the first in his purpose who does all things in agreement with
his designs;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> So that his glory might have praise
through us who first had hope in Christ:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> In whom you, having been given the true
word, the good news of your salvation, and through your faith in him,
were given the sign of the Holy Spirit of hope,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Which is the first-fruit of our heritage,
till God gets back that which is his, to the praise of his glory.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For this cause I, having had news of the
faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and which you make clear to
all the saints,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Give praise without end for you, keeping
you in mind in my prayers;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And that having the eyes of your heart
full of light, you may have knowledge of what is the hope of his
purpose, what is the wealth of the glory of his heritage in the saints,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And how unlimited is his power to us who
have faith, as is seen in the working of the strength of his power,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> By which he made Christ come back from
the dead, and gave him a place at his right hand in heaven,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Far over all rule and authority and power
and every name which is named, not only in the present order, but in
that which is to come:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And he has put all things under his feet,
and has made him to be head over all things to the church,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Which is his body, the full measure of
him in whom all things are made complete.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And to you did he give life, when you were
dead through your wrongdoing and sins,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> In which you were living in the past, after
the ways of this present world, doing the pleasure of the lord of the
power of the air, the spirit who is now working in those who go against
the purpose of God;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Among whom we all at one time were living
in the pleasures of our flesh, giving way to the desires of the flesh
and of the mind, and the punishment of God was waiting for us even as
for the rest.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But God, being full of mercy, through the
great love which he had for us,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Even when we were dead through our sins,
gave us life together with Christ (by grace you have salvation),

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> So that we came back from death with him,
and are seated with him in the heavens, in Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> That in the time to come he might make
clear the full wealth of his grace in his mercy to us in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Because by grace you have salvation through
faith; and that not of yourselves: it is given by God:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Not by works, so that no man may take glory
to himself.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For by his act we were given existence in
Christ Jesus to do those good works which God before made ready for us
so that we might do them.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For this reason keep it in mind that in
the past you, the Gentiles in the flesh, who are looked on as being
outside the circumcision by those who have circumcision, in the flesh,
made by hands;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> That you were at that time without
Christ, being cut off from any part in Israel's rights as a nation,
having no part in God's agreement, having no hope, and without God in
the world.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But now in Christ Jesus you who at one
time were far off are made near in the blood of Christ.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For he is our peace, who has made the two
into one, and by whom the middle wall of division has been broken down,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Having in his flesh put an end to that
which made the division between us, even the law with its rules and
orders, so that he might make in himself, of the two, one new man, so
making peace;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And that the two might come into
agreement with God in one body through the cross, so putting an end to
that division.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And he came preaching peace to you who
were far off, and to those who were near;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Because through him the two of us are
able to come near in one Spirit to the Father.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> So then you are no longer as those who
have no part or place in the kingdom of God, but you are numbered among
the saints, and of the family of God,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Resting on the base of the Apostles and
prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief keystone,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> In whom all the building, rightly joined
together, comes to be a holy house of God in the Lord;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> In whom you, with the rest, are united
together as a living-place of God in the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of
Christ Jesus for you Gentiles,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> If that ordering of the grace of God has
come to your knowledge, which was given to me for you,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> How by revelation the secret was made clear
to me, as I said before in a short letter,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> By the reading of which you will be clear
about my knowledge of the secret of Christ;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Which in other generations was not given to
the sons of men, but the revelation of it has now been made to his holy
Apostles and prophets in the Spirit;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Which is that the Gentiles have a part in
the heritage, and in the same body, and in the same hope in Christ
through the good news,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Of which I was made a preacher, through
that grace of God which was given to me in the measure of the working of
his power.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> To me, who am less than the least of all
the saints, was this grace given, so that I might make clear to the
Gentiles the good news of the unending wealth of Christ:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And make all men see what is the ordering
of the secret which from the first has been kept in God who made all
things;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> So that now to the rulers and the
authorities in the heavens might be made clear through the church the
wide-shining wisdom of God,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Which is seen in his eternal purpose in
Christ Jesus our Lord:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> By whom we come near to God without fear
through faith in him.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For this reason it is my prayer that you
may not become feeble because of my troubles for you, which are your
glory.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For this cause I go down on my knees
before the Father,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> From whom every family in heaven and on
earth is named,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> That in the wealth of his glory he would
make you strong with power through his Spirit in your hearts;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> So that Christ may have his place in your
hearts through faith; and that you, being rooted and based in love,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> May have strength to see with all the
saints how wide and long and high and deep it is,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And to have knowledge of the love of
Christ which is outside all knowledge, so that you may be made complete
as God himself is complete.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Now to him who is able to do in full
measure more than all our desires or thoughts, through the power which
is working in us,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> To him be the glory in the church and in
Christ Jesus to all generations for ever and ever. So be it.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I then, the prisoner in the Lord, make this
request from my heart, that you will see that your behaviour is a credit
to the position which God's purpose has given you,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> With all gentle and quiet behaviour, taking
whatever comes, putting up with one another in love;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Taking care to keep the harmony of the
Spirit in the yoke of peace.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> There is one body and one Spirit, even as
you have been marked out by God in the one hope of his purpose for you;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> One Lord, one faith, one baptism,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> One God and Father of all, who is over all,
and through all, and in all.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But to every one of us has grace been given
in the measure of the giving of Christ.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For this reason he says, He went up on
high, taking his prisoners with him, and gave freely to men.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> (Now this, He went up, what is it but that
he first went down into the lower parts of the earth?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> He who went down is the same who went up
far over all the heavens so that he might make all things complete.)

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he gave some as Apostles, and some,
prophets; and some, preachers of the good news; and some to give care
and teaching;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> For the training of the saints as
servants in the church, for the building up of the body of Christ:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Till we all come to the harmony of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to full growth, to the
full measure of Christ:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> So that we may be no longer children,
sent this way and that, turned about by every wind of teaching, by the
twisting and tricks of men, by the deceits of error;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But saying true words in love, may come
to full growth in him, who is the head, even Christ;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Through whom all the body, being rightly
formed and united together, by the full working of every part, is
increased to the building up of itself in love.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> This I say, then, and give witness in the
Lord, that you are to go no longer in the way of the Gentiles whose
minds are turned to that which has no profit,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Whose thoughts are dark, to whom the life
of God is strange because they are without knowledge, and their hearts
have been made hard;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Who having no more power of feeling, have
given themselves up to evil passions, to do all unclean things with
overmuch desire.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For this was not the teaching of Christ
which was given to you;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> If in fact you gave ear to him, and were
given teaching in him, even as what is true is made clear in Jesus:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> That you are to put away, in relation to
your earlier way of life, the old man, which has become evil by love of
deceit;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And be made new in the spirit of your
mind,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And put on the new man, to which God has
given life, in righteousness and a true and holy way of living.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And so, putting away false words, let
everyone say what is true to his neighbour: for we are parts one of
another.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Be angry without doing wrong; let not the
sun go down on your wrath;

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And do not give way to the Evil One.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Let him who was a thief be so no longer,
but let him do good work with his hands, so that he may have something
to give to him who is in need.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Let no evil talk come out of your mouth,
but only what is good for giving necessary teaching, and for grace to
those who give ear.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And do not give grief to the Holy Spirit
of God, by whom you were marked for the day of salvation.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Let all bitter, sharp and angry feeling,
and noise, and evil words, be put away from you, with all unkind acts;

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And be kind to one another, full of pity,
having forgiveness for one another, even as God in Christ had
forgiveness for you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Let it then be your desire to be like God,
as well-loved children;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And be living in love, even as Christ had
love for you, and gave himself up for us, an offering to God for a
perfume of a sweet smell.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But evil acts of the flesh and all unclean
things, or desire for others' property, let it not even be named among
you, as is right for saints;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And let there be no low behaviour, or
foolish talk, or words said in sport, which are not right, but in place
of them the giving of praise.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Being certain of this, that no man who
gives way to the passions of the flesh, no unclean person, or one who
has desire for the property of others, or who gives worship to images,
has any heritage in the kingdom of Christ and God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Do not be turned from the right way by
foolish words; for because of these things the punishment of God comes
on those who do not put themselves under him.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Have no part with such men;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For you at one time were dark, but now are
light in the Lord: let your behaviour be that of children of light

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> (Because the fruit of the light is in all
righteousness and in everything which is good and true),

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Testing by experience what is
well-pleasing to the Lord;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And have no company with the works of the
dark, which give no fruit, but make their true quality clear;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For the things which are done by them in
secret it is shame even to put into words.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But all things, when their true quality
is seen, are made clear by the light: because everything which is made
clear is light.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For this reason he says, Be awake, you
who are sleeping, and come up from among the dead, and Christ will be
your light.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Take care then how you are living, not as
unwise, but as wise;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Making good use of the time, because the
days are evil.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For this reason, then, do not be foolish,
but be conscious of the Lord's pleasure.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And do not take overmuch wine by which
one may be overcome, but be full of the Spirit;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Joining with one another in holy songs of
praise and of the Spirit, using your voice in songs and making melody in
your heart to the Lord;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Giving praise at all times for all things
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God, even the Father;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Letting yourselves be ruled by one
another in the fear of Christ.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Wives, be under the authority of your
husbands, as of the Lord.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For the husband is the head of the wife,
as Christ is the head of the church, being himself the saviour of the
body.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And as the church is under Christ's
authority, so let wives be under the rule of their husbands in all
things.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Husbands, have love for your wives, even
as Christ had love for the church, and gave himself for it;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> So that he might make it holy, having
made it clean with the washing of water by the word,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And might take it for himself, a church
full of glory, not having one mark or fold or any such thing; but that
it might be holy and complete.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Even so it is right for husbands to have
love for their wives as for their bodies. He who has love for his wife
has love for himself:

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> For no man ever had hate for his flesh;
but he gives it food and takes care of it, even as Christ does for the
church;

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Because we are parts of his body.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> For this cause will a man go away from
his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two will become
one flesh.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> This is a great secret: but my words are
about Christ and the church.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But do you, everyone, have love for his
wife, even as for himself; and let the wife see that she has respect for
her husband.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Children, do what is ordered by your
fathers and mothers in the Lord: for this is right.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Give honour to your father and mother
(which is the first rule having a reward),

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> So that all may be well for you, and your
life may be long on the earth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And, you fathers, do not make your children
angry: but give them training in the teaching and fear of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Servants, do what is ordered by those who
are your natural masters, having respect and fear for them, with all
your heart, as to Christ;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Not only under your master's eye, as
pleasers of men; but as servants of Christ, doing the pleasure of God
from the heart;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Doing your work readily, as to the Lord,
and not to men:

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> In the knowledge that for every good thing
anyone does, he will have his reward from the Lord, If he is a servant
or if he is free.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And, you masters, do the same things to
them, not making use of violent words: in the knowledge that their
Master and yours is in heaven, and he has no respect for a man's
position.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Lastly, be strong in the Lord, and in the
strength of his power.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Take up God's instruments of war, so that
you may be able to keep your position against all the deceits of the
Evil One.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For our fight is not against flesh and
blood, but against authorities and powers, against the world-rulers of
this dark night, against the spirits of evil in the heavens.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For this reason take up all the arms of
God, so that you may be able to be strong in the evil day, and, having
done all, to keep your place.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Take your place, then, having your body
clothed with the true word, and having put on the breastplate of
righteousness;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Be ready with the good news of peace as
shoes on your feet;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And most of all, using faith as a cover
to keep off all the flaming arrows of the Evil One.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And take salvation for your head-dress
and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> With prayers and deep desires, making
requests at all times in the Spirit, and keeping watch, with strong
purpose, in prayer for all the saints,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And for me, that words may be given to me
in the opening of my mouth, to make clear without fear the secret of the
good news,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For which I am a representative in
chains, and that I may say without fear the things which it is right for
me to say.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> But so that you may have knowledge of my
business, and how I am, Tychicus, the well-loved brother and tested
servant in the Lord, will give you news of all things:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Whom I have sent to you for this very
purpose, so that you may have knowledge of our position, and that he may
give comfort to your hearts.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Peace be to the brothers, and love with
faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Grace be with all those who have true
love for our Lord Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians](phi.md)
