[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zep)  [Next](zac.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Haggai

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the second year of Darius the king, in
the sixth month, on the first day of the month, came the word of the
Lord by Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, ruler of
Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> These are the words of the Lord of armies:
These people say, The time has not come for building the Lord's house.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Then the word of the Lord came by Haggai
the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Is it a time for you to be living in roofed
houses while this house is a waste?

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For this cause the Lord of armies has said,
Give thought to your ways.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Much has been planted, but little got in;
you take food, but have not enough; you take drink, but are not full;
you are clothed, but no one is warm; and he who gets payment for his
work, gets it to put it into a bag full of holes.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
Give thought to your ways.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Go up to the hills and get wood and put up
the house; and I will take pleasure in it and be honoured, says the
Lord.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> You were looking for much, and it came to
little; and when you got it into your house, I took it away with a
breath. Why? says the Lord of armies. Because of my house which is a
waste, while every man takes care of the house which is his.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For this cause the heaven over you is
kept from giving dew, and the earth from giving her fruit.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And by my order no rain came on the land
or on the mountains or the grain or the wine or the oil or the produce
of the earth or on men or cattle or on any work of man's hands.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel,
and Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and all the rest of
the people, gave ear to the voice of the Lord their God and to the words
of Haggai the prophet, because the Lord their God had sent him, and the
people were in fear before the Lord.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Then Haggai, whom the Lord had sent to
give his words to the people, said, I am with you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the spirit of Zerubbabel, the son of
Shealtiel, ruler of Judah, was moved by the Lord, as was the spirit of
Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the
rest of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the Lord
of armies, their God.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> On the twenty-fourth day of the month, in
the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> In the seventh month, on the twenty-first
day of the month, the word of the Lord came by Haggai the prophet,
saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Say now to Zerubbabel, the son of
Shealtiel, ruler of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high
priest, and to the rest of the people,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Who is there still among you who saw this
house in its first glory? and how do you see it now? is it not in your
eyes as nothing?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the
Lord; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest; and be
strong, all you people of the land, says the Lord, and get to work: for
I am with you, says the Lord of armies:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The agreement which I made with you when
you came out of Egypt, and my spirit, are with you still; have no fear.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For this is what the Lord of armies has
said: In a short time I will make a shaking of the heavens and the earth
and the sea and the dry land;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And I will make a shaking of all the
nations, and the desired things of all nations will come: and I will
make this house full of my glory, says the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The silver is mine and the gold is mine,
says the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The second glory of this house will be
greater than the first, says the Lord of armies: and in this place I
will give peace, says the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth
month, in the second year of Darius, the word of the Lord came by Haggai
the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> These are the words of the Lord of
armies: Put now a point of law to the priests, saying,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> If anyone has some holy flesh folded in
the skirt of his robe, will bread or soup or wine or oil or any other
food be made holy if touched by his skirt? And the priests answering
said, No.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then Haggai said, Will any of these be
made unclean by the touch of one who is unclean through touching a dead
body? And the priests answering said, It will be made unclean.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then Haggai said, So is this people and
so is this nation before me, says the Lord; and so is every work of
their hands; and the offering they give there is unclean.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And now, give thought, looking back from
this day to the time before one stone was put on another in the Temple
of the Lord:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> How, when anyone came to a store of
twenty measures, there were only ten: when anyone went to the wine-store
to get fifty vessels full, there were only twenty.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And I sent burning and wasting and a rain
of ice-drops on all the works of your hands; but still you were not
turned to me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And now, give thought; looking on from
this day, from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the time
when the base of the Lord's house was put in its place, give thought to
it.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Is the seed still in the store-house?
have the vine and the fig-tree, the pomegranate and the olive-tree,
still not given their fruit? from this day I will send my blessing on
you.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the word of the Lord came a second
time to Haggai, on the twenty-fourth day of the month, saying,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Say to Zerubbabel, ruler of Judah, I will
make a shaking of the heavens and the earth,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Overturning the power of kingdoms; and I
will send destruction on the strength of the kingdoms of the nations; by
me war-carriages will be overturned with those who are in them; and the
horses and the horsemen will come down, everyone by the sword of his
brother.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> In that day, says the Lord of armies, I
will take you, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, says the
Lord, and will make you as a jewelled ring: for I have taken you to be
mine, says the Lord of armies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah](zac.md)
