[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](plm)  [Next](jam.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Hebrews

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In times past the word of God came to our
fathers through the prophets, in different parts and in different ways;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> But now, at the end of these days, it has
come to us through his Son, to whom he has given all things for a
heritage, and through whom he made the order of the generations;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Who, being the outshining of his glory, the
true image of his substance, supporting all things by the word of his
power, having given himself as an offering making clean from sins, took
his seat at the right hand of God in heaven;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Having become by so much better than the
angels, as the name which is his heritage is more noble than theirs.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> To which of the angels did God say at any
time, You are my Son, this day I have given you being? or, I will be his
Father, and he will be my Son?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And again, when he is sending his only Son
into the world, he says, Let all the angels of God give him worship.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And of the angels he says, Who makes his
angels winds, and his servants flames of fire:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But of the Son he says, Your seat of power,
O God, is for ever and ever; and the rod of your kingdom is a rod of
righteousness.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> You have been a lover of righteousness and
a hater of evil; and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your
head more than on the heads of those who are with you.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> You, Lord, at the first did put the earth
on its base, and the heavens are the works of your hands:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> They will come to their end; but you are
for ever; they will become old as a robe;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> They will be rolled up like a cloth, even
like a robe, and they will be changed: but you are the same and your
years will have no end.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But of which of the angels has he said at
any time, Take your seat at my right hand till I put all those who are
against you under your feet?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Are they not all helping spirits, who are
sent out as servants to those whose heritage will be salvation?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For this reason there is the more need for
us to give attention to the things which have come to our ears, for fear
that by chance we might be slipping away.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Because if the word which came through the
angels was fixed, and in the past every evil act against God's orders
was given its full punishment;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> What will come on us, if we do not give our
minds to such a great salvation? a salvation of which our fathers first
had knowledge through the words of the Lord, and which was made certain
to us by those to whom his words came;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And God was a witness with them, by signs
and wonders, and by more than natural powers, and by his distribution of
the Holy Spirit at his pleasure.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For he did not make the angels rulers over
the world to come, of which I am writing.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But a certain writer has given his witness,
saying, What is man, that you keep him in mind? what is the son of man,
that you take him into account?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> You made him a little lower than the
angels; you gave him a crown of glory and honour, and made him ruler
over all the works of your hands:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> You put all things under his feet. For in
making man the ruler over all things, God did not put anything outside
his authority; though we do not see everything under him now.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But we see him who was made a little lower
than the angels, even Jesus, crowned with glory and honour, because he
let himself be put to death so that by the grace of God he might undergo
death for all men.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Because it was right for him, for whom
and through whom all things have being, in guiding his sons to glory, to
make the captain of their salvation complete through pain.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For he who makes holy and those who are
made holy are all of one family; and for this reason it is no shame for
him to give them the name of brothers,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Saying, I will give the knowledge of your
name to my brothers, I will make a song of praise to you before the
church.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And again he says, I will put my faith in
him. And again, See, I am here, and the children which God has given to
me.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And because the children are flesh and
blood, he took a body himself and became like them; so that by his death
he might put an end to him who had the power of death, that is to say,
the Evil One;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And let those who all their lives were in
chains because of their fear of death, go free.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For, truly, he does not take on the life
of angels, but that of the seed of Abraham.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Because of this it was necessary for him
to be made like his brothers in every way, so that he might be a high
priest full of mercy and keeping faith in everything to do with God,
making offerings for the sins of the people.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For having been put to the test himself,
he is able to give help to others when they are tested.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For this reason, holy brothers, marked out
to have a part in heaven, give thought to Jesus the representative and
high priest of our faith;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Who kept faith with God who gave him his
place, even as Moses did in all his house.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And it was right for this man to have more
honour than Moses, even as the builder of a house has more honour than
the house.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For every house has a builder; but the
builder of all things is God.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And Moses certainly kept faith as a
servant, in all his house, and as a witness of those things which were
to be said later;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Christ as a son, over his house; whose
house are we, if we keep our hearts fixed in the glad and certain hope
till the end.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And so, as the Holy Spirit says, Today if
you let his voice come to your ears,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Be not hard of heart, as when you made me
angry, on the day of testing in the waste land,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> When your fathers put me to the test, and
saw my works for forty years.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> So that I was angry with this generation,
and I said, Their hearts are in error at all times, and they have no
knowledge of my ways;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And being angry I made an oath, saying,
They may not come into my rest.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> My brothers, take care that there is not
by chance in any one of you an evil heart without belief, turning away
from the living God:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But give comfort to one another every day
as long as it is still Today; so that no one among you may be made hard
by the deceit of sin:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For if we keep the substance of the faith
which we had at the start, even till the end, we have a part with
Christ;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> As it is said, Today if you will let his
voice come to your ears, be not hard of heart, as when you made him
angry.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Who made him angry when his voice came to
them? was it not all those who came out of Egypt with Moses?

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And with whom was he angry for forty
years? was it not with those who did evil, who came to their deaths in
the waste land?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And to whom did he make an oath that they
might not come into his rest? was it not to those who went against his
orders?

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> So we see that they were not able to go
in because they had no belief.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Let us then, though we still have God's
word that we may come into his rest, go in fear that some of you may be
unable to do so.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And, truly, the good news came to us, even
as it did to them; but the hearing of the word did them no good, because
they were not united in faith with the true hearers.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For those of us who have belief come into
his rest; even as he has said, As I said in my oath when I was angry,
They may not come into my rest: though the works were done from the time
of the making of the world.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For in one place he has said of the seventh
day, And God had rest from all his works on the seventh day;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And in the same place he says again, They
will not come into my rest.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> So that as it is clear that some have to go
in, and that the first hearers of the good news were not able to go in
because they went against God's orders,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> After a long time, again naming a certain
day, he says in David, Today (as he had said before), Today if you will
let his voice come to your ears, be not hard of heart,

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For if Joshua had given them rest, he would
not have said anything about another day.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> So that there is still a Sabbath-keeping
for the people of God.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For the man who comes into his rest has
had rest from his works, as God did from his.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Because of this, let us have a strong
desire to come into that rest, and let no one go after the example of
those who went against God's orders.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> For the word of God is living and full of
power, and is sharper than any two-edged sword, cutting through and
making a division even of the soul and the spirit, the bones and the
muscles, and quick to see the thoughts and purposes of the heart.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And there is nothing made which is not
completely clear to him; there is nothing covered, but all things are
open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Having then a great high priest, who has
made his way through the heavens, even Jesus the Son of God, let us be
strong in our faith.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For we have not a high priest who is not
able to be touched by the feelings of our feeble flesh; but we have one
who has been tested in all points as we ourselves are tested, but
without sin.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Then let us come near to the seat of
grace without fear, so that mercy may be given to us, and we may get
grace for our help in time of need.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Every high priest who is taken from among
men is given his position to take care of the interests of men in those
things which have to do with God, so that he may make offerings for
sins.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> He is able to have feeling for those who
have no knowledge and for those who are wandering from the true way,
because he himself is feeble;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And being feeble, he has to make
sin-offerings for himself as well as for the people.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And no man who is not given authority by
God, as Aaron was, takes this honour for himself.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In the same way Christ did not take for
himself the glory of being made a high priest, but was given it by him
who said, You are my Son, this day I have given you being:

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> As he says in another place, You are a
priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Who in the days of his flesh, having sent
up prayers and requests with strong crying and weeping to him who was
able to give him salvation from death, had his prayer answered because
of his fear of God.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And though he was a Son, through the pain
which he underwent, the knowledge came to him of what it was to be under
God's orders;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And when he had been made complete, he
became the giver of eternal salvation to all those who are under his
orders;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Being named by God a high priest of the
order of Melchizedek.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Of whom we have much to say which it is
hard to make clear, because you are slow of hearing.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And though by this time it would be right
for you to be teachers, you still have need of someone to give you
teaching about the first simple rules of God's revelation; you have
become like babies who have need of milk, and not of solid food.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For everyone who takes milk is without
experience of the word of righteousness: he is a child.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But solid food is for men of full growth,
even for those whose senses are trained by use to see what is good and
what is evil.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> For this reason let us go on from the first
things about Christ to full growth; not building again that on which it
is based, that is, the turning of the heart from dead works, and faith
in God,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The teaching of baptisms, and of the
putting on of hands, and of the future life of the dead, and of the
judging on the last day.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Now we will do this, if God lets us.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> As for those who at one time saw the light,
tasting the good things from heaven, and having their part in the Holy
Spirit,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> With knowledge of the good word of God, and
of the powers of the coming time,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And then let themselves be turned away, it
is not possible for their hearts to be made new a second time; because
they themselves put the Son of God on the cross again, openly shaming
him.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For a land, drinking in the frequent rain
and producing good plants for those for whom it is worked, has a
blessing from God:

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But if it sends up thorns and evil plants,
it is of no use and is ready to be cursed; its only end is to be burned.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But, my loved ones, though we say this, we
are certain that you have better things in you, things which go with
salvation;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For God is true, and will not put away
from him the memory of your work and of your love for his name, in the
help which you gave and still give to the saints.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And it is our desire that you may all
keep the same high purpose in certain hope to the end:

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> So that you may not be slow in heart, but
may take as your example those to whom God has given their heritage,
because of their faith and their long waiting.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For when God made his oath to Abraham,
because there was no greater oath, he made it by himself,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Saying, Be certain that I will give you
my blessing, and make your numbers very great.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And so, when he had been waiting calmly
for a long time, God's word to him was put into effect.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For men at all times make their oaths by
what is greater; and any argument is ended by the decision of the oath.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> So that when it was God's desire to make
it specially clear to those who by his word were to have the heritage,
that his purpose was fixed, he made it more certain with an oath;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> So that we, who have gone in flight from
danger to the hope which has been put before us, may have a strong
comfort in two unchanging things, in which it is not possible for God to
be false;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And this hope is like a strong band for
our souls, fixed and certain, and going in to that which is inside the
veil;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Where Jesus has gone before us, as a high
priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> For this Melchizedek, the king of Salem, a
priest of the Most High God, who gave Abraham his blessing, meeting him
when he came back after putting the kings to death,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And to whom Abraham gave a tenth part of
everything which he had, being first named King of righteousness, and
then in addition, King of Salem, that is to say, King of peace;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Being without father or mother, or family,
having no birth or end to his life, being made like the Son of God, is a
priest for ever.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Now see how great this man was, to whom our
father Abraham gave a tenth part of what he had got in the fight.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And it is true that by the law, those of
the sons of Levi who have the position of priests may take a tenth part
of the people's goods; that is to say, they take it from their brothers
though these are the sons of Abraham.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But this man, who was not of their family,
took the tenth from Abraham, and gave a blessing to him to whom God had
given his undertaking.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But there is no doubt that the less gets
his blessing from the greater.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now at the present time, men over whom
death has power take the tenth; but then it was taken by one of whom it
is witnessed that he is living.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And we may say that in Abraham, even Levi,
who has a right to take the tenth part, gave it;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Because he was still in his father's body
when Melchizedek came to him.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now if it was possible for things to be
made complete through the priests of the house of Levi (for the law was
given to the people in connection with them), what need was there for
another priest who was of the order of Melchizedek and not of the order
of Aaron?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Because if the priests are changed, it is
necessary to make a change in the law.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For he of whom these things are said
comes of another tribe, of which no man has ever made offerings at the
altar.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Because it is clear that our Lord comes
out of Judah, and Moses said nothing about priests from that tribe.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And this is even more clear if a second
priest has come up who is like Melchizedek,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> That is to say, not made by a law based
on the flesh, but by the power of a life without end:

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> For it has been witnessed of him, You are
a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> So the law which went before is put on
one side, because it was feeble and without profit.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> (Because the law made nothing complete),
and in its place there is a better hope, through which we come near to
God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And as this is not without the taking of
an oath

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> (For those were made priests without an
oath, but this one was made a priest with an oath by him who says of
him, The Lord gave his oath, which he will not take back, that you are a
priest for ever);

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> By so much is it a better agreement which
we have through Jesus.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And it is true that there have been a
great number of those priests, because death does not let them go on for
ever;

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> But this priest, because his life goes on
for ever, is unchanging.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> So that he is fully able to be the
saviour of all who come to God through him, because he is ever living to
make prayer to God for them.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> It was right for us to have such a high
priest, one who is holy and without evil, doing no wrong, having no part
with sinners, and made higher than the heavens:

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Who has no need to make offerings for
sins every day, like those high priests, first for himself, and then for
the people; because he did this once and for ever when he made an
offering of himself.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> The law makes high priests of men who are
feeble; but the word of the oath, which was made after the law, gives
that position to a Son, in whom all good is for ever complete.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now of the things we are saying this is the
chief point: We have such a high priest, who has taken his place at the
right hand of God's high seat of glory in heaven,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> As a servant of the holy things and of the
true Tent, which was put up by God, not by man.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Now every high priest is given authority to
take to God the things which are given and to make offerings; so that it
is necessary for this man, like them, to have something for an offering.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> If he had been on earth he would not have
been a priest at all, because there are other priests who make the
offerings ordered by the law;

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Being servants of that which is a copy and
an image of the things in heaven, as Moses, when he was about to make
the Tent, had special orders from God: for, See, he said, that you make
everything like the design which you saw in the mountain.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> But now his position as priest is higher.
because through him God has made a better agreement with man, based on
the giving of better things.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For if that first agreement had been as
good as possible, there would have been no place for a second.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For, protesting against them, he says, See,
the days are coming when I will make a new agreement with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Not like the agreement which I made with
their fathers when I took them by the hand, to be their guide out of the
land of Egypt; for they did not keep the agreement with me, and I gave
them up, says the Lord.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For this is the agreement which I will
make with the people of Israel after those days: I will put my laws into
their minds, writing them in their hearts: and I will be their God, and
they will be my people:

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And there will be no need for every man
to be teaching his brother, or his neighbour, saying, This is the
knowledge of the Lord: for they will all have knowledge of me, great and
small.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And I will have mercy on their
evil-doing, and I will not keep their sins in mind.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> When he says, A new agreement, he has
made the first agreement old. But anything which is getting old and past
use will not be seen much longer.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now the first agreement had its rules of
worship, and a holy order.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For the first Tent was made ready, having
in it the vessels for the lights and the table and the ordering of the
bread; and this is named the holy place.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And inside the second veil was the place
which is named the Holy of holies;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Having a vessel of gold in it for burning
perfumes, and the ark of the agreement, which was covered with gold and
which had in it a pot made of gold for the manna, and Aaron's rod which
put out buds, and the stones with the writing of the agreement;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And over it were the winged ones of glory
with their wings covering the mercy-seat; about which it is not possible
now to say anything in detail.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Now while these things were in existence,
the priests went into the first Tent at all times, for prayer and the
making of offerings.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> But only the high priest went into the
second, once a year, not without making an offering of blood for himself
and for the errors of the people:

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The Holy Spirit witnessing by this that the
way into the holy place had not at that time been made open, while the
first Tent was still in being;

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And this is an image of the present time;
when the offerings which are given are not able to make the heart of the
worshipper completely clean,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Because they are only rules of the flesh,
of meats and drinks and washings, which have their place till the time
comes when things will be put right.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> But now Christ has come as the high
priest of the good things of the future, through this greater and better
Tent, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this world,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And has gone once and for ever into the
holy place, having got eternal salvation, not through the blood of goats
and young oxen, but through his blood.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For if the blood of goats and oxen, and
the dust from the burning of a young cow, being put on the unclean, make
the flesh clean:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> How much more will the blood of Christ,
who, being without sin, made an offering of himself to God through the
Holy Spirit, make your hearts clean from dead works to be servants of
the living God?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And for this cause it is through him that
a new agreement has come into being, so that after the errors under the
first agreement had been taken away by his death, the word of God might
have effect for those who were marked out for an eternal heritage.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Because where there is a testament, there
has to be the death of the man who made it.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For a testament has effect after death;
for what power has it while the man who made it is living?

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> So that even the first agreement was not
made without blood.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For when Moses had given all the rules of
the law to the people, he took the blood of goats and young oxen, with
water and red wool and hyssop, and put it on the book itself and on all
the people,

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Saying, This blood is the sign of the
agreement which God has made with you.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And the blood was put on the Tent and all
the holy vessels in the same way.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And by the law almost all things are made
clean with blood, and without blood there is no forgiveness.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> For this cause it was necessary to make
the copies of the things in heaven clean with these offerings; but the
things themselves are made clean with better offerings than these.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> For Christ did not go into a holy place
which had been made by men's hands as the copy of the true one; but he
went into heaven itself, and now takes his place before the face of God
for us.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And he did not have to make an offering
of himself again and again, as the high priest goes into the holy place
every year with blood which is not his;

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> For then he would have undergone a number
of deaths from the time of the making of the world: but now he has come
to us at the end of the old order, to put away sin by the offering of
himself.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And because by God's law death comes to
men once, and after that they are judged;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> So Christ, having at his first coming
taken on himself the sins of men, will be seen a second time, without
sin, by those who are waiting for him, for their salvation.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> For the law, being only a poor copy of
the future good things, and not the true image of those things, is never
able to make the people who come to the altar every year with the same
offerings completely clean.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For if this had been possible, would
there not have been an end of those offerings, because the worshippers
would have been made completely clean and would have been no longer
conscious of sins?

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> But year by year there is a memory of
sins in those offerings.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Because it is not possible for the blood
of oxen and goats to take away sins.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> So that when he comes into the world, he
says, You had no desire for offerings, but you made a body ready for me;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> You had no joy in burned offerings or in
offerings for sin.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Then I said, See, I have come to do your
pleasure, O God (as it is said of me in the roll of the book).

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> After saying, You had no desire for
offerings, for burned offerings or offerings for sin (which are made by
the law) and you had no pleasure in them,

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Then he said, See, I have come to do your
pleasure. He took away the old order, so that he might put the new order
in its place.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> By that pleasure we have been made
holy, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once and for ever.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And every priest takes his place at the
altar day by day, doing what is necessary, and making again and again
the same offerings which are never able to take away sins.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> But when Jesus had made one offering
for sins for ever, he took his place at the right hand of God;

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And has been waiting there from that
time, till all who are against him are made a foot-rest for his feet.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Because by one offering he has made
complete for ever those who are made holy.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the Holy Spirit is a witness for
us: for after he had said,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> This is the agreement which I will make
with them after those days, says the Lord; I will put my laws in their
hearts, writing them in their minds; he said,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And I will keep no more memory of their
sins and of their evil-doings.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Now where there is forgiveness of
these, there is no more offering for sin.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> So then, my brothers, being able to go
into the holy place without fear, because of the blood of Jesus,

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> By the new and living way which he made
open for us through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And having a great priest over the
house of God,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Let us go in with true hearts, in
certain faith, having our hearts made free from the sense of sin and our
bodies washed with clean water:

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Let us keep the witness of our hope
strong and unshaking, for he is true who has given his word:

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And let us be moving one another at all
times to love and good works;

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Not giving up our meetings, as is the
way of some, but keeping one another strong in faith; and all the more
because you see the day coming near.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> For if we do evil on purpose after we
have had the knowledge of what is true, there is no more offering for
sins,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But only a great fear of being judged,
and of the fire of wrath which will be the destruction of the haters of
God.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> A man who has gone against the law of
Moses is put to death without pity on the word of two or three
witnesses:

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> But will not the man by whom the Son of
God has been crushed under foot, and the blood of the agreement with
which he was washed clean has been taken as an unholy thing, and who has
had no respect for the Spirit of grace, be judged bad enough for a very
much worse punishment?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> For we have had experience of him who
says, Punishment is mine, I will give reward. And again, The Lord will
be judge of his people.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> We may well go in fear of falling into
the hands of the living God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> But give thought to the days after you
had seen the light, when you went through a great war of troubles;

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> In part, in being attacked by angry
words and cruel acts, before the eyes of everyone, and in part, in being
united with those who were attacked in this way.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> For you had pity on those who were in
prison, and had joy in the loss of your property, in the knowledge that
you still had a better property and one which you would keep for ever.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> So do not give up your hope which will
be greatly rewarded.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> For, having done what was right in
God's eyes, you have need of waiting before his word has effect for you.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> In a very little time he who is coming
will come; he will not be slow.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But the upright man will be living by
his faith; and if he goes back, my soul will have no pleasure in him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> But we are not of those who go back to
destruction; but of those who have faith even to the salvation of the
soul.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now faith is the substance of things
hoped for, and the sign that the things not seen are true.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For by it our fathers had God's approval.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> By faith it is clear to us that the order
of events was fixed by the word of God, so that what is seen has not
been made from things which only seem to be.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> By faith Abel made a better offering to
God than Cain, and he had witness through it of his righteousness, God
giving his approval of his offering: and his voice still comes to us
through it though he is dead.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> By faith Enoch was taken up to heaven so
that he did not see death; he was seen no longer, for God took him away:
for before he was taken, witness had been given that he was
well-pleasing to God:

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And without faith it is not possible to
be well-pleasing to him, for it is necessary for anyone who comes to God
to have the belief that God is, and that he is a rewarder of all those
who make a serious search for him.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> By faith Noah, being moved by the fear of
God, made ready an ark for the salvation of his family, because God had
given him news of things which were not seen at the time; and through it
the world was judged by him, and he got for his heritage the
righteousness which is by faith.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> By faith Abraham did as God said when he
was ordered to go out into a place which was to be given to him as a
heritage, and went out without knowledge of where he was going.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> By faith he was a wanderer in the land of
the agreement, as in a strange land, living in tents with Isaac and
Jacob, who had a part with him in the same heritage:

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For he was looking for the strong town,
whose builder and maker is God.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And by faith Sarah herself had power to
give birth, when she was very old, because she had faith in him who gave
his word;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> So that from one man, who was near to
death, came children in number as the stars in heaven, or as the sand by
the seaside, which may not be numbered.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> All these came to their end in faith,
not having had the heritage; but having seen it with delight far away,
they gave witness that they were wanderers and not of the earth.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> For those who say such things make it
clear that they are searching for a country for themselves.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And truly if they had kept in mind the
country from which they went out, they would have had chances of turning
back.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But now their desire is for a better
country, that is to say, for one in heaven; and so it is no shame to God
to be named their God; for he has made ready a town for them.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> By faith Abraham made an offering of
Isaac, when he was tested: and he with whom the agreement had been made
gave up as an offering the only son of his body,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Of whom it had been said, From Isaac
will your seed take their name:

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Judging that God was able to give life
even to the dead; and because of this he did get him back as if from
death.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> By faith Isaac, blessing Jacob and
Esau, gave news of things to come.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> By faith Jacob gave a blessing to the
two sons of Joseph, when he was near to death; and gave God worship,
supported by his stick.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> By faith Joseph, when his end was near,
said that the children of Israel would go out of Egypt; and gave orders
about his bones.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> By faith Moses was kept secretly by his
father and mother for three months after his birth, because they saw
that he was a fair child; and they had no fear of the king's orders.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> By faith Moses, when he became a man,
had no desire to be named the son of Pharaoh's daughter;

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Feeling that it was better to undergo
pain with the people of God, than for a short time to have a taste of
the pleasures of sin;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Judging a part in the shame of Christ
to be better than all the wealth of Egypt; for he was looking forward to
his reward.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> By faith he went out of Egypt, not
being turned from his purpose by fear of the wrath of the king; for he
kept on his way, as seeing him who is unseen.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> By faith he kept the Passover, and put
the sign of the blood on the houses, so that the angel of destruction
might not put their oldest sons to death.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> By faith they went through the Red Sea
as if it had been dry land, though the Egyptians were overcome by the
water when they made an attempt to do the same.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> By faith the walls of Jericho came
down, after they had been circled for seven days.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> By faith Rahab, the loose woman, was
not put to death with those who had gone against God's orders, because
she had taken into her house in peace those sent to see the land.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> What more am I to say? For there would
not be time to give the stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson, and Jephthah,
of David and Samuel and the prophets:

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Who through faith overcame kingdoms,
did righteousness, got their reward, kept the mouths of lions shut,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Put out the power of fire, got safely
away from the edge of the sword, were made strong when they had been
feeble, became full of power in war, and put to flight the armies of the
nations.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Women had their dead given back to them
living; others let themselves be cruelly attacked, having no desire to
go free, so that they might have a better life to come;

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And others were tested by being laughed
at or by blows, and even with chains and prisons:

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> They were stoned, they were cut up with
knives, they were tested, they were put to death with the sword, they
went about in sheepskins and in goatskins; being poor and in pain and
cruelly attacked,

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Wandering in waste places and in
mountains and in holes in the rocks; for whom the world was not good
enough.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And not one of these got the good
things of the agreement, though they all had a good record through
faith,

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Because God had kept some better thing
for us, so that it was not possible for them to become complete without
us.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> For this reason, as we are circled by so
great a cloud of witnesses, putting off every weight, and the sin into
which we come so readily, let us keep on running in the way which is
marked out for us,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Having our eyes fixed on Jesus, the guide
and end of our faith, who went through the pains of the cross, not
caring for the shame, because of the joy which was before him, and who
has now taken his place at the right hand of God's seat of power.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Give thought to him who has undergone so
much of the hate of sinners against himself, so that you may not be
tired and feeble of purpose.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Till now you have not given your blood in
your fight against sin:

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And you have not kept in mind the word
which says to you as to sons, My son, do not make little of the Lord's
punishment, and do not give up hope when you are judged by him;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For the Lord sends punishment on his
loved ones; everyone whom he takes as his son has experience of his rod.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> It is for your training that you undergo
these things; God is acting to you as a father does to his sons; for
what son does not have punishment from his father?

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> But if you have not that punishment of
which we all have our part, then you are not true sons, but children of
shame.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And again, if the fathers of our flesh
gave us punishment and had our respect, how much more will we be under
the authority of the Father of spirits, and have life?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> For they truly gave us punishment for a
short time, as it seemed good to them; but he does it for our profit, so
that we may become holy as he is.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> At the time all punishment seems to be
pain and not joy: but after, those who have been trained by it get from
it the peace-giving fruit of righteousness.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For this cause let the hands which are
hanging down be lifted up, and let the feeble knees be made strong,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And make straight roads for your feet,
so that the feeble may not be turned out of the way, but may be made
strong.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Let your desire be for peace with all
men, and to be made holy, without which no man may see the Lord;

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Looking with care to see that no man
among you in his behaviour comes short of the grace of God; for fear
that some bitter root may come up to be a trouble to you, and that some
of you may be made unclean by it;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And that there may not be any evil
liver, or any man without respect for God, like Esau, who let his
birthright go for a plate of food.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> For you have knowledge that even long
after, when he was desiring the blessing for his heritage, he was turned
away, though he made his request frequently and with weeping; because
the past might not be changed.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> You have not come to a mountain which
may be touched, and is burning with fire, and to a black cloud, and a
dark smoke, and a violent wind,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And to the sound of a horn, and the
voice of words, the hearers of which made request that not a word more
might be said to them:

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For the order which said, If the
mountain is touched even by a beast, the beast is to be stoned, seemed
hard to them;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the vision was so overpowering that
even Moses said, I am shaking and full of fear.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But you have come to the mountain of
Zion, to the place of the living God, to the Jerusalem which is in
heaven, and to an army of angels which may not be numbered,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> To the great meeting and church of the
first of those who are named in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and
to the spirits of good men made complete,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And to Jesus by whom the new agreement
has been made between God and man, and to the sign of the blood which
says better things than Abel's blood.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> See that you give ear to his voice
which comes to you. For if those whose ears were shut to the voice which
came to them on earth did not go free from punishment, what chance have
we of going free if we give no attention to him whose voice comes from
heaven?

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Whose voice was the cause of the
shaking of the earth; but now he has made an oath, saying, There will be
still one more shaking, not only of the earth, but of heaven.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And the words, Still one more, make it
clear that there will be a taking away of those things which are
shaking, as of things which are made, so that there may be only those
things of which no shaking is possible.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> If then, we have a kingdom which will
never be moved, let us have grace, so that we may give God such worship
as is pleasing to him with fear and respect:

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> For our God is an all-burning fire.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Go on loving your brothers in the faith.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Take care to keep open house: because in
this way some have had angels as their guests, without being conscious
of it.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Keep in mind those who are in chains, as
if you were chained with them, and those who are in trouble, as being
yourselves in the body.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Let married life be honoured among all of
you and not made unclean; for men untrue in married life will be judged
by God.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Be free from the love of money and
pleased with the things which you have; for he himself has said, I will
be with you at all times.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> So that we say with a good heart, The
Lord is my helper; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Keep in mind those who were over you, and
who gave you the word of God; seeing the outcome of their way of life,
let your faith be like theirs.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and
today and for ever.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Do not be turned away by different
strange teachings, because it is good for your hearts to be made strong
by grace, and not by meats, which were of no profit to those who took so
much trouble over them.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> We have an altar from which those
priests who are servants in the Tent may not take food.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For the bodies of the beasts whose
blood is taken into the holy place by the high priest as an offering for
sin are burned outside the circle of the tents.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For this reason Jesus was put to death
outside the walls, so that he might make the people holy by his blood.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Let us then go out to him outside the
circle of the tents, taking his shame on ourselves.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> For here we have no fixed
resting-place, but our search is for the one which is to come.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Let us then make offerings of praise to
God at all times through him, that is to say, the fruit of lips giving
witness to his name.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> But go on doing good and giving to
others, because God is well-pleased with such offerings.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Give ear to those who are rulers over
you, and do as they say: for they keep watch over your souls, ready to
give an account of them; let them be able to do this with joy and not
with grief, because that would be of no profit to you.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Make prayers for us, for we are certain
that our hearts are free from the sense of sin, desiring the right way
of life in all things.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> I make this request more strongly, in
the hope of coming back to you more quickly.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Now may the God of peace, who made that
great keeper of his flock, even our Lord Jesus, come back from the dead
through the blood of the eternal agreement,

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Make you full of every good work and
ready to do all his desires, working in us whatever is pleasing in his
eyes through Jesus Christ; and may the glory be given to him for ever
and ever. So be it.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> But, brothers, take kindly the words
which I have said for your profit; for I have not sent you a long
letter.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Our brother Timothy has been let out of
prison; and if he comes here in a short time, he and I will come to you
together.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Give words of love from me to those who
are rulers over you, and to all the saints. Those who are in Italy send
you their love.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> May grace be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James](jam.md)
