[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sol)  [Next](jer) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Isaiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The vision of Isaiah, the son of Amoz,
which he saw about Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Give ear, O heavens, and you, O earth, to
the word which the Lord has said: I have taken care of my children till
they became men, but their hearts have been turned away from me.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Even the ox has knowledge of its owner, and
the ass of the place where its master puts its food: but Israel has no
knowledge, my people give no thought to me.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> O nation full of sin, a people weighted
down with crime, a generation of evil-doers, false-hearted children:
they have gone away from the Lord, they have no respect for the Holy One
of Israel, their hearts are turned back from him.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Why will you have more and more punishment?
why keep on in your evil ways? Every head is tired and every heart is
feeble.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> The body, from head to foot, is all
diseased; it is a mass of open wounds, marks of blows, and broken flesh:
the flow of blood has not been stopped, and no oil has been put on the
wounds.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Your country has become waste; your towns
are burned with fire; as for your land, it is overturned before your
eyes, made waste and overcome by men from strange lands.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the daughter of Zion has become like a
tent in a vine-garden, like a watchman's house in a field of fruit, like
a town shut in by armies.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> If the Lord of armies had not kept some at
least of us safe, we would have been like Sodom, and the fate of
Gomorrah would have been ours.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Give ear to the word of the Lord, you
rulers of Sodom; let your hearts be turned to the law of our God, you
people of Gomorrah.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> What use to me is the number of the
offerings which you give me? says the Lord; your burned offerings of
sheep, and the best parts of fat cattle, are a weariness to me; I take
no pleasure in the blood of oxen, or of lambs, or of he-goats.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> At whose request do you come before me,
making my house unclean with your feet?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Give me no more false offerings; the
smoke of burning flesh is disgusting to me, so are your new moons and
Sabbaths and your holy meetings.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Your new moons and your regular feasts
are a grief to my soul: they are a weight in my spirit; I am crushed
under them.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And when your hands are stretched out to
me, my eyes will be turned away from you: even though you go on making
prayers, I will not give ear: your hands are full of blood.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Be washed, make yourselves clean; put
away the evil of your doings from before my eyes; let there be an end of
sinning;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Take pleasure in well-doing; let your
ways be upright, keep down the cruel, give a right decision for the
child who has no father, see to the cause of the widow.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Come now, and let us have an argument
together, says the Lord: how may your sins which are red like blood be
white as snow? how may their dark purple seem like wool?

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> If you will give ear to my word and do
it, the good things of the land will be yours;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But if your hearts are turned against me,
I will send destruction on you by the sword; so the Lord has said.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> The upright town has become untrue; there
was a time when her judges gave right decisions, when righteousness had
a resting-place in her, but now she is full of those who take men's
lives.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Your silver is no longer true metal, your
wine is mixed with water.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Your chiefs have gone against the Lord,
they have become friends of thieves; every one of them is looking for
profit and going after rewards; they do not give right decisions for the
child who has no father, and they do not let the cause of the widow come
before them.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> For this reason the Lord, the Lord of
armies, the Strong One of Israel, has said, I will put an end to my
haters, and send punishment on those who are against me;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And my hand will again be on you, washing
away what is unclean as with soap, and taking away all your false metal;

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And I will give you judges again as at
the first, and wise guides as in the past; then you will be named, The
Town of Righteousness, the true town.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Upright acts will be the price of Zion's
forgiveness, and by righteousness will men be living there.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> But a common destruction will overtake
sinners and evil-doers together, and those who have gone away from the
Lord will be cut off.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For you will be put to shame because of
the trees of your desire, and because of the gardens of your pleasure.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> For you will be like a tree whose leaves
have become dry, and like a garden without water.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And the strong will be as food for the
fire, and his work as a flame; and they will be burned together, with no
one to put out the fire.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> The word which Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw
about Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And it will come about in the last days,
that the mountain of the Lord will be placed on the top of the
mountains, and be lifted up over the hills; and all nations will come to
it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the peoples will say, Come, and let us
go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and
he will give us knowledge of his ways, and we will be guided by his
word; for out of Zion the law will go out, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And he will be the judge between the
nations, and the peoples will be ruled by his decisions: and their
swords will be turned into plough-blades, and their spears into
vine-knives: no longer will the nations be turning their swords against
one another, and the knowledge of war will be gone for ever.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> O family of Jacob, come, and let us go in
the light of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For you, O Lord, have given up your people,
the family of Jacob, because they are full of the evil ways of the east,
and make use of secret arts like the Philistines, and are friends with
the children of strange countries.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And their land is full of silver and gold,
and there is no end to their stores; their land is full of horses, and
there is no end to their carriages.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Their land is full of images; they give
worship to the work of their hands, even to that which their fingers
have made.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the poor man's head is bent, and the
great man goes down on his face: for this cause there will be no
forgiveness for their sin.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Go into a hole in the rock, covering
yourselves with dust, in fear of the Lord, before the glory of his
power.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The high looks of man will be put to
shame, and the pride of men will be made low, and only the Lord will be
lifted up in that day.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For the day of the Lord of armies is
coming on all the pride of men, and on all who are high and lifted up;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And on all the high trees of Lebanon, and
on all the strong trees of Bashan;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And on all the high mountains, and on all
the hills which are lifted up;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And on every high tower, and on every
strong wall;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And on all the ships of Tarshish, and on
all the fair boats.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the high looks of man will be put to
shame, and the pride of men will be made low: and only the Lord will be
lifted up in that day.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the images will never be seen again.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And men will go into cracks of the rocks,
and into holes of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and before the glory
of his power, when he comes out of his place, shaking the earth with his
strength.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> In that day men will put their images of
silver and of gold, which they made for worship, in the keeping of the
beasts of the dark places;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> To take cover in the cracks of the rocks,
and in the holes of the hills, for fear of the Lord, and before the
glory of his power, when he comes out of his place, shaking the earth
with his strength.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Have no more to do with man, whose life
is only a breath, for he is of no value.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For the Lord, the Lord of armies, is about
to take away from Jerusalem and from Judah all their support; their
store of bread and of water;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The strong man and the man of war; the
judge and the prophet; the man who has knowledge of secret arts, and the
man who is wise because of his years;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The captain of fifty, and the man of high
position, and the wise guide, and the wonder-worker, and he who makes
use of secret powers.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And I will make children their chiefs, and
foolish ones will have rule over them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the people will be crushed, every one
by his neighbour; the young will be full of pride against the old, and
those of low position will be lifted up against the noble.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> When one man puts his hand on another in
his father's house, and says, You have clothing, be our ruler and be
responsible for us in our sad condition:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Then he will say with an oath, I will not
be a helper, for in my house there is no bread or clothing: I will not
let you make me a ruler of the people.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For Jerusalem has become feeble, and
destruction has come on Judah, because their words and their acts are
against the Lord, moving the eyes of his glory to wrath.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Their respect for a man's position is a
witness against them; and their sin is open to the view of all; like
that of Sodom, it is not covered. A curse on their soul! for the measure
of their sin is full.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Happy is the upright man! for he will
have joy of the fruit of his ways.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Unhappy is the sinner! for the reward of
his evil doings will come on him.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> As for my people, their ruler is acting
like a child, and those who have authority over them are women. O my
people, your guides are the cause of your wandering, turning your
footsteps out of the right way.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The Lord is ready to take up his cause
against his people, and is about to come forward as their judge.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> The Lord comes to be the judge of their
responsible men and of their rulers: it is you who have made waste the
vine-garden, and in your houses is the property of the poor which you
have taken by force.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> By what right are you crushing my people,
and putting a bitter yoke on the necks of the poor? This is the word of
the Lord, the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Again, the Lord has said, Because the
daughters of Zion are full of pride, and go with outstretched necks and
wandering eyes, with their foot-chains sounding when they go:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The Lord will send disease on the heads
of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will let their secret parts be
seen.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In that day the Lord will take away the
glory of their foot-rings, and their sun-jewels, and their
moon-ornaments,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The ear-rings, and the chains, and the
delicate clothing,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> The head-bands, and the arm-chains, and
the worked bands, and the perfume-boxes, and the jewels with secret
powers,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> The rings, and the nose-jewels,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> The feast-day dresses, and the robes, and
the wide skirts, and the handbags,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> The looking-glasses, and the fair linen,
and the high head-dresses, and the veils.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And in the place of sweet spices will be
an evil smell, and for a fair band a thick cord; for a well-dressed head
there will be the cutting-off of the hair, and for a beautiful robe
there will be the clothing of sorrow; the mark of the prisoner in place
of the ornaments of the free.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Your men will be put to the sword, and
your men of war will come to destruction in the fight.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And in the public places of her towns
will be sorrow and weeping; and she will be seated on the earth, waste
and uncovered.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And in that day seven women will put their
hands on one man, saying, There will be no need for you to give us food
or clothing, only let us go under your name, so that our shame may be
taken away.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> In that day will the young growth of the
Lord be beautiful in glory, and the fruit of the earth will be the pride
of those who are still living in Israel.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And it will come about that the rest of the
living in Zion, and of those who have been kept from destruction in
Jerusalem, will be named holy, even everyone who has been recorded for
life in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> When Zion has been washed from her sin by
the Lord, and Jerusalem made clean from her blood by a judging and a
burning wind.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And over every living-place on Mount Zion,
all over all her meetings, the Lord will make a cloud and smoke by day,
and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for over all, the glory of
the Lord will be a cover and a tent;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And a shade in the daytime from the heat,
and a safe cover from storm and from rain.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Let me make a song about my loved one, a
song of love for his vine-garden. My loved one had a vine-garden on a
fertile hill:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And after working the earth of it with a
spade, he took away its stones, and put in it a very special vine; and
he put up a watchtower in the middle of it, hollowing out in the rock a
place for the grape-crushing; and he was hoping that it would give the
best grapes, but it gave common grapes.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And now, you people of Jerusalem and you
men of Judah, be the judges between me and my vine-garden.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Is there anything which might have been
done for my vine-garden which I have not done? why then, when I was
hoping for the best grapes did it give me common grapes?

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And now, this is what I will do to my
vine-garden: I will take away the circle of thorns round it, and it will
be burned up; its wall will be broken down and the beasts of the field
will go through it;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I will make it waste; its branches will
not be touched with the knife, or the earth worked with the spade; but
blackberries and thorns will come up in it: and I will give orders to
the clouds not to send rain on it.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For the vine-garden of the Lord of armies
is the people of Israel, and the men of Judah are the plant of his
delight: and he was looking for upright judging, and there was blood;
for righteousness, and there was a cry for help.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Cursed are those who are joining house to
house, and putting field to field, till there is no more living-space
for any but themselves in all the land!

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> The Lord of armies has said to me secretly,
Truly, numbers of great and fair houses will be waste, with no one
living in them.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For ten fields of vines will only give
one measure of wine, and a great amount of seed will only give a small
measure of grain.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Cursed are those who get up early in the
morning to give themselves up to strong drink; who keep on drinking far
into the night till they are heated with wine!

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And corded instruments and
wind-instruments and wine are in their feasts: but they give no thought
to the work of the Lord, and they are not interested in what his hands
are doing.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For this cause my people are taken away
as prisoners into strange countries for need of knowledge: and their
rulers are wasted for need of food, and their loud-voiced feasters are
dry for need of water.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For this cause the underworld has made
wide its throat, opening its mouth without limit: and her glory, and the
noise of her masses, and her loud-voiced feasters, will go down into it.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the poor man's head is bent, and the
great man goes down on his face, and the eyes of pride are put to shame:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> But the Lord of armies is lifted up as
judge, and the Holy God is seen to be holy in righteousness.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Then the lambs will get food as in their
grass-lands, and the fat cattle will be feasting in the waste places.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Cursed are those who make use of ox-cords
for pulling the evil thing, and the bands of a young ox for their sin!

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Who say, Let him do his work quickly, let
him make it sudden, so that we may see it: let the design of the Holy
One of Israel come near, so that it may be clear to us.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Cursed are those who give the name of
good to evil, and of evil to what is good: who make light dark, and dark
light: who make bitter sweet, and sweet bitter!

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Cursed are those who seem wise to
themselves, and who take pride in their knowledge!

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Cursed are those who are strong to take
wine, and great in making mixed drinks!

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Who for a reward give support to the
cause of the sinner, and who take away the righteousness of the upright
from him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> For this cause, as the waste of the grain
is burned up by tongues of fire, and as the dry grass goes down before
the flame, so their root will be like the dry stems of grain, and their
flower will go up in dust: because they have gone against the law of the
Lord of armies, and have given no honour to the word of the Holy One of
Israel.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> For this reason the wrath of the Lord has
been burning against his people, and his hand has been stretched out
against them in punishment, and the hills were shaking, and their dead
bodies were like waste in the open places of the town.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he will let a flag be lifted up as a
sign to a far-off nation, whistling to them from the ends of the earth:
and they will come quickly and suddenly.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> There is no weariness among them, and no
man is feeble-footed: they come without resting or sleeping, and the
cord of their shoes is not broken.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Their arrows are sharp, and every bow is
bent: the feet of their horses are like rock, and their wheels are like
a rushing storm.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> The sound of their armies will be like
the voice of a lion, and their war-cry like the noise of young lions:
with loud cries they will come down on their food and will take it away
safely, and there will be no one to take it out of their hands.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And his voice will be loud over him in
that day like the sounding of the sea: and if a man's eyes are turned to
the earth, it is all dark and full of trouble; and the light is made
dark by thick clouds.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> In the year of King Uzziah's death I saw
the Lord seated in his place, high and lifted up, and the Temple was
full of the wide skirts of his robe.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Over him were the winged ones: every one
had six wings; two for covering his face, two for covering his feed, and
two for flight.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And one said in a loud voice to another,
Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of armies: all the earth is full of his
glory.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And the bases of the door-pillars were
shaking at the sound of his cry, and the house was full of smoke.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then I said, The curse is on me, and my
fate is destruction; for I am a man of unclean lips, living among a
people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
armies.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then a winged one came to me with a burning
coal in his hand, which he had taken from off the altar with the
fire-spoon.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And after touching my mouth with it, he
said, See, your lips have been touched with this; and your evil is taken
away, and you are made clean from sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And the voice of the Lord came to my ears,
saying, Whom am I to send, and who will go for us? Then I said, Here am
I, send me.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And he said, Go, and say to this people,
You will go on hearing, but learning nothing; you will go on seeing, but
without getting wiser.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Make the hearts of this people fat, and
let their ears be stopped, and their eyes shut; for fear that they may
see with their eyes, and be hearing with their ears, and their heart may
become wise, and they may be turned to me and made well.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then I said, Lord, how long? And he said
in answer, Till the towns are waste and unpeopled, and the houses have
no men, and the land becomes completely waste,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the Lord has taken men far away, and
there are wide waste places in the land.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And even if there is still a tenth part
in it, it will again be burned, like a tree of the woods whose broken
end is still in the earth after the tree has been cut down (the holy
seed is the broken end).

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now it came about in the days of Ahaz, the
son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin, the king of
Aram, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, the king of Israel, came up to
Jerusalem to make war against it, but were not able to overcome it.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And word came to the family of David that
Aram had put up its tents in Ephraim. And the king's heart, and the
hearts of his people, were moved, like the trees of the wood shaking in
the wind.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Then the Lord said to Isaiah, Go out now,
you and Shear-jashub, your son, and you will come across Ahaz at the end
of the stream flowing from the higher pool, in the highway of the
washerman's field;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And say to him, Take care and be quiet;
have no fear, and do not let your heart be feeble, because of these two
ends of smoking fire-wood, because of the bitter wrath of Rezin and
Aram, and of the son of Remaliah.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Because Aram has made evil designs against
you, saying,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Let us go up against Judah, troubling her,
and forcing our way into her, and let us put up a king in her, even the
son of Tabeel:

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> This is the word of the Lord God: This
design will not come about or be effected.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For the head of Aram is Damascus, and the
head of Damascus is Rezin (and in sixty-five years from now Ephraim will
be broken, and will no longer be a people):

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the
head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If you will not have faith, your
kingdom will be broken.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And Isaiah said again to Ahaz,

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Make a request to the Lord your God for a
sign, a sign in the deep places of the underworld, or in the high
heavens.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But Ahaz said, I will not put the Lord to
the test by making such a request.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And he said, Give ear now, O family of
David: is it not enough that you are driving men to disgust? will you do
the same to my God?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For this cause the Lord himself will give
you a sign; a young woman is now with child, and she will give birth to
a son, and she will give him the name Immanuel.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Butter and honey will be his food, when
he is old enough to make a decision between evil and good.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For before the child is old enough to
make a decision between evil and good, the land whose two kings you are
now fearing will have become waste.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> The Lord is about to send on you, and on
your people, and on your father's house, such a time of trouble as there
has not been from the days of the separating of Ephraim from Judah; even
the coming of the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And it will be in that day that the Lord
will make a piping sound for the fly which is in the end of the rivers
of Egypt, and for the bee which is in the land of Assyria.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And they will come, covering all the
waste valleys, and the holes of the rocks, and the thorns, and all the
watering-places.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> In that day will the Lord take away the
hair of the head and of the feet, as well as the hair of the face, with
a blade got for a price from the other side of the River; even with the
king of Assyria.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And it will be in that day that a man
will give food to a young cow and two sheep;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And they will give so much milk that he
will be able to have butter for his food: for butter and honey will be
the food of all who are still living in the land.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And it will be in that day that in every
place where before there were a thousand vines valued at a thousand
shekels of silver, there will be nothing but blackberries and thorns.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Men will come there with bows and arrows,
because all the land will be full of blackberries and thorns.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And they will send out the oxen and the
sheep on all the hills which before were worked with the spade, ... fear
of blackberries and thorns.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the Lord said to me, Take a great
writing-board, and on it put down in common letters,
Maher-shalal-hash-baz;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And take true witnesses to the writing,
Uriah the priest, and Zechariah, the son of Jeberechiah.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And I went in to my wife, and she became
with child, and gave birth to a son. Then the Lord said to me, Give him
the name Maher-shalal-hash-baz,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> For before the child is able to say,
Father, or, Mother, the wealth of Damascus and the goods of Samaria will
be taken away by the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the Lord said again to me,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Because this people will have nothing to do
with the softly-flowing waters of Shiloah, and have fear of Rezin and
Remaliah's son;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For this cause the Lord is sending on them
the waters of the River, deep and strong, even the king of Assyria and
all his glory: and it will come up through all its streams, overflowing
all its edges:

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And it will come on into Judah; rushing on
and overflowing, till the waters are up to the neck; \*\*\* and his
outstretched wings will be covering the land from side to side: for God
is with us.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Have knowledge, O peoples, and be in fear;
give ear, all you far-off parts of the earth:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Let your designs be formed, and they will
come to nothing; give your orders, and they will not be effected: for
God is with us.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For the Lord, controlling me with a
strong hand, gave me orders not to go in the way of this people, saying,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Do not say, It is holy, about everything
of which this people says, It is holy; and do not be in fear of what
they go in fear of.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> But let the Lord of armies be holy to
you, and go in fear of him, giving honour to him.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he will be for a holy place: but for
a stone of falling and a rock of trouble to the two houses of Israel,
and to the men of Jerusalem, for a net in which they may be taken.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And numbers of them, falling on the
stone, will be broken, and will be taken in the net.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Let my teaching be kept secret: and my
words be given to my disciples only.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I will be waiting for the Lord, whose
face is veiled from the house of Jacob, and I will be looking for him.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> See, I and the children whom the Lord has
given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of
armies, whose resting-place is in Mount Zion.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And when they say to you, Make request
for us to those who have control of spirits, and to those wise in secret
arts, who make hollow bird-like sounds; is it not right for a people to
make request to their gods, to make request for the living to the dead?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Then say to them, Put your faith in the
teaching and the witness. ... If they do not say such things. ... For
him there is no dawn. ...

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he will go through the land in bitter
trouble and in need of food; and when he is unable to get food, he will
become angry, cursing his king and his God, and his eyes will be turned
to heaven on high;

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And he will be looking down on the earth,
and there will be trouble and dark clouds, black night where there is no
seeing.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> In earlier times he made the land of
Zebulun and the land of Naphtali of small value, but after that he gave
it glory, by the way of the sea, on the other side of Jordan, Galilee of
the nations.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The people who went in the dark have seen a
great light, and for those who were living in the land of the deepest
night, the light is shining.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> You have made them very glad, increasing
their joy. They are glad before you as men are glad in the time of
getting in the grain, or when they make division of the goods taken in
war.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For by your hand the yoke on his neck and
the rod on his back, even the rod of his cruel master, have been broken,
as in the day of Midian.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For every boot of the man of war with his
sounding step, and the clothing rolled in blood, will be for burning,
food for the fire.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For to us a child has come, to us a son is
given; and the government has been placed in his hands; and he has been
named Wise Guide, Strong God, Father for ever, Prince of Peace.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Of the increase of his rule and of peace
there will be no end, on the seat of David, and in his kingdom; to make
it strong, supporting it with wise decision and righteousness, now and
for ever. By the fixed purpose of the Lord of armies this will be done.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The Lord has sent a word to Jacob, and it
has come on Israel;

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And all the people will have experience of
it, even Ephraim and the men of Samaria, who say in the pride of their
uplifted hearts,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The bricks have come down, but we will
put up buildings of cut stone in their place: the sycamores are cut
down, but they will be changed to cedars.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For this cause the Lord has made strong
the haters of Israel, driving them on to make war against him;

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Aram on the east, and the Philistines on
the west, who have come against Israel with open mouths. For all this
his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But the heart of the people was not
turned to him who sent punishment on them, and they made no prayer to
the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For this cause the Lord took away from
Israel head and tail, high and low, in one day.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> The man who is honoured and responsible
is the head, and the prophet who gives false teaching is the tail.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For the guides of this people are the
cause of their wandering from the right way, and those who are guided by
them come to destruction.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For this cause the Lord will have no
pleasure in their young men, and no pity on their widows and the
children without fathers: for they are all haters of God and evil-doers,
and foolish words come from every mouth. For all this his wrath is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> For evil was burning like a fire; the
blackberries and thorns were burned up; the thick woods took fire,
rolling up in dark clouds of smoke.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> The land was dark with the wrath of the
Lord of armies: the people were like those who take men's flesh for
food.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> On the right a man was cutting off bits
and was still in need; on the left a man took a meal but had not enough;
no man had pity on his brother; every man was making a meal of the flesh
of his neighbour.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Manasseh was making a meal of Ephraim,
and Ephraim of Manasseh; and together they were attacking Judah. For all
this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Cursed are those who make evil decisions,
and the writers who make the records of their cruel acts:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Who do wrong to the poor in their cause,
and take away the right of the crushed among my people, so that they may
have the property of widows, and get under their power those who have no
father.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And what will you do in the day of
punishment, and in the destruction which is coming from far? to whom
will you go for help, and what will become of your glory?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> ... For all this his wrath is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Ho! Assyrian, the rod of my wrath, the
instrument of my punishment!

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> I will send him against a nation of
wrongdoers, and against the people of my wrath I will give him orders,
to take their wealth in war, crushing them down like the dust in the
streets.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But this is not what is in his mind, and
this is not his design; but his purpose is destruction, and the cutting
off of more and more nations.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For he says, Are not all my captains
kings?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Will not the fate of Calno be like that
of Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> As my hand has come on the kingdoms of
the images, whose pictured images were more in number than those of
Jerusalem and Samaria;

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> So, as I have done to Samaria and her
images, I will do to Jerusalem and her images.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For this cause it will be that, when
the purpose of the Lord against Mount Zion and Jerusalem is complete, I
will send punishment on the pride of the heart of the king of Assyria,
and on the glory of his uplifted eyes.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For he has said, By the strength of my
hand I have done it, and by my knowledge, for I am wise: and I have
taken away the limits of the peoples' lands, and the stores of their
wealth have become mine; and I have made towns low in the dust, sending
destruction on those living in them;

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And I have put my hands on the wealth
of the peoples, as on the place where a bird has put her eggs; and as a
man may take the eggs from which a bird has gone, so I have taken all
the earth for myself: and not a wing was moved, and not a mouth gave out
a sound.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Will the axe say high-sounding words
against him who is using it, or the blade be full of pride against him
who is cutting with it? As if a rod had the power of shaking him who is
using it, or as if a stick might take up him who is not wood.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> For this cause the Lord, the Lord of
armies, will make his fat become wasted; and in his inner parts a fire
will be lighted like a burning flame.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And the light of Israel will be for a
fire, and his Holy One for a flame: wasting and burning up his thorns in
one day.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And he will put an end to the glory of
his woods and of his planted fields, soul and body together; and it will
be as when a man is wasted by disease.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the rest of the trees of his wood
will be small in number, so that a child may put them down in writing.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And it will be in that day that the
rest of Israel, and those of Jacob who have come safely through these
troubles, will no longer go for help to him whose rod was on their back,
but their faith will be in the Lord, the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The rest, even the rest of Jacob, will
come back to the Strong God.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For though your people, O Israel, are
as the sand of the sea, only a small number will come back: for the
destruction is fixed, overflowing in righteousness.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> For the Lord, the Lord of armies, is
about to make destruction complete in all the land.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> For this cause the Lord, the Lord of
armies, says, O my people living in Zion, have no fear of the Assyrian,
even if his rod comes on your back, and his stick is lifted up as in
Egypt.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> For in a very short time my passion
will be over, and my wrath will be turned to their destruction.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And the Lord of armies will be shaking
a whip against him, as when he overcame Midian at the rock of Oreb: and
his rod will be lifted up against them as it was against the Egyptians.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And in that day the weight which he put
on your back will be taken away, and his yoke broken from off your neck.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> He has gone up from Pene-Rimmon, he has
come to Aiath; he has gone past Migron, at Michmash he puts his forces
in order.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> They have gone across the mountain;
Geba will be our resting-place tonight, they say: Ramah is shaking with
fear; Gibeah of Saul has gone in flight.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Give a loud cry, daughter of Gallim;
let Laishah give ear; let Anathoth give answer to her.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Madmenah has gone; the men of Gebim are
putting their goods in a safe place.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> This very day he is stopping at Nob; he
is shaking his hand against the mountain of the daughter of Zion, the
hill of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> See, the Lord, the Lord of armies, is
cutting off his branches with a great noise, and his strong ones are
falling and his high ones are coming down.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And he is cutting down the thick places
of the wood with an axe, and Lebanon with its tall trees is coming down.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And there will come a rod out of the
broken tree of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots will give fruit.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And the spirit of the Lord will be
resting on him, the spirit of wisdom and good sense, the spirit of wise
guiding and strength, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the
Lord;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And he will not be guided in his judging
by what he sees, or give decisions by the hearing of his ears:

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But he will do right in the cause of the
poor, and give wise decisions for those in the land who are in need; and
the rod of his mouth will come down on the cruel, and with the breath of
his lips he will put an end to the evil-doer.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And righteousness will be the cord of his
robe, and good faith the band round his breast.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the wolf will be living with the
lamb, and the leopard will take his rest with the young goat; and the
lion will take grass for food like the ox; and the young lion will go
with the young ones of the herd; and a little child will be their guide.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And the cow and the bear will be friends
while their young ones are sleeping together.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the child at the breast will be
playing by the hole of the snake, and the older child will put his hand
on the bright eye of the poison-snake.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> There will be no cause of pain or
destruction in all my holy mountain: for the earth will be full of the
knowledge of the Lord as the sea is covered by the waters.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And in that day, the eyes of the
nations will be turned to the root of Jesse which will be lifted up as
the flag of the peoples; and his resting-place will be glory.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And in that day the hand of the Lord
will be stretched out the second time to get back the rest of his
people, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush,
and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the sea-lands.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he will put up a flag as a sign to
the nations, and he will get together those of Israel who had been sent
away, and the wandering ones of Judah, from the four ends of the earth.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the envy of Ephraim will be gone,
and those who make trouble for Judah will come to an end: Ephraim will
have no more envy of Judah, and there will be an end of Judah's hate for
Ephraim.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And they will be united in attacking
the Philistines on the west, and together they will take the goods of
the children of the east: their hand will be on Edom and Moab; and the
children of Ammon will be under their rule.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And the Lord will make the tongue of
the Egyptian sea completely dry; and with his burning wind his hand will
be stretched out over the River, and it will be parted into seven
streams, so that men may go over it with dry feet.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And there will be a highway for the
rest of his people from Assyria; as there was for Israel in the day when
he came up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And in that day you will say I will give
praise to you, O Lord; for though you were angry with me, your wrath is
turned away, and I am comforted.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> See, God is my salvation; I will have
faith in the Lord, without fear: for the Lord Jah is my strength and
song; and he has become my salvation.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> So with joy will you get water out of the
springs of salvation.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And in that day you will say, Give praise
to the Lord, let his name be honoured, give word of his doings among the
peoples, say that his name is lifted up.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Make a song to the Lord; for he has done
noble things: give news of them through all the earth.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Let your voice be sounding in a cry of
joy, O daughter of Zion, for great is the Holy One of Israel among you.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> The word of the Lord about Babylon which
Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Put up a flag on a clear mountain-top,
make a loud outcry to them, give directions with the hand, so that they
may go into the doors of the great ones.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> I have given orders to my holy ones, I
have sent out my men of war, those of mine who take pride in their
power, to give effect to my wrath.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The noise of great numbers in the
mountains, like the noise of a strong people! The noise of the kingdoms
of the nations meeting together! The Lord of armies is numbering his
forces for war.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> They come from a far country, from the
farthest part of heaven, even the Lord and the instruments of his wrath,
with destruction for all the land.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Send out a cry of grief; for the day of
the Lord is near; it comes as destruction from the Most High.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> For this cause all hands will be feeble,
and every heart of man be turned to water;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Their hearts will be full of fear; pains
and sorrows will overcome them; they will be in pain like a woman in
childbirth; they will be shocked at one another; their faces will be
like flames.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> See, the day of the Lord is coming,
cruel, with wrath and burning passion: to make the land a waste, driving
the sinners in it to destruction.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> For the stars of heaven and its bright
armies will not give their light: the sun will be made dark in his
journey through the heaven, and the moon will keep back her light.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And I will send punishment on the world
for its evil, and on the sinners for their wrongdoing; and I will put an
end to all pride, and will make low the power of the cruel.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> I will make men so small in number,
that a man will be harder to get than gold, even the best gold of Ophir.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> For this cause the heavens will be
shaking, and the earth will be moved out of its place, in the wrath of
the Lord of armies, and in the day of his burning passion.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And it will be that, like a roe in
flight, and like wandering sheep, they will go every man to his people
and to his land.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Everyone who is overtaken will have a
spear put through him, and everyone who goes in flight will be put to
the sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Their young children will be broken up
before their eyes; their goods will be taken away, and their wives made
the property of others.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> See, I am driving the Medes against
them, who put no value on silver and have no pleasure in gold.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> In their hands are bows and spears;
they are cruel, violently putting the young men to death, and crushing
the young women; they have no pity for children, and no mercy for the
fruit of the body.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the
beautiful town which is the pride of the Chaldaeans, will be like God's
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> People will never be living in it
again, and it will have no more men from generation to generation: the
Arab will not put up his tent there; and those who keep sheep will not
make it a resting-place for their flocks.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But the beasts of the waste land will
have their holes there; and the houses will be full of crying jackals,
and ostriches will have their place there, and evil spirits will be
dancing there.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And wolves will be answering one
another in their towers, and jackals in their houses of pleasure: her
time is near, and her days of power will quickly be ended.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob,
and will again make Israel his special people, and will put them in
their land; and the man from a strange country will take his place among
them and be joined to the family of Jacob.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the people will take them with them
to their place: and the children of Israel will give them a heritage in
the Lord's land as men-servants and women-servants, making them
prisoners whose prisoners they were; and they will be rulers over their
masters.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And it will be, in the day when the Lord
gives you rest from your sorrow, and from your trouble, and from the
hard yoke which they had put on you,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> That you will take up this bitter song
against the king of Babylon, and say, How has the cruel overseer come to
an end! He who was lifted up in pride is cut off;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The stick of the evil-doers, the rod of
the rulers, is broken by the Lord;

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He whose rod was on the peoples with an
unending wrath, ruling the nations in passion, with an uncontrolled
rule.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> All the earth is at rest and is quiet:
they are bursting into song.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Even the trees of the wood are glad over
you, the trees of Lebanon, saying, From the time of your fall no
wood-cutter has come up against us with an axe.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The underworld is moved at your coming:
the shades of the dead are awake before you, even the strong ones of the
earth; all the kings of the world have got up from their seats.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> They all make answer and say to you,
Have you become feeble like us? have you been made even as we are?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Your pride has gone down into the
underworld, and the noise of your instruments of music; the worms are
under you, and your body is covered with them.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> How great is your fall from heaven, O
shining one, son of the morning! How are you cut down to the earth, low
among the dead bodies!

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> For you said in your heart, I will go
up to heaven, I will make my seat higher than the stars of God; I will
take my place on the mountain of the meeting-place of the gods, in the
inmost parts of the north.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I will go higher than the clouds; I
will be like the Most High.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> But you will come down to the
underworld, even to its inmost parts.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Those who see you will be looking on
you with care, they will be in deep thought, saying, Is this the
troubler of the earth, the shaker of kingdoms?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Who made the world a waste, overturning
its towns; who did not let his prisoners loose from the prison-house.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> All the kings of the earth are at rest
in glory, every man in his house,

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But you, like a birth before its time,
are stretched out with no resting-place in the earth; clothed with the
bodies of the dead who have been put to the sword, who go down to the
lowest parts of the underworld; a dead body, crushed under foot.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> As for your fathers, you will not be
united with them in their resting-place, because you have been the cause
of destruction to your land, and of death to your people; the seed of
the evil-doer will have no place in the memory of man.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Make ready a place of death for his
children, because of the evil-doing of their father; so that they may
not come up and take the earth for their heritage, covering the face of
the world with waste places.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> For I will come up against them, says
the Lord of armies, cutting off from Babylon name and offspring, son and
son's son, says the Lord.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And I will make you a heritage for the
hedgehog, and pools of water: and I will go through it with the brush of
destruction, says the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The Lord has taken an oath, saying, My
design will certainly come about, and my purpose will be effected:

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> To let the Assyrian be broken in my
land, and crushed under foot on my mountains: there will his yoke be
taken away from them, and his rule over them come to an end.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> This is the purpose for all the earth:
and this is the hand stretched out over all nations.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> For it is the purpose of the Lord of
armies, and who will make it of no effect? when his hand is stretched
out, by whom may it be turned back?

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the year of the death of King Ahaz
this word came to the prophet:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Be not glad, O Philistia, all of you,
because the rod which was on you is broken: for out of the snake's root
will come a poison-snake, and its fruit will be a winged poison-snake.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And the poorest of the land will have
food, and those in need will be given a safe resting-place: but your
seed will come to an end for need of food, and the rest of you will be
put to the sword.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Send out a cry, O door! Make sounds of
sorrow, O town! All your land has come to nothing, O Philistia; for
there comes a smoke out of the north, and everyone keeps his place in
the line.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> What answer, then, will my people give
to the representatives of the nation? That the Lord is the builder of
Zion, and she will be a safe place for the poor of his people.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> The word about Moab. For in a night Ar of
Moab has become waste, and is seen no longer; for in a night Kir of Moab
has become waste, and is seen no longer.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The daughter of Dibon has gone up to the
high places, weeping: Moab is sounding her cry of sorrow over Nebo, and
over Medeba: everywhere the hair of the head and of the face is cut off.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> In their streets they are covering
themselves with haircloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their
public places, there is crying and bitter weeping.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Heshbon is crying out, and Elealeh; their
voice is sounding even to Jahaz: for this cause the heart of Moab is
shaking; his soul is shaking with fear.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> My heart is crying out for Moab; her
people go in flight to Zoar, and to Eglath-shelishiyah: for they go up
with weeping by the slope of Luhith; on the way to Horonaim they send up
a cry of destruction.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> The waters of Nimrim will become dry: for
the grass is burned up, the young grass is coming to an end, every green
thing is dead.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> For this cause they will take away their
wealth, and the stores they have got together, over the stream of the
water-plants.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For the cry has gone round the limits of
Moab; as far as to Eglaim and Beer-elim.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> For the waters of Dimon are full of
blood: and I'm sending even more on Moab, a lion on those of Moab who go
in flight, and on the rest of the land.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And they will send ... to the mountain of
the daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> For the daughters of Moab will be like
wandering birds, like a place from which the young birds have gone in
flight, at the ways across the Arnon.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Give wise directions, make a decision;
let your shade be as night in full day: keep safe those who are in
flight; do not give up the wandering ones.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Let those who have been forced out of
Moab have a resting-place with you; be a cover to them from him who is
making waste their land: till the cruel ones are cut off, and wasting
has come to an end, and those who take pleasure in crushing the poor are
gone from the land.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Then a king's seat will be based on
mercy, and one will be seated on it in the tent of David for ever;
judging uprightly, and quick to do righteousness.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> We have had word of the pride of Moab,
how great it is; how he is lifted up in pride and passion: his high
words about himself are false.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> For this cause everyone in Moab will give
cries of grief for Moab: crushed to the earth, they will be weeping for
the men of Kir-hareseth.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> For the fields of Heshbon are waste, the
vine of Sibmah is dead; the lords of nations were overcome by the
produce of her vines; her vine-plants went as far as Jazer, and came
even to the waste land; her branches were stretched out to the sea.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For this cause my sorrow for the vine of
Sibmah will be like the weeping for Jazer: my eyes are dropping water on
you, O Heshbon and Elealeh! For they are sounding the war-cry over your
summer fruits and the getting in of your grain;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And all joy is gone; no longer are they
glad for the fertile field; and in the vine-gardens there are no songs
or sounds of joy: the crushing of grapes has come to an end, and its
glad cry has been stopped.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> For this cause the cords of my heart
are sounding for Moab, and I am full of sorrow for Kir-heres.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And when Moab goes up to the high
place, and makes prayer in the house of his god, it will have no effect.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> This is the word which the Lord said
about Moab in the past.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> But now the Lord has said, In three
years, the years of a servant working for payment, the glory of Moab,
all that great people, will be turned to shame, and the rest of Moab
will be very small and without honour.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The word about Damascus. See, they have
made Damascus a town no longer; it has become a waste place.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Her towns are unpeopled for ever; there
the flocks take their rest in peace, without fear.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The strong tower has gone from Ephraim,
and the kingdom from Damascus: the rest of Aram will come to
destruction, and be made like the glory of the children of Israel, says
the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And it will be in that day that the glory
of Jacob will be made small, and the strength of his body will become
feeble.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And it will be like a man cutting the
growth of his grain, pulling together the heads of the grain with his
arm; even as when they get in the grain in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> But it will be like a man shaking an
olive-tree, something will still be there, two or three berries on the
top of the highest branch, four or five on the outside branches of a
fertile tree, says the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> In that day a man's heart will be turned
to his Maker, and his eyes to the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> He will not be looking to the altars, the
work of his hands, or to the wood pillars or to the sun-images which his
fingers have made.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> In that day your towns will be like the
waste places of the Hivites and the Amorites which the children of
Israel took for a heritage, and they will come to destruction.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> For you have not given honour to the
God of your salvation, and have not kept in mind the Rock of your
strength; for this cause you made a garden of Adonis, and put in it the
vine-cuttings of a strange god;

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> In the day of your planting you were
watching its growth, and in the morning your seed was flowering: but its
fruit is wasted away in the day of grief and bitter sorrow.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Ah! the voice of peoples, like the loud
sounding of the seas, and the thundering of great nations rushing on
like the bursting out of waters!

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But he will put a stop to them, and
make them go in flight far away, driving them like the waste of the
grain on the tops of the mountains before the wind, and like the
circling dust before the storm.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> In the evening there is fear, and in
the morning they are gone. This is the fate of those who take our goods,
and the reward of those who violently take our property for themselves.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Ho! land of the sounding of wings, on the
other side of the rivers of Ethiopia:

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Which sends its representatives by the
sea, even in ships of papyrus on the waters. Go back quickly, O
representatives, to a nation tall and smooth, to a people causing fear
through all their history; a strong nation, crushing down its haters,
whose land is cut through by rivers.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> All you peoples of the world, and you who
are living on the earth, when a flag is lifted up on the mountains, give
attention; and when the horn is sounded, give ear.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> For this is what the Lord has said to me:
I will be quiet, watching from my place; like the clear heat when the
sun is shining, like a mist of dew in the heat of summer.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For before the time of getting in the
grapes, after the opening of the bud, when the flower has become a grape
ready for crushing, he will take away the small branches with knives,
cutting down and taking away the wide-stretching branches.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> They will be for the birds of the
mountains, and for the beasts of the earth: the birds will come down on
them in the summer, and the beasts of the earth in the winter.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> In that time an offering will be made to
the Lord of armies from a people tall and smooth, causing fear through
all their history; a strong nation, crushing down its haters, whose land
is cut through by rivers, an offering taken to the place of the name of
the Lord of armies, even Mount Zion.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> The word about Egypt. See, the Lord is
seated on a quick-moving cloud, and is coming to Egypt: and the false
gods of Egypt will be troubled at his coming, and the heart of Egypt
will be turned to water.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And I will send the Egyptians against the
Egyptians: and they will be fighting every one against his brother, and
every one against his neighbour; town against town, and kingdom against
kingdom.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And the spirit of Egypt will be troubled
in her, and I will make her decisions without effect: and they will be
turning to the false gods, and to those who make hollow sounds, and to
those who have control of spirits, and to those who are wise in secret
arts.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And I will give the Egyptians into the
hand of a cruel lord; and a hard king will be their ruler, says the
Lord, the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And the waters of the sea will be cut
off, and the river will become dry and waste:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And the rivers will have an evil smell;
the stream of Egypt will become small and dry: all the water-plants will
come to nothing.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The grass-lands by the Nile, and
everything planted by the Nile, will become dry, or taken away by the
wind, and will come to an end.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> The fishermen will be sad, and all those
who put fishing-lines into the Nile will be full of grief, and those
whose nets are stretched out on the waters will have sorrow in their
hearts.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And all the workers in linen thread, and
those who make cotton cloth, will be put to shame.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And the makers of twisted thread will
be crushed, and those who ... will be sad in heart.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> The chiefs of Zoan are completely
foolish; the wisest guides of Pharaoh have become like beasts: how do
you say to Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the offspring of early
kings?

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Where, then, are your wise men? let
them make clear to you, let them give you knowledge of the purpose of
the Lord of armies for Egypt.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> The chiefs of Zoan have become foolish,
the chiefs of Noph are tricked, the heads of her tribes are the cause of
Egypt's wandering out of the way.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> The Lord has sent among them a spirit
of error: and by them Egypt is turned out of the right way in all her
doings, as a man overcome by wine is uncertain in his steps.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And in Egypt there will be no work for
any man, head or tail, high or low, to do.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> In that day the Egyptians will be like
women: and the land will be shaking with fear because of the waving of
the Lord's hand stretched out over it.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And the land of Judah will become a
cause of great fear to Egypt; whenever its name comes to mind, Egypt
will be in fear before the Lord of armies because of his purpose against
it.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> In that day there will be five towns in
the land of Egypt using the language of Canaan, and making oaths to the
Lord of armies; and one of them will be named, The Town of the Sun.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> In that day there will be an altar to
the Lord in the middle of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to the Lord at
the edge of the land.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And it will be a sign and a witness to
the Lord of armies in the land of Egypt: when they are crying out to the
Lord because of their cruel masters, then he will send them a saviour
and a strong one to make them free.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And the Lord will give the knowledge of
himself to Egypt, and the Egyptians will give honour to the Lord in that
day; they will give him worship with offerings and meal offerings, and
will take an oath to the Lord and give effect to it.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And the Lord will send punishment on
Egypt, and will make them well again; and when they come back to the
Lord he will give ear to their prayer and take away their disease.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> In that day there will be a highway out
of Egypt to Assyria, and Assyria will come into Egypt, and Egypt will
come into Assyria; and the Egyptians will give worship to the Lord
together with the Assyrians.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> In that day Israel will be the third
together with Egypt and Assyria, a blessing in the earth:

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Because of the blessing of the Lord of
armies which he has given them, saying, A blessing on Egypt my people,
and on Assyria the work of my hands, and on Israel my heritage.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> In the year when the Tartan came to
Ashdod, sent by Sargon, king of Assyria, and made war against it and
took it;

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> At that time the word of the Lord came to
Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saying, Go, and take off your robe, and your
shoes from your feet; and he did so, walking unclothed and without shoes
on his feet.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And the Lord said, As my servant Isaiah
has gone unclothed and without shoes for three years as a sign and a
wonder to Egypt and Ethiopia,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> So will the king of Assyria take away the
prisoners of Egypt and those forced out of Ethiopia, young and old,
unclothed and without shoes, and with backs uncovered, to the shame of
Egypt.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And they will be full of fear, and will
no longer have faith in Ethiopia which was their hope, or in Egypt which
was their glory.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And those living by the sea will say in
that day, See the fate of our hope to whom we went for help and
salvation from the king of Assyria: what hope have we then of salvation?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The word about the waste land. As
storm-winds in the South go rushing through, it comes from the waste
land, from the land greatly to be feared.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> A vision of fear comes before my eyes;
the worker of deceit goes on in his false way, and the waster goes on
making waste. Up! Elam; to the attack! Media; I have put an end to her
sorrow.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> For this cause I am full of bitter grief;
pains like the pains of a woman in childbirth have come on me: I am bent
down with sorrow at what comes to my ears; I am shocked by what I see.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> My mind is wandering, fear has overcome
me: the evening of my desire has been turned into shaking for me.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> They make ready the table, they put down
the covers, they take food and drink. Up! you captains; put oil on your
breastplates.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> For so has the Lord said to me, Go, let a
watchman be placed; let him give word of what he sees:

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And when he sees war-carriages, horsemen
by twos, war-carriages with asses, war-carriages with camels, let him
give special attention.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the watchman gave a loud cry, O my
lord, I am on the watchtower all day, and am placed in my watch every
night:

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> See, here come war-carriages with men,
horsemen by twos: and in answer he said, Babylon is made low, is made
low, and all her images are broken on the earth.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> O my crushed ones, the grain of my
floor! I have given you the word which came to me from the Lord of
armies, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The word about Edom. A voice comes to
me from Seir, Watchman, how far gone is the night? how far gone is the
night?

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The watchman says, The morning has
come, but night is still to come: if you have questions to put, put
them, and come back again.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> The word about Arabia. In the thick
woods of Arabia will be your night's resting-place, O travelling bands
of Dedanites!

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Give water to him who is in need of
water; give bread, O men of the land of Tema, to those in flight.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> For they are in flight from the sharp
sword, and the bent bow, and from the trouble of war.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> For so has the Lord said to me, In a
year, by the years of a servant working for payment, all the glory of
Kedar will come to an end:

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the rest of the bowmen, the men of
war of the children of Kedar, will be small in number: for the Lord, the
God of Israel, has said it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> The word about the valley of vision. Why
have all your people gone up to the house-tops?

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> You, who are full of loud voices, a town
of outcries, given up to joy; your dead men have not been put to the
sword, or come to their death in war.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> All your rulers ... have gone in flight;
all your strong ones have gone far away.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> For this cause I have said, Let your eyes
be turned away from me in my bitter weeping; I will not be comforted for
the wasting of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> For it is a day of trouble and of
crushing down and of destruction from the Lord, the Lord of armies, in
the valley of vision; ...

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And Elam was armed with arrows, and Aram
came on horseback; and the breastplate of Kir was uncovered.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And your most fertile valleys were full
of war-carriages, and the horsemen took up their positions in front of
the town.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He took away the cover of Judah; and in
that day you were looking with care at the store of arms in the house of
the woods.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And you saw all the broken places in the
wall of the town of David: and you got together the waters of the lower
pool.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And you had the houses of Jerusalem
numbered, pulling down the houses to make the wall stronger.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And you made a place between the two
walls for storing the waters of the old pool: but you gave no thought to
him who had done this, and were not looking to him by whom it had been
purposed long before.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And in that day the Lord, the Lord of
armies, was looking for weeping, and cries of sorrow, cutting off of the
hair, and putting on the clothing of grief:

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> But in place of these there was joy and
delight, oxen and sheep were being made ready for food, there was
feasting and drinking: men said, Now is the time for food and wine, for
tomorrow death comes.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And the Lord of armies said to me
secretly, Truly, this sin will not be taken from you till your death,
says the Lord, the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> The Lord, the Lord of armies, says, Go
to this person in authority, this Shebna, who is over the house; who has
made himself a resting-place on high, cutting out a place for himself in
the rock, and say,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Who are you, and by what right have you
made for yourself a resting-place here?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> See, O strong man, the Lord will send
you violently away, gripping you with force,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Twisting you round and round like a
ball he will send you out into a wide country: there you will come to
your end, and there will be the carriages of your pride, O shame of your
lord's house!

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I will have you forced out of your
place of authority, and pulled down from your position.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And in that day I will send for my
servant, Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah:

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And I will put your robe on him, and
put your band about him, and I will give your authority into his hand:
and he will be a father to the men of Jerusalem, and to the family of
Judah.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And I will give the key of the family
of David into his care; and what he keeps open will be shut by no one,
and what he keeps shut no one will make open.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And I will put him like a nail in a
safe place; and he will be for a seat of glory to his father's family.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And all the glory of his father's
family will be hanging on him, all their offspring, every small vessel,
even the cups and the basins.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> In that day, says the Lord of armies,
will the nail fixed in a safe place give way; and it will be cut down,
and in its fall the weight hanging on it will be cut off, for the Lord
has said it.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> The word about Tyre. Let a cry of sorrow
go up, O ships of Tarshish, because your strong place is made waste; on
the way back from the land of Kittim the news is given to them.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Send out a cry of grief, you men of the
sea-land, traders of Zidon, who go over the sea, whose representatives
are on great waters;

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Who get in the seed of Shihor, whose
wealth is the trade of the nations.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Be shamed, O Zidon: for the sea, the
strong place of the sea has said, I have not been with child, or given
birth; I have not taken care of young men, or kept watch over the growth
of virgins.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> When the news comes to Egypt they will be
bitterly pained at the fate of Tyre.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Go over to Tarshish; give cries of
sorrow, O men of the sea-land.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Is this the town which was full of joy,
whose start goes back to times long past, whose wanderings took her into
far-off countries?

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> By whom was this purposed against Tyre,
the crowning town, whose traders are chiefs, whose business men are
honoured in the land?

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> It was the purpose of the Lord of armies
to put pride to shame, to make sport of the glory of those who are
honoured in the earth.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Let your land be worked with the
plough, O daughter of Tarshish; there is no longer any harbour.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> His hand is stretched out over the sea,
the kingdoms are shaking: the Lord has given orders about Canaan, to
make waste its strong places.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And he said, There is no more joy for
you, O crushed virgin daughter of Zidon: up! go over to Kittim; even
there you will have no rest.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> ...

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Let a cry of sorrow go up, O ships of
Tarshish: because your strong place is made waste.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And it will be in that day that Tyre
will go out of mind for seventy years, that is, the days of one king:
after the end of seventy years it will be for Tyre as in the song of the
loose woman.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Take an instrument of music, go about
the town, O loose woman who has gone out from the memory of man; make
sweet melody with songs, so that you may come back to men's minds.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And it will be after the end of seventy
years, that the Lord will have mercy on Tyre, and she will go back to
her trade, acting as a loose woman with all the kingdoms of the world on
the face of the earth.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And her goods and her trade will be
holy to the Lord: they will not be kept back or stored up; for her
produce will be for those living in the Lord's land, to give them food
for their needs, and fair clothing.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> See, the Lord is making the earth waste
and unpeopled, he is turning it upside down, and sending the people in
all directions.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And it will be the same for the people as
for the priest; for the servant as for his master; and for the
woman-servant as for her owner; the same for the one offering goods for
a price as for him who takes them; the same for him who gives money at
interest and for him who takes it; the same for him who lets others have
the use of his property as for those who make use of it.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> The earth will be completely waste and
without men; for this is the word of the Lord.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> The earth is sorrowing and wasting away,
the world is full of grief and wasting away, the high ones of the earth
come to nothing.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> The earth has been made unclean by those
living in it; because the laws have not been kept by them, the orders
have been changed, and the eternal agreement has been broken.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For this cause the earth is given up to
the curse, and those in it are judged as sinners: for this cause those
living on the earth are burned up, and the rest are small in number.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The new wine is thin, the vine is feeble,
and all the glad-hearted make sounds of grief.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> The pleasing sound of all instruments of
music has come to an end, and the voices of those who are glad.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> There is no more drinking of wine with a
song; strong drink will be bitter to those who take it.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> The town is waste and broken down:
every house is shut up, so that no man may come in.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> There is a crying in the streets
because of the wine; there is an end of all delight, the joy of the land
is gone.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> In the town all is waste, and in the
public place is destruction.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> For it will be in the heart of the
earth among the peoples, like the shaking of an olive-tree, as the last
of the grapes after the getting-in is done.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> But those will be making sounds of joy;
they will be crying loudly from the sea for the glory of the Lord.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Give praise to the Lord in the east, to
the name of the Lord, the God of Israel, in the sea-lands.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> From the farthest part of the earth
comes the sound of songs, glory to the upright. But I said, I am wasting
away, wasting away, the curse is on me! The false ones go on in their
false way, yes, they go on acting falsely.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Fear, and death, and the net, are come
on you, O people of the earth.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And it will be that he who goes in
flight from the sound of fear will be overtaken by death; and he who
gets free from death will be taken in the net: for the windows on high
are open, and the bases of the earth are shaking.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> The earth is completely broken, it is
parted in two, it is violently moved.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> The earth will be moving uncertainly,
like a man overcome by drink; it will be shaking like a tent; and the
weight of its sin will be on it, crushing it down so that it will not
get up again.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And in that day the Lord will send
punishment on the army of the high ones on high, and on the kings of the
earth on the earth.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And they will be got together, like
prisoners in the prison-house; and after a long time they will have
their punishment.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Then the moon will be veiled, and the
sun put to shame; for the Lord of armies will be ruling in Mount Zion
and in Jerusalem, and before his judges he will let his glory be seen.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> O Lord, you are my God; I will give
praise to you, I will give honour to your name; for you have done great
acts of power; your purposes in the past have been made true and certain
in effect.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> For you have made a town a waste place: a
strong town a mass of broken walls; the tower of the men of pride has
come to an end; it will never be put up again.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> For this cause will the strong people
give glory to you, the town of the cruel ones will be in fear of you.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> For you have been a strong place for the
poor and the crushed in their trouble, a safe place from the storm, a
shade from the heat, when the wrath of the cruel ones is like a winter
storm.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> As heat by the shade of a cloud, the
noise of the men of pride has been made quiet by you; as heat by the
shade of a cloud, the song of the cruel ones has been stopped.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And in this mountain will the Lord of
armies make for all peoples a feast of good things, a feast of wines
long stored, of good things sweet to the taste, of wines long kept and
tested.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And in this mountain he will put an end
to the shade covering the face of all peoples, and the veil which is
stretched over all nations.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> He has put an end to death for ever; and
the Lord God will take away all weeping; and he will put an end to the
shame of his people in all the earth: for the Lord has said it.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And in that day it will be said, See,
this is our God; we have been waiting for him, and he will be our
saviour: this is the Lord in whom is our hope; we will be glad and have
delight in his salvation.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> For in this mountain will the hand of
the Lord come to rest, and Moab will be crushed down in his place, even
as the dry stems of the grain are crushed under foot in the waste place.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And if he puts out his hands, like a
man stretching out his hands in swimming, the Lord will make low his
pride, however expert his designs.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And the strong tower of your walls has
been broken by him, made low, and crushed even to the dust.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> In that day will this song be made in the
land of Judah: We have a strong town; he will make salvation our walls
and towers.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Let the doors be open, so that the
upright nation which keeps faith may come in.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> The man whose heart is unmoved you will
keep in peace, because his hope is in you.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Let your hope be in the Lord for ever:
for the Lord Jah is an unchanging Rock.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> For he has made low those who are lifted
up, all the people of the town of pride: he makes it low, crushing it
down to the earth; he makes it low in the dust.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> It will be crushed under the feet of the
poor and the steps of those who are in need.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The way of the good man is straight; the
road of the upright is made smooth by you.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> We have been waiting for you, O Lord; the
desire of our soul is for the memory of your name.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> In the night the desire of my soul has
been for you; early will my spirit be searching for you; for when your
punishments come on the earth, the people of the world will get the
knowledge of righteousness.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Even if you are kind to the evil-doer,
he will not go after righteousness; even in the land of the upright he
will still go on in his wrongdoing, and will not see the glory of the
Lord.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Lord, your hand is lifted up, but they
do not see: let them see ... yes, your haters will be burned up in the
fire.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Lord, you will give us peace: for all
our works are the outcome of your purpose.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> O Lord, our God, other lords than you
have had rule over us; but in you only is our salvation, and no other
name will we take on our lips.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> The dead will not come back to life:
their spirits will not come back to earth; for this cause you have sent
destruction on them, so that the memory of them is dead.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> You have made the nation great, O Lord,
you have made it great; glory is yours: you have made wide the limits of
the land.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Lord, in trouble our eyes have been
turned to you, we sent up a prayer when your punishment was on us.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> As a woman with child, whose time is
near, is troubled, crying out in her pain; so have we been before you, O
Lord.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> We have been with child, we have been
in pain, we have given birth to wind; no salvation has come to the earth
through us, and no children have come into the world.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Your dead will come back; their dead
bodies will come to life again. Those in the dust, awaking from their
sleep, will send out a song; for your dew is a dew of light, and the
earth will give birth to the shades.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Come, my people, into your secret
places, and let your doors be shut: keep yourself safe for a short time,
till his wrath is over.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For the Lord is coming out of his place
to send punishment on the people of the earth for their evil-doing: the
earth will let the blood drained out on her be seen, and will keep her
dead covered no longer.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> In that day the Lord, with his great and
strong and cruel sword, will send punishment on Leviathan, the
quick-moving snake, and on Leviathan, the twisted snake; and he will put
to death the dragon which is in the sea.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> In that day it will be said, A
vine-garden of delight, make a song about it.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> I, the Lord, am watching it; I will give
it water at all times: I will keep it night and day, for fear that any
damage comes to it.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> My passion is over: if the thorns were
fighting against me, I would make an attack on them, and they would be
burned up together.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Or let him put himself under my power,
and make peace with me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> In days to come Jacob will take root:
Israel will put out buds and flowers; and the face of the world will be
full of fruit.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Is his punishment like the punishment of
those who overcame him? or are his dead as great in number as those he
put to the sword?

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Your anger against her has been made
clear by driving her away; he has taken her away with his storm-wind in
the day of his east wind.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> So by this will the sin of Jacob be
covered, and this is all the fruit of taking away his punishment; when
all the stones of the altar are crushed together, so that the wood
pillars and the sun-images will not be put up again.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> For the strong town is without men, an
unpeopled living-place; and she has become a waste land: there the young
ox will take his rest, and its branches will be food for him.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> When its branches are dry they will be
broken off; the women will come and put fire to them: for it is a
foolish people; for this cause he who made them will have no mercy on
them, and he whose work they are will not have pity on them.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And it will be in that day that the
Lord will get together his grain, from the River to the stream of Egypt,
and you will be got together with care, O children of Israel.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And it will be in that day that a great
horn will be sounded; and those who were wandering in the land of
Assyria, and those who had been sent away into the land of Egypt, will
come; and they will give worship to the Lord in the holy mountain at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Ho! crown of pride of those who are given
up to wine in Ephraim, and the dead flower of his glory which is on the
head of those who are overcome by strong drink!

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> See, the Lord has a strong and cruel one;
like a rain of ice, a storm of destruction, like the overflowing of a
strong river, he will violently overcome them.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> The crown of pride of those who are given
up to wine in Ephraim will be crushed under foot;

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And the dead flower of his glory, which
is on the head of the fertile valley, will be like the first early fruit
before the summer; which a man takes and puts in his mouth the minute he
sees it.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> In that day will the Lord of armies be a
crown of glory, and a fair ornament, to the rest of his people;

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And a spirit of wisdom to the judge, and
strength to those who keep back the attackers at the door of the town.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And further, these are uncertain through
wine, and have gone out of the right way through strong drink: the
priest and the prophet are uncertain through strong drink, they are
overcome by wine, they have gone out of the way through strong drink;
their vision is false, they go wrong in their decisions.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> For all the tables are covered with
coughed-up food, so that there is not a clean place.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> To whom will he give knowledge? and to
whom will he make clear the word? Will it be to those who have newly
given up milk, and who have only now been taken from the breast?

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> For it is one rule after another; one
line after another; here a little, there a little.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> No, but with broken talk, and with a
strange tongue, he will give his word to this people:

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> To whom he said, This is the rest, give
rest to him who is tired; and by this you may get new strength; but they
would not give ear.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> For this cause the word of the Lord
will be to them rule after rule, line after line, here a little, there a
little; so that they may go on their way, and falling back may be
broken, and taken in the net.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Give ear then to the word of the Lord,
you men of pride, the rulers of this people in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Because you have said, We have made
death our friend, and with the underworld we have made an agreement;
when the overflowing waters come through they will not come near us; for
we are looking to false words for help, taking cover in what is untrue:

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> For this cause says the Lord God, See,
I am placing in Zion as a base, a stone, a tested stone, an angle-stone
which is certain and of great value: and he who has faith will not give
way.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And I will make right decision the
measuring-line, and righteousness the weight: and the ice-storm will
take away the safe place of false words, and the secret place will be
covered by the flowing waters.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And the help you were looking for from
death will come to nothing, and your agreement with the underworld will
be broken; when the overflowing waters come through, then you will be
overcome by them.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Whenever they come through they will
overtake you; for they will come through morning after morning, by day
and by night: and the news will be nothing but fear.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For the bed is not long enough for a
man to be stretched out on: and the cover is not wide enough for him to
be covered with.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For the Lord will come up as on Mount
Perazim, he will be moved to wrath as in the valley of Gibeon; so that
he may do his work--strange is his work; and give effect to his
act--unnatural is his act.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And now, take care that you do not make
sport of him, or your bands will be made strong; for I have had word
from the Lord, the Lord of armies, of an end, of a complete end, which
is to come on all the land.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> Let your ears be open to my voice; give
attention to what I say.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Is the ploughman for ever ploughing?
does he not get the earth ready and broken up for the seed?

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> When the face of the earth has been
levelled, does he not put in the different sorts of seed, and the grain
in lines, and the barley in its place, and the spelt at the edge?

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> For his God is his teacher, giving him
the knowledge of these things.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For the fitches are not crushed with a
sharp instrument, and a cart-wheel is not rolled over the cummin; but
the grain of the fitches is hammered out with a stick, and of the cummin
with a rod.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Is the grain for bread crushed? He does
not go on crushing it for ever, but he lets his cart-wheels and his
horses go over it without crushing it.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> This comes from the Lord of armies,
purposing wonders, and wise in all his acts.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Ho! Ariel, Ariel, the town against which
David made war; put year to year, let the feasts come round:

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And I will send trouble on Ariel, and
there will be weeping and cries of grief; and she will be to me as
Ariel.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And I will make war on you like David,
and you will be shut in by earthworks, and I will make towers round you.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And you will be made low, and your voice
will come out of the earth, and your words will be low out of the dust;
and your voice will come out of the earth like that of a spirit, making
bird-like noises out of the dust.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And the army of your attackers will be
like small dust, and all the cruel ones like dry stems gone before the
wind; suddenly it will come about.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> The Lord of armies will come in with
thunder and earth-shaking and great noise, with rushing wind and storm,
and the flame of burning fire.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And all the nations making war on Ariel,
and all those who are fighting against her and shutting her in with
their towers, will be like a dream, like a vision of the night.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And it will be like a man desiring food,
and dreaming that he is feasting; but when he is awake there is nothing
in his mouth: or like a man in need of water, dreaming that he is
drinking; but when he is awake he is feeble and his soul is full of
desire: so will all the nations be which make war on Mount Zion.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Be surprised and full of wonder; let your
eyes be covered and be blind: be overcome, but not with wine; go with
uncertain steps, but not because of strong drink.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> For the Lord has sent on you a spirit
of deep sleep; and by him your eyes, the prophets, are shut, and your
heads, the seers, are covered.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And the vision of all this has become
to you like the words of a book which is shut, which men give to one who
has knowledge of writing, saying, Make clear to us what is in the book:
and he says, I am not able to, for the book is shut:

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And they give it to one without
learning, saying, Make clear to us what is in the book: and he says, I
have no knowledge of writing.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And the Lord said, because this people
come near to me with their mouths, and give honour to me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me, and their fear of me is false, a
rule given them by the teaching of men;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> For this cause I will again do a
strange thing among this people, a thing to be wondered at: and the
wisdom of their wise men will come to nothing, and the sense of their
guides will no longer be seen.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Cursed are those who go deep to keep
their designs secret from the Lord, and whose works are in the dark, and
who say, Who sees us? and who has knowledge of our acts?

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> You are turning things upside down! Is
the wet earth the same to you as the one who is forming it? will the
thing made say of him who made it, He made me not: or the thing formed
say of him who gave it form, He has no knowledge?

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> In a very short time Lebanon will
become a fertile field, and the fertile field will seem like a wood.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And in that day those whose ears are
stopped will be hearing the words of the book; and the eyes of the blind
will see through the mist and the dark.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And the poor will have their joy in the
Lord increased, and those in need will be glad in the Holy One of
Israel.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> For the cruel one has come to nothing;
and those who make sport of the Lord are gone; and those who are
watching to do evil are cut off:

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Who give help to a man in a wrong
cause, and who put a net for the feet of him who gives decisions in the
public place, taking away a man's right without cause.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> For this reason the Lord, the saviour
of Abraham, says about the family of Jacob, Jacob will not now be put to
shame, or his face be clouded with fear.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> But when they, the children of Jacob,
see the work of my hands among them, they will give honour to my name;
yes, they will give honour to the Holy One of Jacob, and go in fear of
the God of Israel.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Those whose hearts were turned away
from him will get knowledge, and those who made an outcry against him
will give attention to his teaching.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Ho! uncontrolled children, says the Lord,
who give effect to a purpose which is not mine, and who make an
agreement, but not by my spirit, increasing their sin:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Who make a move to go down into Egypt,
without authority from me; who are looking to the strength of Pharaoh
for help, and whose hope is in the shade of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And the strength of Pharaoh will be your
shame, and your hope in the shade of Egypt will come to nothing.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> For his chiefs are at Zoan, and his
representatives have come to Hanes.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> For they have all come with offerings to
a people of no use to them, in whom is no help or profit, but only shame
and a bad name.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> The word about the Beasts of the South.
Through the land of trouble and grief, the land of the she-lion and the
voice of the lion, of the snake and the burning winged snake, they take
their wealth on the backs of young asses, and their stores on camels, to
a people in whom is no profit.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> For there is no use or purpose in the
help of Egypt: so I have said about her, She is Rahab, who has come to
an end.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Now go, put it in writing before them on
a board, and make a record of it in a book, so that it may be for the
future, a witness for all time to come.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> For they are an uncontrolled people,
false-hearted, who will not give ear to the teaching of the Lord:

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Who say to the seers, See not; and to
the prophets, Do not give us word of what is true, but say false things
to give us pleasure:

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Get out of the good way, turning from
the right road; do not keep the Holy One of Israel before our minds.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> For this cause the Holy One of Israel
says, Because you will not give ear to this word, and are looking for
help in ways of deceit and evil, and are putting your hope in them:

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> This sin will be to you like a crack in
a high wall, causing its fall suddenly and in a minute.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And he will let it be broken as a
potter's vessel is broken: it will be smashed to bits without mercy; so
that there will not be a bit in which one may take fire from the
fireplace, or water from the spring.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> For the Lord, the Holy One of Israel,
said, In quiet and rest is your salvation: peace and hope are your
strength: but you would not have it so.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Saying, No, for we will go in flight on
horses; so you will certainly go in flight: and, We will go on the backs
of quick-running beasts; so those who go after you will be quick-footed.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> A thousand will go in fear before one;
even before five you will go in flight: till you are like a pillar by
itself on the top of a mountain, and like a flag on a hill.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> For this cause the Lord will be
waiting, so that he may be kind to you; and he will be lifted up, so
that he may have mercy on you; for the Lord is a God of righteousness:
there is a blessing on all whose hope is in him.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> O people, living in Zion, at Jerusalem,
your weeping will be ended; he will certainly have mercy on you at the
sound of your cry; when it comes to his ear, he will give you an answer.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And though the Lord will give you the
bread of trouble and the water of grief, you will no longer put your
teacher on one side, but you will see your teacher:

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And at your back, when you are turning
to the right hand or to the left, a voice will be sounding in your ears,
saying, This is the way in which you are to go.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And you will make unclean what is
covering your pictured images of silver, and the plating of your images
of gold: you will send them away as an unclean thing, saying, Be gone!

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And he will give rain for your seed, so
that you may put it in the earth; and you will have bread from the
produce of the earth, good and more than enough for your needs: in that
day the cattle will get their food in wide grass-lands.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And the oxen and the young asses which
are used for ploughing, will have salted grain which has been made free
from the waste with fork and basket.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And there will be rivers and streams of
water on every tall mountain and on every high hill, in the day when
great numbers are put to the sword, when the towers come down.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And the light of the moon will be as
the light of the sun, and the light of the sun will be seven times
greater, as the light of seven days, in the day when the Lord puts oil
on the wounds of his people, and makes them well from the blows they
have undergone.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> See, the name of the Lord is coming
from far, burning with his wrath, with thick smoke going up: his lips
are full of passion, and his tongue is like a burning fire:

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> And his breath is as an overflowing
stream, coming up even to the neck, shaking the nations for their
destruction, like the shaking of grain in a basket: and he will put a
cord in the mouths of the people, turning them out of their way.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> You will have a song, as in the night
when a holy feast is kept; and you will be glad in heart, as when they
go with music of the pipe to the mountain of the Lord, the Rock of
Israel.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> And the Lord will send out the sound of
his great voice, and they will see his arm stretched out, with the heat
of his wrath, and the flame of a burning fire; with a cloud-burst, and
storm, and a rain of ice.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> For through the voice of the Lord the
Assyrian will be broken, and the Lord's rod will be lifted up against
him.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> And every blow of the rod of his
punishment, which the Lord will send on him, will be with the sound of
music: and with the waving of his sword the Lord will make war against
him.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> For a place of fire has long been
ready; yes, it has been made ready for the king; he has made it deep and
wide: it is massed with fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like
a stream of fire, puts a light to it.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Cursed are those who go down to Egypt for
help, and who put their faith in horses; looking to war-carriages for
salvation, because of their numbers; and to horsemen, because they are
very strong; but they are not looking to the Holy One of Israel, or
turning their hearts to the Lord;

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Though he is wise, and able to send evil,
and his purpose will not be changed; but he will go against the house of
the evil-doers, and against those to whom they are looking for help.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> For the Egyptians are men, and not God;
and their horses are flesh, and not spirit: and when the Lord's hand is
stretched out, the helper and he who is helped will come down together.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> For the Lord has said to me, As a lion,
or a young lion, makes an angry noise over his food, and if a band of
herdsmen come out against him, he will not be in fear of their voices,
or give up his food for their noise: so the Lord of armies will come
down to make war against Mount Zion and its hill.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Like birds with outstretched wings, so
will the Lord of armies be a cover to Jerusalem; he will be a cover and
salvation for it, going over it he will keep it from danger.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Come back to him who has been so deeply
sinned against by the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> For in that day they will all give up
their images of silver and of gold, the sin which they made for
themselves.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Then the Assyrian will come down by the
sword, but not of man; the sword, not of men, will be the cause of his
destruction: and he will go in flight from the sword, and his young men
will be put to forced work.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And his rock will come to nothing because
of fear, and his chiefs will go in flight from the flag, says the Lord,
whose fire is in Zion, and his altar in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> See, a king will be ruling in
righteousness, and chiefs will give right decisions.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And a man will be as a safe place from
the wind, and a cover from the storm; as rivers of water in a dry place,
as the shade of a great rock in a waste land.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And the eyes of those who see will not be
shut, and those who have hearing will give ear to the word.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> The man of sudden impulses will become
wise in heart, and he whose tongue is slow will get the power of talking
clearly.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> The foolish man will no longer be named
noble, and they will not say of the false man that he is a man of
honour.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> For the foolish man will say foolish
things, having evil thoughts in his heart, working what is unclean, and
talking falsely about the Lord, to keep food from him who is in need of
it, and water from him whose soul is desiring it.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> The designs of the false are evil,
purposing the destruction of the poor man by false words, even when he
is in the right.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But the noble-hearted man has noble
purposes, and by these he will be guided.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> Give ear to my voice, you women who are
living in comfort; give attention to my words, you daughters who have no
fear of danger.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> In not much more than a year, you, who
are not looking for evil, will be troubled: for the produce of the
vine-gardens will be cut off, and there will be no getting in of the
grapes.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Be shaking with fear, you women who are
living in comfort; be troubled, you who have no fear of danger: take off
your robes and put on clothing of grief.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Have sorrow for the fields, the
pleasing fields, the fertile vine;

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And for the land of my people, where
thorns will come up; even for all the houses of joy in the glad town.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> For the fair houses will have no man
living in them; the town which was full of noise will become a waste;
the hill and the watchtower will be unpeopled for ever, a joy for the
asses of the woods, a place of food for the flocks;

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Till the spirit comes on us from on
high, and the waste land becomes a fertile field, and the fertile field
is changed into a wood.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> Then in the waste land there will be an
upright rule, and righteousness will have its place in the fertile
field.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And the work of righteousness will be
peace; and the effect of an upright rule will be to take away fear for
ever.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> And my people will be living in peace,
in houses where there is no fear, and in quiet resting-places.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> But the tall trees will come down with
a great fall, and the town will be low in a low place.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Happy are you who are planting seed by
all the waters, and sending out the ox and the ass.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Ho! you who make waste those who did not
make you waste; acting falsely to those who were not false to you. When
you have come to an end of wasting, you will be made waste, and after
your false acts, they will do the same to you.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> O Lord, have mercy on us; for we have
been waiting for your help: be our strength every morning, our salvation
in time of trouble.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> At the loud noise the peoples have gone
in flight; at your coming up the nations have gone in all directions.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And the goods taken in war will be got
together like the massing of young locusts; men will be rushing on them
like the rushing of locusts.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> The Lord is lifted up; his place is on
high: he has made Zion full of righteousness and true religion.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And she will have no more fear of change,
being full of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge: the fear of the Lord is
her wealth.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> See, the men of war are sorrowing outside
the town: those who came looking for peace are weeping bitterly.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> The highways are waste, no man is
journeying there: the agreement is broken, he has made sport of the
towns, he has no thought for man.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> The earth is sorrowing and wasting away;
Lebanon is put to shame and has become waste; Sharon is like the Arabah;
and in Bashan and Carmel the leaves are falling.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Now will I come forward, says the Lord;
now will I be lifted up; now will my power be seen.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Your designs will be without profit,
and their effect will be nothing: you will be burned up by the fire of
my breath.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And the peoples will be like the
burning of chalk: as thorns cut down, which are burned in the fire.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Give ear, you who are far off, to what
I have done: see my power, you who are near.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> The sinners in Zion are full of fear;
the haters of God are shaking with wonder. Who among us may keep his
place before the burning fire? who among us may see the eternal
burnings?

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> He whose ways are true, and whose words
are upright; he who gives no thought to the profits of false acts, whose
hands have not taken rewards, who will have no part in putting men to
death, and whose eyes are shut against evil;

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> He will have a place on high: he will
be safely shut in by the high rocks: his bread will be given to him; his
waters will be certain.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Your eyes will see the king in his
glory: they will be looking on a far-stretching land.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Your heart will give thought to the
cause of your fear: where is the scribe, where is he who made a record
of the payments, where is he by whom the towers were numbered?

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> Never again will you see the cruel
people, a people whose tongue has no sense for you; whose language is
strange to you.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Let your eyes be resting on Zion, the
town of our holy feasts: you will see Jerusalem, a quiet resting-place,
a tent which will not be moved, whose tent-pins will never be pulled up,
and whose cords will never be broken.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> But there the Lord will be with us in
his glory, ... wide rivers and streams; where no boat will go with
blades, and no fair ship will be sailing.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is
our law-giver, the Lord is our king; he will be our saviour.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Your cords have become loose; they were
not able to make strong the support of their sails, the sail was not
stretched out: then the blind will take much property, the feeble-footed
will make division of the goods of war.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And the men of Zion will not say, I am
ill: for its people will have forgiveness for their sin.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Come near, you nations, and give ear;
take note, you peoples: let the earth and everything in it give ear; the
world and all those living in it.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> For the Lord is angry with all the
nations, and his wrath is burning against all their armies: he has put
them to the curse, he has given them to destruction.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Their dead bodies will be thick on the
face of the earth, and their smell will come up, and the mountains will
be flowing with their blood, and all the hills will come to nothing.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And the heavens will be rolled together
like the roll of a book: and all their army will be gone, like a dead
leaf from the vine, or a dry fruit from the fig-tree.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For my sword in heaven is full of wrath:
see, it is coming down on Edom, in punishment on the people of my curse.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> The sword of the Lord is full of blood,
it is fat with the best of the meat, with the blood of lambs and goats,
with the best parts of the sheep: for the Lord has a feast in Bozrah,
and much cattle will be put to death in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And the strong oxen will go down to death
together with the smaller cattle.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> For it is the day of the Lord's
punishment, when he gives payment for the wrongs done to Zion.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And its streams will be turned into
boiling oil, and its dust into burning stone, and all the land will be
on fire.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> It will not be put out day or night;
its smoke will go up for ever: it will be waste from generation to
generation; no one will go through it for ever.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> But the birds of the waste land will
have their place there; it will be a heritage for the bittern and the
raven: and it will be measured out with line and weight as a waste land.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> The jackals will be there, and her
great ones will be gone; they will say, There is no longer a kingdom
there, and all her chiefs will have come to an end.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And thorns will come up in her fair
houses, and waste plants in her strong towers: and foxes will make their
holes there, and it will be a meeting-place for ostriches.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> And the beasts of the waste places will
come together with the jackals, and the evil spirits will be crying to
one another, even the night-spirit will come and make her resting-place
there.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> The arrowsnake will make her hole and
put her eggs there, and get her young together under her shade: there
the hawks will come together by twos.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> See what is recorded in the book of the
Lord: all these will be there, not one without the other: the mouth of
the Lord has given the order, and his spirit has made them come
together.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And he has given them their heritage,
and by his hand it has been measured out to them: it will be theirs for
ever, their resting-place from generation to generation.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> The waste land and the dry places will be
glad; the lowland will have joy and be full of flowers.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> It will be flowering like the rose; it
will be full of delight and songs; the glory of Lebanon will be given to
it; the pride of Carmel and Sharon: they will see the glory of the Lord,
the power of our God.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Make strong the feeble hands, give
support to the shaking knees.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Say to those who are full of fear, Be
strong and take heart: see, your God will give punishment; the reward of
God will come; he himself will come to be your saviour.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Then the eyes of the blind will see, and
the ears which are stopped will be open.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> Then will the feeble-footed be jumping
like a roe, and the voice which was stopped will be loud in song: for in
the waste land streams will be bursting out, and waters in the dry
places.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And the burning sand will become a pool,
and the dry earth springs of waters: the fields where the sheep take
their food will become wet land, and water-plants will take the place of
grass.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And a highway will be there; its name
will be, The Holy Way; the unclean and the sinner may not go over it,
and those who go on it will not be turned out of the way by the foolish.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> No lion will be there, or any cruel
beast; they will not be seen there; but those for whom the Lord has
given a price,

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Even those whom he has made free, will
come back again; they will come with songs to Zion; on their heads will
be eternal joy; delight and joy will be theirs, and sorrow and sounds of
grief will be gone for ever.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And it came about in the fourteenth year
of King Hezekiah that Sennacherib, king of Assyria, came up against all
the walled towns of Judah and took them.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And the king of Assyria sent the
Rab-shakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem to King Hezekiah with a strong
force, and he took up his position by the stream of the higher pool, by
the highway of the washerman's

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And there came out to him Eliakim, the
son of Hilkiah, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah,
the son of Asaph, the recorder.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And the Rab-shakeh said to them, Say now
to Hezekiah, These are the words of the great king, the king of Assyria:
In what are you placing your hope?

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> You say you have a design and strength
for war, but these are only words: now to whom are you looking for
support, that you have gone against my authority?

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> See, you are basing your hope on that
broken rod of Egypt, which will go into a man's hand if he makes use of
it for a support; for so is Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all who put their
faith in him.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> And if you say to me, Our hope is in the
Lord our God; is it not he whose high places and altars Hezekiah has
taken away, saying to Judah and Jerusalem that worship may only be given
before this altar?

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And now, take a chance with my master,
the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses, if you are
able to put horsemen on them.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> How then may you put to shame the least
of my master's servants? and you have put your hope in Egypt for
war-carriages and horsemen:

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And have I now come to send destruction
on this land without the Lord's authority? It was the Lord himself who
said to me, Go up against this land and make it waste.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> Then Eliakim and Shebna and Joah said
to the Rab-shakeh, Please make use of the Aramaean language in talking
to your servants, for we are used to it, and do not make use of the
Jews' language in the hearing of the people on the wall.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> But the Rab-shakeh said, Is it to your
master or to you that my master has sent me to say these words? has he
not sent me to the men seated on the wall? for they are the people who
will be short of food with you when the town is shut in.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Then the Rab-shakeh got up and said
with a loud voice in the Jews' language, Give ear to the words of the
great king, the king of Assyria:

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> This is what the king says: Do not be
tricked by Hezekiah, for there is no salvation for you in him.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> And do not let Hezekiah make you put
your faith in the Lord, saying, The Lord will certainly keep us safe,
and this town will not be given into the hands of the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Do not give ear to Hezekiah, for this
is what the king of Assyria says, Make peace with me, and come out to
me; and everyone will be free to take the fruit of his vine and of his
fig-tree, and the water of his spring;

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Till I come and take you away to a land
like yours, a land of grain and wine, a land of bread and vine-gardens.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Give no attention to Hezekiah when he
says to you, The Lord will keep us safe. Has any one of the gods of the
nations kept his land from falling into the hands of the king of
Assyria?

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Where are the gods of Hamath and of
Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? where are the gods of Samaria?
and have they kept Samaria out of my hand?

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Who among all the gods of these
countries have kept their country from falling into my hand, to give
cause for the thought that the Lord will keep Jerusalem from falling
into my hand?

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> But they kept quiet and gave him no
answer: for the king's order was, Give him no answer.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Then Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, who
was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph,
the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothing parted as a sign of
grief, and gave him an account of what the Rab-shakeh had said.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And on hearing it Hezekiah took off his
robe and put on haircloth and went into the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he sent Eliakim, who was over the
house, and Shebna the scribe, and the chief priests, dressed in
haircloth, to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And they said to him, Hezekiah says, This
day is a day of trouble and punishment and shame: for the children are
ready to come to birth, but there is no strength to give birth to them.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> It may be that the Lord your God will
give ear to the words of the Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria, his
master, has sent to say evil things against the living God, and will
make his words come to nothing: so make your prayer for the rest of the
people.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> So the servants of King Hezekiah came to
Isaiah.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And Isaiah said to them, This is what you
are to say to your master: The Lord says, Be not troubled by the words
which the servants of the king of Assyria have said against me in your
hearing.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> See, I will put a spirit into him, and
bad news will come to his ears, and he will go back to his land; and
there I will have him put to death.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> So the Rab-shakeh went back, and when he
got there the king of Assyria was making war against Libnah: for it had
come to his ears that the king of Assyria had gone away from Lachish.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And when news came to him that Tirhakah,
king of Ethiopia, had made an attack on him, ... And he sent
representatives to Hezekiah, king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> This is what you are to say to
Hezekiah, king of Judah: Let not your God, in whom is your faith, give
you a false hope, saying, Jerusalem will not be given into the hands of
the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> No doubt the story has come to your
ears of what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, putting them
to the curse: and will you be kept safe from their fate?

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Did the gods of the nations keep safe
those on whom my fathers sent destruction, Gozan and Haran and Rezeph,
and the children of Eden who were in Telassar?

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Where is the king of Hamath, and the
king of Arpad, and the king of the town of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and
Ivva?

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And Hezekiah took the letter from the
hands of those who had come with it; and after reading it, Hezekiah went
up to the house of the Lord, opening the letter there before the Lord,

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And he made prayer to the Lord, saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> O Lord of armies, the God of Israel,
seated between the winged ones, you only are the God of all the kingdoms
of the earth; you have made heaven and earth.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Let your ear be turned to us, O Lord;
let your eyes be open, O Lord, and see: take note of all the words of
Sennacherib who has sent men to say evil against the living God.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Truly, O Lord, the kings of Assyria
have made waste all the nations and their lands,

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> And have given their gods to the fire:
for they were no gods, but wood and stone, the work of men's hands; so
they have given them to destruction.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> But now, O Lord our God, give us
salvation from his hand, so that it may be clear to all the kingdoms of
the earth that you, and you only, are the Lord.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> Then Isaiah, the son of Amoz, sent to
Hezekiah, saying, The Lord, the God of Israel, says, The prayer you have
made to me against Sennacherib, king of Assyria, has come to my ears.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> This is the word which the Lord has
said about him: In the eyes of the virgin daughter of Zion you are
shamed and laughed at; the daughter of Jerusalem has made sport of you.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> Against whom have you said evil and
bitter things? and against whom has your voice been loud and your eyes
lifted up? even against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> You have sent your servants with evil
words against the Lord, and have said, With all my war-carriages I have
come up to the top of the mountains, to the inmost parts of Lebanon; and
its tall cedars will be cut down, and the best trees of its woods: I
will come up into his highest places, into his thick woods.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> I have made water-holes and taken their
waters, and with my foot I have made all the rivers of Egypt dry.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> Has it not come to your ears how I did
it long before, purposing it in times long past? Now I have given effect
to my design, so that by you strong towns might be turned into masses of
broken walls.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> This is why their townsmen had no
power, they were broken and put to shame; they were like the grass of
the field, or a green plant; like the grass on the house-tops, which a
cold wind makes waste.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> But I have knowledge of your getting up
and your resting, of your going out and your coming in.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> Because your wrath against me and your
pride have come to my ears, I will put my hook in your nose and my cord
in your lips, and I will make you go back by the way you came.

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> And this will be the sign to you: you
will get your food this year from what comes up of itself, and in the
second year from the produce of the same; and in the third year you will
put in your seed, and get in the grain, and make vine-gardens, and take
of their fruit.

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> And those of Judah who are still living
will again take root in the earth, and give fruit.

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> For from Jerusalem those who have been
kept safe will go out, and those who are still living will go out of
Mount Zion: by the fixed purpose of the Lord of armies this will be
done.

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> For this cause the Lord says about the
king of Assyria, He will not come into this town, or send an arrow
against it; he will not come before it with arms, or put up an earthwork
against it.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> By the way he came he will go back, and
he will not get into this town.

<span id="an_37:35">37:35</span> For I will keep this town safe, for my
honour, and for the honour of my servant David.

<span id="an_37:36">37:36</span> And the angel of the Lord went out and
put to death in the army of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five
thousand men: and when the people got up early in the morning, there was
nothing to be seen but dead bodies.

<span id="an_37:37">37:37</span> Sennacherib, king of Assyria, went back
to his place at Nineveh.

<span id="an_37:38">37:38</span> And it came about, when he was
worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that his sons Adrammelech
and Sharezer put him to death with the sword, and they went in flight
into the land of Ararat. And Esar-haddon, his son, became king in his
place.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> In those days Hezekiah was ill and near
death. And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him, and said to
him, The Lord says, Put your house in order; for your death is near.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And Hezekiah, turning his face to the
wall, made his prayer to the Lord, saying,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> O Lord, keep in mind how I have been true
to you with all my heart, and have done what is good in your eyes. And
Hezekiah gave way to bitter weeping.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Then the word of the Lord came to Isaiah,
saying,

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Go to Hezekiah, and say, The Lord, the
God of David, your father, says, Your prayer has come to my ears, and I
have seen your weeping: see, I will give you fifteen more years of life.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And I will keep you and this town safe
from the hands of the king of Assyria: and I will keep watch over this
town.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And Isaiah said, This is the sign the
Lord will give you, that he will do what he has said:

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> See, I will make the shade which has gone
down on the steps of Ahaz with the sun, go back ten steps. So the shade
went back the ten steps by which it had gone down.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> The writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah,
after he had been ill, and had got better from his disease.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> I said, In the quiet of my days I am
going down into the underworld: the rest of my years are being taken
away from me.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> I said, I will not see the Lord, even
the Lord in the land of the living: I will not see man again or those
living in the world.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> My resting-place is pulled up and taken
away from me like a herdsman's tent: my life is rolled up like a
linen-worker's thread; I am cut off from the cloth on the frame: from
day even to night you give me up to pain.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> I am crying out with pain till the
morning; it is as if a lion was crushing all my bones.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> I make cries like a bird; I give out
sounds of grief like a dove: my eyes are looking up with desire; O Lord,
I am crushed, take up my cause.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> What am I to say? seeing that it is he
who has done it: all my time of sleeping I am turning from side to side
without rest.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> O Lord, for this cause I am waiting for
you, give rest to my spirit: make me well again, and let me come back to
life.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> See, in place of peace my soul had
bitter sorrow. but you have kept back my soul from the underworld; for
you have put all my sins out of your memory.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> For the underworld is not able to give
you praise, death gives you no honour: for those who go down into the
underworld there is no hope in your mercy.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> The living, the living man, he will
give you praise, as I do this day: the father will give the story of
your mercy to his children.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> O Lord, quickly be my saviour; so we
will make my songs to corded instruments all the days of our lives in
the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> And Isaiah said, Let them take a cake
of figs, and put it on the diseased place, and he will get well.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And Hezekiah said, What is the sign
that I will go up to the house of the Lord?

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> At that time Merodach-baladan, the son of
Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters with an offering to Hezekiah,
because he had news that Hezekiah had been ill, and was well again.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And Hezekiah was glad at their coming,
and let them see all his store of wealth, the silver and the gold and
the spices and the oil, and all the house of his arms, and everything
there was in his stores: there was nothing in all his house or his
kingdom which he did not let them see.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> Then Isaiah the prophet came to King
Hezekiah, and said to him, What did these men say, and where did they
come from? And Hezekiah said, They came from a far country, even from
Babylon.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And he said, What have they seen in your
house? And Hezekiah said in answer, They saw everything in my house:
there is nothing among my stores which I did not let them see.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Give ear to
the word of the Lord of armies:

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Truly, the days are coming when
everything in your house, and whatever your fathers have put in store
till this day, will be taken away to Babylon: all will be gone.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And your sons, even your offspring, will
they take away to be unsexed servants in the house of the king of
Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the
word of the Lord which you have said. And he said in his heart, There
will be peace and quiet in my days.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> Give comfort, give comfort, to my people,
says your God.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Say kind words to the heart of Jerusalem,
crying out to her that her time of trouble is ended, that her punishment
is complete; that she has been rewarded by the Lord's hand twice over
for all her sins.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> A voice of one crying, Make ready in the
waste land the way of the Lord, make level in the lowland a highway for
our God.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Let every valley be lifted up, and every
mountain and hill be made low, and let the rough places become level,
and the hilltops become a valley,

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And the glory of the Lord will be made
clear, and all flesh will see it together, for the mouth of the Lord has
said it.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> A voice of one saying, Give a cry! And I
said, What is my cry to be? All flesh is grass, and all its strength
like the flower of the field.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> The grass becomes dry, the flower is
dead; because the breath of the Lord goes over it: truly the people is
grass.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> The grass is dry, the flower is dead; but
the word of our God is eternal.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> You who give good news to Zion, get up
into the high mountain; you who give good news to Jerusalem, let your
voice be strong; let it be sounding without fear; say to the towns of
Judah, See, your God!

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> See, the Lord God will come as a strong
one, ruling in power: see, those made free by him are with him, and
those whom he has made safe go before him.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> He will give food to his flock like a
keeper of sheep; with his arm he will get it together, and will take up
the lambs on his breast, gently guiding those which are with young.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> In the hollow of whose hand have the
waters been measured? and who is able to take the heavens in his
stretched-out fingers? who has got together the dust of the earth in a
measure? who has taken the weight of the mountains, or put the hills
into the scales?

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> By whom has the spirit of the Lord been
guided, or who has been his teacher?

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> Who gave him suggestions, and made
clear to him the right way? who gave him knowledge, guiding him in the
way of wisdom?

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> See, the nations are to him like a drop
hanging from a bucket, and like the small dust in the scales: he takes
up the islands like small dust.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Lebanon is not enough to make a
fire with, or all its cattle enough for a burned offering.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> All the nations are as nothing before
him; even less than nothing, a thing of no value.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> Whom then is God like, in your opinion?
or what will you put forward as a comparison with him?

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> The workman makes an image, and the
gold-worker puts gold plates over it, and makes silver bands for it.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> The wise workman makes selection of the
mulberry-tree of the offering, a wood which will not become soft; so
that the image may be fixed to it and not be moved.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> Have you no knowledge of it? has it not
come to your ears? has not news of it been given to you from the first?
has it not been clear to you from the time when the earth was placed on
its base?

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> It is he who is seated over the arch of
the earth, and the people in it are as small as locusts; by him the
heavens are stretched out like an arch, and made ready like a tent for a
living-place.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> He makes rulers come to nothing; the
judges of the earth are of no value.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> They have only now been planted, and
their seed put into the earth, and they have only now taken root, when
he sends out his breath over them and they become dry, and the
storm-wind takes them away like dry grass.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> Who then seems to you to be my equal?
says the Holy One.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> Let your eyes be lifted up on high, and
see: who has made these? He who sends out their numbered army: who has
knowledge of all their names: by whose great strength, because he is
strong in power, all of them are in their places.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> Why do you say, O Jacob, such words as
these, O Israel, The Lord's eyes are not on my way, and my God gives no
attention to my cause?

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Have you no knowledge of it? has it not
come to your ears? The eternal God, the Lord, the Maker of the ends of
the earth, is never feeble or tired; there is no searching out of his
wisdom.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> He gives power to the feeble,
increasing the strength of him who has no force.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> Even the young men will become feeble
and tired, and the best of them will come to the end of his strength;

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> But those who are waiting for the Lord
will have new strength; they will get wings like eagles: running, they
will not be tired, and walking, they will have no weariness.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Come quietly before me, O sea-lands, and
let the peoples get together their strength: let them come near; then
let them say what they have to say: let us put forward our cause against
one another.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Who sent out from the east one who is
right wherever he goes? he gives the nations into his hands, and makes
him ruler over kings; he gives them as the dust to his sword, as dry
stems before the wind to his bow.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> He goes after them safely, not touching
the road with his feet.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Whose purpose and work was it? His who
sent out the generations from the start. I the Lord, the first, and with
the last, I am he.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> The sea-lands saw it, and were in fear;
the ends of the earth were shaking: they came near.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> They gave help everyone to his neighbour;
and everyone said to his brother, Take heart!

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> So the metal-worker put heart into the
gold-worker, and he who was hammering the metal smooth said kind words
to the iron-worker, saying of the plate, It is ready: and he put it
together with nails, so that there might be no slipping.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> But as for you, Israel, my servant, and
you, Jacob, whom I have taken for myself, the seed of Abraham my friend:

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> You whom I have taken from the ends of
the earth, and sent for from its farthest parts, saying to you, You are
my servant, whom I have taken for myself, and whom I have not given up:

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Have no fear, for I am with you; do not
be looking about in trouble, for I am your God; I will give you
strength, yes, I will be your helper; yes, my true right hand will be
your support.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Truly, all those who are angry with you
will be made low and put to shame: those desiring to do you wrong will
come to nothing and never again be seen.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> You will make search for your haters
but they will not be there; those who make war against you will be as
nothing and will come to destruction.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> For I, the Lord your God, have taken
your right hand in mine, saying to you, Have no fear; I will be your
helper.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Have no fear, you worm Jacob, and you
men of Israel; I will be your helper, says the Lord, even he who takes
up your cause, the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> See, I will make you like a new
grain-crushing instrument with teeth, crushing the mountains small, and
making the hills like dry stems.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> You will send the wind over them, and
it will take them away; they will go in all directions before the
storm-wind: you will have joy in the Lord, and be glad in the Holy One
of Israel.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> The poor and crushed are looking for
water where no water is, and their tongue is dry for need of it: I the
Lord will give ear to their prayer, I the God of Israel will not give
them up.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> I will make rivers on the dry
mountain-tops, and fountains in the valleys: I will make the waste land
a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> I will put in the waste land the cedar,
the acacia, the myrtle, and the olive-tree; and in the lowland will be
planted the fir-tree, the plane, and the cypress together:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> So that they may see and be wise and
give their mind to it, and that it may be clear to them all that the
hand of the Lord has done this, and that the Holy One of Israel has made
it.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> Put forward your cause, says the Lord;
let your strong argument come out, says the King of Jacob.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> Let the future be made clear to us:
give us news of the past things, so that we may give thought to them; or
of the things to come, so that we may see if they are true.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> Give us word of what will be after
this, so that we may be certain that you are gods: yes, do good or do
evil, so that we may all see it and be surprised.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> But you are nothing, and your work is
of no value: foolish is he who takes you for his gods.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> I have sent for one from the north, and
from the dawn he has come; in my name he will get rulers together and go
against them; they will be like dust, even as the wet earth is stamped
on by the feet of the potter.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> Who has given knowledge of it from the
first, so that we may be certain of it? and from the start, so that we
may say, His word is true? There is no one who gives news, or says
anything, or who gives ear to your words.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> I was the first to give word of it to
Zion, and I gave the good news to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> And I saw that there was no man, even
no wise man among them, who might give an answer to my questions.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Truly they are all nothing, their works
are nothing and of no value: their metal images are of no more use than
wind.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> See my servant, whom I am supporting, my
loved one, in whom I take delight: I have put my spirit on him; he will
give the knowledge of the true God to the nations.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> He will make no cry, his voice will not
be loud: his words will not come to men's ears in the streets.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> He will not let a crushed stem be quite
broken, and he will not let a feebly burning light be put out: he will
go on sending out the true word to the peoples.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> His light will not be put out, and he
will not be crushed, till he has given the knowledge of the true God to
the earth, and the sea-lands will be waiting for his teaching.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> God the Lord, even he who made the
heavens, measuring them out on high; stretching out the earth, and
giving its produce; he who gives breath to the people on it, and life to
those who go about on it, says:

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> I the Lord have made you the vessel of my
purpose, I have taken you by the hand, and kept you safe, and I have
given you to be an agreement to the people, and a light to the nations:

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> To give eyes to the blind, to make free
the prisoners from the prison, to let out those who are shut up in the
dark.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> I am the Lord; that is my name: I will
not give my glory to another, or my praise to pictured images.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> See, the things said before have come
about, and now I give word of new things: before they come I give you
news of them.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> Make a new song to the Lord, and let
his praise be sounded from the end of the earth; you who go down to the
sea, and everything in it, the sea-lands and their people.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Let the waste land and its flocks be
glad, the tent-circles of Kedar; let the people of the rock give a glad
cry, from the top of the mountains let them make a sound of joy.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> Let them give glory to the Lord,
sounding his praise in the sea-lands.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> The Lord will go out as a man of war,
he will be moved to wrath like a fighting-man: his voice will be strong,
he will give a loud cry; he will go against his attackers like a man of
war.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> I have long been quiet, I have kept
myself in and done nothing: now I will make sounds of pain like a woman
in childbirth, breathing hard and quickly.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> I will make waste mountains and hills,
drying up all their plants; and I will make rivers dry, and pools dry
land.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And I will take the blind by a way of
which they had no knowledge, guiding them by roads strange to them: I
will make the dark places light before them, and the rough places level.
These things will I do and will not give them up.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> They will be turned back and be greatly
shamed who put their hope in pictured images, who say to metal images,
You are our gods.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> Give ear, you whose ears are shut; and
let your eyes be open, you blind, so that you may see.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> Who is blind, but my servant? who has
his ears stopped, but he whom I send? who is blind as my true one, or
who has his ears shut like the Lord's servant?

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> Seeing much, but keeping nothing in
mind; his ears are open, but there is no hearing.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> It was the Lord's pleasure, because of
his righteousness, to make the teaching great and give it honour.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> But this is a people whose property has
been taken away from them by force; they are all taken in holes, and
shut up in prisons: they are made prisoners, and no one makes them free;
they are taken by force and no one says, Give them back.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> Who is there among you who will give
ear to this? who will give attention to it for the time to come?

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> Who gave up Jacob to those who took
away his goods, and Israel to his attackers? Did not the Lord? he
against whom they did wrong, and in whose ways they would not go,
turning away from his teaching.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> For this reason he let loose on him the
heat of his wrath, and his strength was like a flame; and it put fire
round about him, but he did not see it; he was burned, but did not take
it to heart.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> But now, says the Lord your Maker, O
Jacob, and your life-giver, O Israel: have no fear, for I have taken up
your cause; naming you by your name, I have made you mine.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> When you go through the waters, I will be
with you; and through the rivers, they will not go over you: when you go
through the fire, you will not be burned; and the flame will have no
power over you.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> For I am the Lord your God, the Holy One
of Israel, your saviour; I have given Egypt as a price for you, Ethiopia
and Seba for you.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> Because of your value in my eyes, you
have been honoured, and loved by me; so I will give men for you, and
peoples for your life.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> Have no fear, for I am with you: I will
take your seed from the east, and get you together from the west;

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> I will say to the north, Give them up;
and to the south, Do not keep them back; send back my sons from far, and
my daughters from the end of the earth;

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> Every one who is named by my name, and
whom I have made for my glory, who has been formed and designed by me.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> Send out the blind people who have eyes,
and those who have ears, but they are shut.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Let all the nations come together, and
let the peoples be present: who among them is able to make this clear,
and give us word of earlier things? let their witnesses come forward, so
that they may be seen to be true, and that they may give ear, and say,
It is true.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> You are my witnesses, says the Lord,
and my servant whom I have taken for myself: so that you may see and
have faith in me, and that it may be clear to you that I am he; before
me there was no God formed, and there will not be after me.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> I, even I, am the Lord; and there is no
saviour but me.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> I gave the word, and made it clear, and
there was no strange god among you: for this reason you are my
witnesses, says the Lord.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> From time long past I am God, and from
this day I am he: there is no one who is able to take you out of my
hand: when I undertake a thing, by whom will my purpose be changed?

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> The Lord, who has taken up your cause,
the Holy One of Israel, says, Because of you I have sent to Babylon, and
made all their seers come south, and the Chaldaeans whose cry is in the
ships.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> I am the Lord, your Holy One, the Maker
of Israel, your King.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> This is the word of the Lord, who makes
a way in the sea, and a road through the deep waters;

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> Who sends out the war-carriages and the
horses, the army with all its force; they have come down, they will not
get up again; like a feebly burning light they are put out.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> Give no thought to the things which are
past; let the early times go out of your minds.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> See, I am doing a new thing; now it is
starting; will you not take note of it? I will even make a way in the
waste land, and rivers in the dry country.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> The beasts of the field will give me
honour, the jackals and the ostriches: because I send out waters in the
waste land, and rivers in the dry country, to give drink to the people
whom I have taken for myself:

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> Even the people whom I made to be the
witnesses of my praise.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> But you have made no prayer to me, O
Jacob: and you have given no thought to me, O Israel.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> You have not made me burned offerings
of sheep, or given me honour with your offerings of beasts; I did not
make you servants to give me an offering, and I did not make you tired
with requests for perfumes.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> You have not got me sweet-smelling
plants with your money, or given me pleasure with the fat of your
offerings: but you have made me a servant to your sins, and you have
made me tired with your evil doings.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> I, even I, am he who takes away your
sins; and I will no longer keep your evil doings in mind.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Put me in mind of this; let us take up
the cause between us: put forward your cause, so that you may be seen to
be in the right.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> Your first father was a sinner, and
your guides have gone against my word.

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> Your chiefs have made my holy place
unclean, so I have made Jacob a curse, and Israel a thing of shame.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> And now, give ear, O Jacob my servant,
and Israel whom I have taken for myself:

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> The Lord who made you, forming you in
your mother's body, the Lord, your helper, says, Have no fear, O Jacob
my servant, and you, Jeshurun, whom I have taken for myself.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> For I will send water on the land needing
it, and streams on the dry earth: I will let my spirit come down on your
seed, and my blessing on your offspring.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And they will come up like grass in a
well-watered field, like water-plants by the streams.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> One will say, I am the Lord's; and
another will give himself the name, Jacob; another will put a mark on
his hand, I am the Lord's, and another will take the name of Israel for
himself.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> The Lord, the King of Israel, even the
Lord of armies who has taken up his cause, says, I am the first and the
last, and there is no God but me.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> If there is one like me, let him come
forward and say it, let him make it clear and put it in order before me:
who has made clear in the past the things to come? let him make clear
the future to me.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> Have no fear, be strong in heart; have I
not made it clear to you in the past, and let you see it? and you are my
witnesses. Is there any God but me, or a Rock of whom I have no
knowledge?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Those who make a pictured image are all
of them as nothing, and the things of their desire will be of no profit
to them: and their servants see not, and have no knowledge; so they will
be put to shame.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> Whoever makes a god, makes nothing but
a metal image in which there is no profit.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Truly, all those who make use of secret
arts will be put to shame, and their words of power are only words of
men: let them all come forward together; they will all be in fear and be
put to shame.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> The iron-worker is heating the metal in
the fire, giving it form with his hammers, and working on it with his
strong arm: then for need of food his strength gives way, and for need
of water he becomes feeble.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> The woodworker is measuring out the
wood with his line, marking it out with his pencil: after smoothing it
with his plane, and making circles on it with his instrument, he gives
it the form and glory of a man, so that it may be placed in the house.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> He has cedars cut down for himself, he
takes an oak and lets it get strong among the trees of the wood; he has
an ash-tree planted, and the rain gives it growth.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> Then it will be used to make a fire, so
that a man may get warm; he has the oven heated with it and makes bread:
he makes a god with it, to which he gives worship: he makes a pictured
image out of it, and goes down on his face before it.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> With part of it he makes a fire, and on
the fire he gets meat cooked and takes a full meal: he makes himself
warm, and says, Aha! I am warm, I have seen the fire:

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And the rest of it he makes into a god,
even his pictured image: he goes down on his face before it, giving
worship to it, and making prayer to it, saying, Be my saviour; for you
are my god.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They have no knowledge or wisdom; for
he has put a veil over their eyes, so that they may not see; and on
their hearts, so that they may not give attention.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And no one takes note, no one has
enough knowledge or wisdom to say, I have put part of it in the fire,
and made bread on it; I have had a meal of the flesh cooked with it: and
am I now to make the rest of it into a false god? am I to go down on my
face before a bit of wood?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> As for him whose food is the dust of a
dead fire, he has been turned from the way by a twisted mind, so that he
is unable to keep himself safe by saying, What I have here in my hand is
false.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Keep these things in mind, O Jacob; and
you Israel, for you are my servant: I have made you; you are my servant;
O Israel, I will not let you go out of my memory.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> I have put your evil doings out of my
mind like a thick cloud, and your sins like a mist: come back to me; for
I have taken up your cause.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> Make a song, O heavens, for the Lord
has done it: give a loud cry, you deep parts of the earth: let your
voices be loud in song, you mountains, and you woods with all your
trees: for the Lord has taken up the cause of Jacob, and will let his
glory be seen in Israel.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> The Lord, who has taken up your cause,
and who gave you life in your mother's body, says, I am the Lord who
makes all things; stretching out the heavens by myself, and giving the
earth its limits; who was with me?

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> Who makes the signs of those who give
word of the future come to nothing, so that those who have knowledge of
secret arts go off their heads; turning the wise men back, and making
their knowledge foolish:

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> Who makes the word of his servants
certain, and gives effect to the purposes of his representatives; who
says of Jerusalem, Her people will come back to her; and of the towns of
Judah, I will give orders for their building, and will make her waste
places fertile again:

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> Who says to the deep, Be dry, and I
will make your rivers dry:

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> Who says of Cyrus, He will take care of
my sheep, and will do all my pleasure: who says of Jerusalem, I will
give the word for your building; and of the Temple, Your bases will be
put in place.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> The Lord says to the man of his
selection, to Cyrus, whom I have taken by the right hand, putting down
nations before him, and taking away the arms of kings; making the doors
open before him, so that the ways into the towns may not be shut;

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> I will go before you, and make the rough
places level: the doors of brass will be broken, and the iron rods cut
in two:

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And I will give you the stores of the
dark, and the wealth of secret places, so that you may be certain that I
am the Lord, who gave you your name, even the God of Israel.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> Because of Jacob my servant, and Israel
whom I have taken for myself, I have sent for you by name, giving you a
name of honour, though you had no knowledge of me.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> I am the Lord, and there is no other;
there is no God but me: I will make you ready for war, though you had no
knowledge of me:

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> So that they may see from the east and
from the west that there is no God but me: I am the Lord, and there is
no other.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> I am the giver of light and the maker of
the dark; causing blessing, and sending troubles; I am the Lord, who
does all these things.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> Let righteousness come down, O heavens,
from on high, and let the sky send it down like rain: let the earth be
open to give the fruit of salvation, causing righteousness to come up
with it; I the Lord have made it come about.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Cursed is he who has an argument with his
Maker, the pot which has an argument with the Potter! Will the wet earth
say to him who is working with it, What are you doing, that your work
has nothing by which it may be gripped?

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Cursed is he who says to a father, To
what are you giving life? or to a woman, What are you in birth-pains
with?

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> The Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and
his Maker, says, Will you put a question to me about the things which
are to come, or will you give me orders about my sons, and the work of
my hands?

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> I have made the earth, forming man on
it: by my hands the heavens have been stretched out, and all the stars
put in their ordered places.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> I have sent him out to overcome the
nations, and I will make all his ways straight: I will give him the work
of building my town, and he will let my prisoners go free, without price
or reward, says the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> The Lord says, The workmen of Egypt,
and the traders of Ethiopia, and the tall Sabaeans, will come over the
sea to you, and they will be yours; they will go after you; in chains
they will come over: and they will go down on their faces before you,
and will make prayer to you, saying, Truly, God is among you; and there
is no other God.

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> Truly, you have a secret God, the God
of Israel is a Saviour!

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> All those who have gone against him
will be put to shame; the makers of images will be made low.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> But the Lord will make Israel free with
an eternal salvation: you will not be put to shame or made low for ever
and ever.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> For this is the word of the Lord who
made the heavens; he is God; the maker and designer of the earth; who
made it not to be a waste, but as a living-place for man: I am the Lord,
and there is no other.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> I have not given my word in secret, in
a place in the underworld; I did not say to the seed of Jacob, Go into a
waste land to make request of me: I the Lord say what is true, my word
is righteousness.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> Come together, even come near, you
nations who are still living: they have no knowledge who take up their
image of wood, and make prayer to a god in whom is no salvation.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> Give the word, put forward your cause,
let us have a discussion together: who has given news of this in the
past? who made it clear in early times? did not I, the Lord? and there
is no God but me; a true God and a saviour; there is no other.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> Let your hearts be turned to me, so
that you may have salvation, all the ends of the earth: for I am God,
and there is no other.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> By myself have I taken an oath, a true
word has gone from my mouth, and will not be changed, that to me every
knee will be bent, and every tongue will give honour.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> Only in the Lord will Jacob overcome
and be strong: together all those who were angry with him will be put to
shame and come to destruction.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In the Lord will all the seed of Israel
get their rights, and they will give glory to him.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Bel is bent down, Nebo is falling; their
images are on the beasts and on the cattle: the things which you took
about have become a weight to the tired beast.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> They are bent down, they are falling
together: they were not able to keep their images safe, but they
themselves have been taken prisoner.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Give ear to me, O family of Jacob, and
all the rest of the people of Israel, who have been supported by me from
their birth, and have been my care from their earliest days:

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Even when you are old I will be the same,
and when you are grey-haired I will take care of you: I will still be
responsible for what I made; yes, I will take you and keep you safe.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> Who in your eyes is my equal? or what
comparison will you make with me?

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> As for those who take gold out of a bag,
and put silver in the scales, they give payment to a gold-worker, to
make it into a god; they go down on their faces and give it worship.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> They put him on their backs, and take him
up, and put him in his fixed place, from which he may not be moved; if a
man gives a cry for help to him, he is unable to give an answer, or get
him out of his trouble.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> Keep this in mind and be shamed; let it
come back to your memory, you sinners.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Let the things which are past come to
your memory: for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is
no one like me;

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> Making clear from the first what is to
come, and from past times the things which have not so far come about;
saying, My purpose is fixed, and I will do all my pleasure;

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> Sending for a bird of strong flight
from the east, the man of my purpose from a far country; I have said it,
and I will give effect to it; the thing designed by me will certainly be
done.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> Give ear to me, you feeble-hearted, who
have no faith in my righteousness:

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> My righteousness is near, it is not far
off; salvation will come quickly; and I will make Zion free, and give
Israel my glory.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> Come and take your seat in the dust, O
virgin daughter of Babylon; come down from your seat of power, and take
your place on the earth, O daughter of the Chaldaeans: for you will
never again seem soft and delicate.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Take the crushing-stones and get the meal
crushed: take off your veil, put away your robe, let your legs be
uncovered, go through the rivers.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> The shame of your unclothed condition
will be seen by all: I will give punishment without mercy,

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Says the Lord who takes up our cause; the
Lord of armies is his name, the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Be seated in the dark without a word, O
daughter of the Chaldaeans: for you will no longer be named, The Queen
of Kingdoms.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> I was angry with my people, I put shame
on my heritage, and gave them into your hands: you had no mercy on them;
you put a cruel yoke on those who were old;

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> And you said, I will be a queen for ever:
you did not give attention to these things, and did not keep in mind
what would come after.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> So now take note of this, you who are
given up to pleasure, living without fear of evil, saying in your heart,
I am, and there is no one like me; I will never be a widow, or have my
children taken from me.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> But these two things will come on you
suddenly in one day, the loss of children and of husband: in full
measure they will come on you, for all your secret arts, and all your
wonders.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> For you had faith in your evil-doing;
you said, No one sees me; by your wisdom and knowledge you have been
turned out of the way: and you have said in your heart, I am, and there
is no other.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> Because of this evil will come on you,
which may not be turned away for any price: and trouble will overtake
you, from which no money will give salvation: destruction will come on
you suddenly, without your knowledge.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> Go on now with your secret arts, and
all your wonder-working, to which you have given yourself up from your
earliest days; it may be that they will be of profit to you, or by them
you may put fear into your attackers.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> But your mind is troubled by the number
of your guides: let them now come forward for your salvation: the
measurers of the heavens, the watchers of the stars, and those who are
able to say from month to month what things are coming on you.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> Truly, they have become like dry stems,
they have been burned in the fire; they are not able to keep themselves
safe from the power of the flame: it is not a coal for warming them, or
a fire by which a man may be seated.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> Small profit have you had from those
who, from your earliest days, got great profit out of you; they have
gone in flight, every one straight before him, and you have no saviour.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Give ear to this, O family of Jacob, you
who are named by the name of Israel, and have come out of the body of
Judah; who take oaths by the name of the Lord, and make use of the name
of the God of Israel, but not truly and not in good faith.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> For they say that they are of the holy
town, and put their faith in the God of Israel: the Lord of armies is
his name.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> I gave word in the past of the things
which came about; they came from my mouth, and I made them clear:
suddenly I did them, and they came about.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Because I saw that your heart was hard,
and that your neck was an iron cord, and your brow brass;

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> For this reason I made it clear to you in
the past, before it came I gave you word of it: for fear that you might
say, My god did these things, and my pictured and metal images made them
come about.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> All this has come to your ears and you
have seen it; will you not give witness to it? I am now making clear new
things, even secret things, of which you had no knowledge.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> They have only now been effected, and not
in the past: and before this day they had not come to your ears; for
fear that you might say, I had knowledge of them.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> Truly you had no word of them, no
knowledge of them; no news of them in the past had come to your ears;
because I saw how false was your behaviour, and that your heart was
turned against me from your earliest days.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> Because of my name I will put away my
wrath, and for my praise I will keep myself from cutting you off.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> See, I have been testing you for myself
like silver; I have put you through the fire of trouble.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> For myself, even because of my name, I
will do it; for I will not let my name be shamed; and my glory I will
not give to another.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Give ear to me, Jacob, and Israel, my
loved one; I am he, I am the first and I am the last.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> Yes, by my hand was the earth placed on
its base, and by my right hand the heavens were stretched out; at my
word they take up their places.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> Come together, all of you, and give
ear; who among you has given news of these things? the Lord's loved one
will do his pleasure with Babylon, and with the seed of the Chaldaeans.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> I, even I, have given the word; I have
sent for him: I have made him come, and have given effect to his
undertakings.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> Come near to me, and give ear to this;
from the start I did not keep it secret; from the time of its coming
into existence I was there: and now the Lord God has sent me, and given
me his spirit.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> The Lord who takes up your cause, the
Holy One of Israel, says, I am the Lord your God, who is teaching you
for your profit, guiding you by the way in which you are to go.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> If only you had given ear to my orders,
then your peace would have been like a river, and your righteousness as
the waves of the sea:

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> Your seed would have been like the
sand, and your offspring like the dust: your name would not be cut off
or come to an end before me.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Go out of Babylon, go in flight from
the Chaldaeans; with the sound of song make it clear, give the news, let
the word go out even to the end of the earth: say, The Lord has taken up
the cause of his servant Jacob.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> They had no need of water when he was
guiding them through the waste lands: he made water come out of the rock
for them: the rock was parted and the waters came flowing out.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> There is no peace, says the Lord, for
the evil-doers.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> Give ear, O sea-lands, to me; and take
note, you peoples from far: I have been marked out by the Lord from the
first; when I was still in my mother's body, he had my name in mind:

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> And he has made my mouth like a sharp
sword, in the shade of his hand he has kept me; and he has made me like
a polished arrow, keeping me in his secret place;

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> And he said to me, You are my servant,
Israel, in whom my glory will be seen;

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> And I said, I have undergone weariness
for nothing, I have given my strength for no purpose or profit: but
still the Lord will take up my cause, and my God will give me my reward.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> And now, says the Lord, who made me his
servant when I was still in my mother's body, so that I might make Jacob
come back to him, and so that Israel might come together to him: and I
was honoured in the eyes of the Lord, and my God became my strength.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> It is not enough for one who is my
servant to put the tribes of Jacob again in their place, and to get back
those of Israel who have been sent away: my purpose is to give you as a
light to the nations, so that you may be my salvation to the end of the
earth.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> The Lord who takes up Israel's cause,
even his Holy One, says to him whom men make sport of, who is hated by
the nations, a servant of rulers: Kings will see and get up from their
places, and chiefs will give worship: because of the Lord who keeps
faith; even the Holy One of Israel who has taken you for himself.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> This is the word of the Lord: I have
given ear to you at a good time, and I have been your helper in a day of
salvation: and I will keep you safe, and will make you a glory for the
people, putting the land in order, and giving them the heritages which
now are waste;

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> Saying to those who are in chains, Go
free; to those who are in the dark, Come out into the light. They will
get food by the way wherever they go, and have grass-lands on all the
dry mountain-tops.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> They will not be in need of food or
drink, or be troubled by the heat or the sun: for he who has mercy on
them will be their guide, taking them by the springs of water.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> And I will make all my mountains a way,
and my highways will be lifted up.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> See, these are coming from far; and
these from the north and the west; and these from the land of Sinim.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> Let your voice be loud in song, O
heavens; and be glad, O earth; make sounds of joy, O mountains, for the
Lord has given comfort to his people, and will have mercy on his crushed
ones.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> But Zion said, The Lord has given me
up, I have gone from his memory.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> Will a woman give up the child at her
breast, will she be without pity for the fruit of her body? yes, these
may, but I will not let you go out of my memory.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> See, your name is marked on my hands;
your walls are ever before me.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Your builders are coming quickly; your
haters and those who made you waste will go out of you.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> Let your eyes be lifted up round about,
and see: they are all coming together to you. By my life, says the Lord,
truly you will put them all on you as an ornament, and be clothed with
them like a bride.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> For though the waste places of your
land have been given to destruction, now you will not be wide enough for
your people, and those who made you waste will be far away.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> The children to whom you gave birth in
other lands will say in your ears, The place is not wide enough for me:
make room for me to have a resting-place.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> Then you will say in your heart, Who
has given me all these children? when my children had been taken from
me, and I was no longer able to have others, who took care of these?
when I was by myself, where then were these?

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> This is the word of the Lord God: See,
I will make a sign with my hand to the nations, and put up my flag for
the peoples; and they will take up your sons on their beasts, and your
daughters on their backs.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> And kings will take care of you, and
queens will give you their milk: they will go down on their faces before
you, kissing the dust of your feet; and you will be certain that I am
the Lord, and that those who put their hope in me will not be shamed.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Will the goods of war be taken from the
strong man, or the prisoners of the cruel one be let go?

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> But the Lord says, Even the prisoners
of the strong will be taken from him, and the cruel made to let go his
goods: for I will take up your cause against your haters, and I will
keep your children safe.

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> And the flesh of your attackers will be
taken by themselves for food; and they will take their blood for drink,
as if it was sweet wine: and all men will see that I the Lord am your
saviour, even he who takes up your cause, the Strong One of Jacob.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> This is the word of the Lord: Where is
the statement which I gave your mother when I put her away? or to which
of my creditors have I given you for money? It was for your sins that
you were given into the hands of others, and for your evil-doing was
your mother put away.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> Why, then, when I came, was there no man?
and no one to give answer to my voice? has my hand become feeble, so
that it is unable to take up your cause? or have I no power to make you
free? See, at my word the sea becomes dry, I make the rivers a waste
land: their fish are dead for need of water, and make an evil smell.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> By me the heavens are clothed with black,
and I make haircloth their robe.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> The Lord God has given me the tongue of
those who are experienced, so that I may be able to give the word a
special sense for the feeble: every morning my ear is open to his
teaching, like those who are experienced:

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> And I have not put myself against him, or
let my heart be turned back from him.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> I was offering my back to those who gave
me blows, and my face to those who were pulling out my hair: I did not
keep my face covered from marks of shame.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> For the Lord God is my helper; I will not
be put to shame: so I have made my face like a rock, and I am certain
that he will give me my right.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> He who takes up my cause is near; who
will go to law with me? let us come together before the judge: who is
against me? let him come near to me.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> See, the Lord God is my helper; who will
give a decision against me? truly, all of them will become old like a
robe; they will be food for the worm.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> Who among you has the fear of the Lord,
giving ear to the voice of his servant who has been walking in the dark
and has no light? Let him put his faith in the name of the Lord, looking
to his God for support.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> See, all you who make a fire, arming
yourselves with burning branches: go in the flame of your fire, and
among the branches you have put a light to. This will you have from my
hand, you will make your bed in sorrow.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Give ear to me, you who are searching for
righteousness, who are looking for the Lord: see the rock from which you
were cut out, and the hole out of which you were taken.

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> Let your thoughts be turned to Abraham,
your father, and to Sarah, who gave you birth: for when he was but one,
my voice came to him, and I gave him my blessing, and made him a great
people.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> For the Lord has given comfort to Zion:
he has made glad all her broken walls; making her waste places like
Eden, and changing her dry land into the garden of the Lord; joy and
delight will be there, praise and the sound of melody.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> Give attention to me, O my people; and
give ear to me, O my nation; for teaching will go out from me, and the
knowledge of the true God will be a light to the peoples.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> Suddenly will my righteousness come near,
and my salvation will be shining out like the light; the sea-lands will
be waiting for me, and they will put their hope in my strong arm.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Let your eyes be lifted up to the
heavens, and turned to the earth which is under them: for the heavens
will go in flight like smoke, and the earth will become old like a coat,
and its people will come to destruction like insects: but my salvation
will be for ever, and my righteousness will not come to an end.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Give ear to me, you who have knowledge of
righteousness, in whose heart is my law; have no fear of the evil words
of men, and give no thought to their curses.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> For like a coat they will be food for the
insect, the worm will make a meal of them like wool: but my
righteousness will be for ever, and my salvation to all generations.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> Awake! awake! put on strength, O arm of
the Lord, awake! as in the old days, in the generations long past. Was
it not by you that Rahab was cut in two, and the dragon Wounded?

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> Did you not make the sea dry, the
waters of the great deep? did you not make the deep waters of the sea a
way for the Lord's people to go through?

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> Those whom the Lord has made free will
come back with songs to Zion; and on their heads will be eternal joy:
delight and joy will be theirs, and sorrow and sounds of grief will be
gone for ever.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> I, even I, am your comforter: are you
so poor in heart as to be in fear of man who will come to an end, and of
the son of man who will be like grass?

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> And you have given no thought to the
Lord your Maker, by whom the heavens were stretched out, and the earth
placed on its base; and you went all day in fear of the wrath of the
cruel one, when he was making ready for your destruction. And where is
the wrath of the cruel one?

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> The prisoner, bent under his chain,
will quickly be made free, and will not go down into the underworld, and
his bread will not come to an end.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> For I am the Lord your God, who makes
the sea calm when its waves are thundering: the Lord of armies is his
name.

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> And I have put my words in your mouth,
covering you with the shade of my hand, stretching out the heavens, and
placing the earth on its base, and saying to Zion, You are my people.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Awake! awake! up! O Jerusalem, you who
have taken from the Lord's hand the cup of his wrath; tasting in full
measure the wine which overcomes.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> She has no one among all her children
to be her guide; not one of the sons she has taken care of takes her by
the hand.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> These two things have come on you; who
will be weeping for you? wasting and destruction; death from need of
food, and from the sword; how may you be comforted?

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> Your sons are overcome, like a roe in a
net; they are full of the wrath of the Lord, the punishment of your God.

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> So now give ear to this, you who are
troubled and overcome, but not with wine:

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> This is the word of the Lord your
master, even your God who takes up the cause of his people: See, I have
taken out of your hand the cup which overcomes, even the cup of my
wrath; it will not again be given to you:

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> And I will put it into the hand of your
cruel masters, and of those whose yoke has been hard on you; who have
said to your soul, Down on your face! so that we may go over you: and
you have given your backs like the earth, even like the street, for them
to go over.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> Awake! awake! put on your strength, O
Zion; put on your beautiful robes, O Jerusalem, the holy town: for from
now there will never again come into you the unclean and those without
circumcision.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> Make yourself clean from the dust; up!
and take the seat of your power, O Jerusalem: the bands of your neck are
loose, O prisoned daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> For the Lord says, You were given for
nothing, and you will be made free without price.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> For the Lord God says, My people went
down at first into Egypt, to get a place for themselves there: and the
Assyrian put a cruel yoke on them without cause.

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> Now then, what have I here? says the
Lord, for my people are taken away without cause; they are made waste
and give cries of sorrow, says the Lord, and all the day the nations put
shame on my name.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> For this cause I will make my name clear
to my people; in that day they will be certain that it is my word which
comes to them; see, here am I.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> How beautiful on the mountains are the
feet of him who comes with good news, who gives word of peace, saying
that salvation is near; who says to Zion, Your God is ruling!

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> The voice of your watchmen! their voices
are loud in song together; for they will see him, eye to eye, when the
Lord comes back to Zion.

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> Give sounds of joy, make melody together,
waste places of Jerusalem: for the Lord has given comfort to his people,
he has taken up the cause of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> The Lord has let his holy arm be seen
by the eyes of all nations; and all the ends of the earth will see the
salvation of our God.

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> Away! away! go out from there, touching
no unclean thing; go out from among her; be clean, you who take up the
vessels of the Lord.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> For you will not go out suddenly, and
you will not go in flight: for the Lord will go before you, and the God
of Israel will come after you to keep you.

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> See, my servant will do well in his
undertakings, he will be honoured, and lifted up, and be very high.

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> As peoples were surprised at him, And
his face was not beautiful, so as to be desired: his face was so changed
by disease as to be unlike that of a man, and his form was no longer
that of the sons of men.

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> So will nations give him honour; kings
will keep quiet because of him: for what had not been made clear to them
they will see; and they will give their minds to what had not come to
their ears.

<span id="an_53:1">53:1</span> Who would have had faith in the word
which has come to our ears, and to whom had the arm of the Lord been
unveiled?

<span id="an_53:2">53:2</span> For his growth was like that of a
delicate plant before him, and like a root out of a dry place: he had no
grace of form, to give us pleasure;

<span id="an_53:3">53:3</span> Men made sport of him, turning away from
him; he was a man of sorrows, marked by disease; and like one from whom
men's faces are turned away, he was looked down on, and we put no value
on him.

<span id="an_53:4">53:4</span> But it was our pain he took, and our
diseases were put on him: while to us he seemed as one diseased, on whom
God's punishment had come.

<span id="an_53:5">53:5</span> But it was for our sins he was wounded,
and for our evil doings he was crushed: he took the punishment by which
we have peace, and by his wounds we are made well.

<span id="an_53:6">53:6</span> We all went wandering like sheep; going
every one of us after his desire; and the Lord put on him the punishment
of us all.

<span id="an_53:7">53:7</span> Men were cruel to him, but he was gentle
and quiet; as a lamb taken to its death, and as a sheep before those who
take her wool makes no sound, so he said not a word.

<span id="an_53:8">53:8</span> They took away from him help and right,
and who gave a thought to his fate? for he was cut off from the land of
the living: he came to his death for the sin of my people.

<span id="an_53:9">53:9</span> And they put his body into the earth with
sinners, and his last resting-place was with the evil-doers, though he
had done no wrong, and no deceit was in his mouth.

<span id="an_53:10">53:10</span> And the Lord was pleased ... see a
seed, long life, ... will do well in his hand. ...

<span id="an_53:11">53:11</span> ... made clear his righteousness before
men ... had taken their sins on himself.

<span id="an_53:12">53:12</span> For this cause he will have a heritage
with the great, and he will have a part in the goods of war with the
strong, because he gave up his life, and was numbered with the
evil-doers; taking on himself the sins of the people, and making prayer
for the wrongdoers.

<span id="an_54:1">54:1</span> Let your voice be loud in song, O woman
without children; make melody and sounds of joy, you who did not give
birth: for the children of her who had no husband are more than those of
the married wife, says the Lord.

<span id="an_54:2">54:2</span> Make wide the place of your tent, and let
the curtains of your house be stretched out without limit: make your
cords long, and your tent-pins strong.

<span id="an_54:3">54:3</span> For I will make wide your limits on the
right hand and on the left; and your seed will take the nations for a
heritage, and make the waste towns full of people.

<span id="an_54:4">54:4</span> Have no fear; for you will not be shamed
or without hope: you will not be put to shame, for the shame of your
earlier days will go out of your memory, and you will no longer keep in
mind the sorrows of your widowed years.

<span id="an_54:5">54:5</span> For your Maker is your husband; the Lord
of armies is his name: and the Holy One of Israel is he who takes up
your cause; he will be named the God of all the earth.

<span id="an_54:6">54:6</span> For the Lord has made you come back to
him, like a wife who has been sent away in grief of spirit; for one may
not give up the wife of one's early days.

<span id="an_54:7">54:7</span> For a short time I gave you up; but with
great mercies I will take you back again.

<span id="an_54:8">54:8</span> In overflowing wrath my face was veiled
from you for a minute, but I will have pity on you for ever, says the
Lord who takes up your cause.

<span id="an_54:9">54:9</span> For this is like the days of Noah to me:
for as I took an oath that the waters of Noah would never again go over
the earth, so have I taken an oath that I will not again be angry with
you, or say bitter words to you.

<span id="an_54:10">54:10</span> For the mountains may be taken away,
and the hills be moved out of their places, but my love will not be
taken from you, or my agreement of peace broken, says the Lord, who has
had mercy on you.

<span id="an_54:11">54:11</span> O troubled one, storm-crushed,
uncomforted! see, your stones will be framed in fair colours, and your
bases will be sapphires.

<span id="an_54:12">54:12</span> I will make your towers of rubies, and
your doors of carbuncles, and the wall round you will be of all sorts of
beautiful stones.

<span id="an_54:13">54:13</span> And all your builders will be made wise
by the Lord; and great will be the peace of your children.

<span id="an_54:14">54:14</span> All your rights will be made certain to
you: have no fear of evil, and destruction will not come near you.

<span id="an_54:15">54:15</span> See, they may be moved to war, but not
by my authority: all those who come together to make an attack on you,
will be broken against you.

<span id="an_54:16">54:16</span> See, I have made the iron-worker,
blowing on the burning coals, and making the instrument of war by his
work; and I have made the waster for destruction.

<span id="an_54:17">54:17</span> No instrument of war which is formed
against you will be of any use; and every tongue which says evil against
you will be judged false. This is the heritage of the servants of the
Lord, and their righteousness comes from me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_55:1">55:1</span> Ho! everyone in need, come to the waters,
and he who has no strength, let him get food: come, get bread without
money; wine and milk without price.

<span id="an_55:2">55:2</span> Why do you give your money for what is
not bread, and the fruit of your work for what will not give you
pleasure? Give ear to me, so that your food may be good, and you may
have the best in full measure.

<span id="an_55:3">55:3</span> Give ear, and come to me, take note with
care, so that your souls may have life: and I will make an eternal
agreement with you, even the certain mercies of David.

<span id="an_55:4">55:4</span> See, I have given him as a witness to the
peoples, a ruler and a guide to the nations.

<span id="an_55:5">55:5</span> See, you will send for a nation of which
you had no knowledge, and those who had no knowledge of you will come
running to you, because of the Lord your God, and because of the Holy
One of Israel, for he has given you glory.

<span id="an_55:6">55:6</span> Make search for the Lord while he is
there, make prayer to him while he is near:

<span id="an_55:7">55:7</span> Let the sinner give up his way, and the
evil-doer his purpose: and let him come back to the Lord, and he will
have mercy on him; and to our God, for there is full forgiveness with
him.

<span id="an_55:8">55:8</span> For my thoughts are not your thoughts, or
your ways my ways, says the Lord.

<span id="an_55:9">55:9</span> For as the heavens are higher than the
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your
thoughts.

<span id="an_55:10">55:10</span> For as the rain comes down, and the
snow from heaven, and does not go back again, but gives water to the
earth, and makes it fertile, giving seed to the planter, and bread for
food;

<span id="an_55:11">55:11</span> So will my word be which goes out of my
mouth: it will not come back to me with nothing done, but it will give
effect to my purpose, and do that for which I have sent it.

<span id="an_55:12">55:12</span> For you will go out with joy, and be
guided in peace: the mountains and the hills will make melody before
you, and all the trees of the fields will make sounds of joy.

<span id="an_55:13">55:13</span> In place of the thorn will come up the
fir-tree, and in place of the blackberry the myrtle: and it will be to
the Lord for a name, for an eternal sign which will not be cut off.

<span id="an_56:1">56:1</span> The Lord says, Let your way of life be
upright, and let your behaviour be rightly ordered: for my salvation is
near, and my righteousness will quickly be seen.

<span id="an_56:2">56:2</span> Happy is the man who does this, and the
son of man whose behaviour is so ordered; who keeps the Sabbath holy,
and his hand from doing any evil.

<span id="an_56:3">56:3</span> And let not the man from a strange
country, who has been joined to the Lord, say, The Lord will certainly
put a division between me and his people: and let not the unsexed man
say, See, I am a dry tree.

<span id="an_56:4">56:4</span> For the Lord says, As for the unsexed who
keep my Sabbaths, and give their hearts to pleasing me, and keep their
agreement with me:

<span id="an_56:5">56:5</span> I will give to them in my house, and
inside my walls, a place and a name better than that of sons and
daughters; I will give them an eternal name which will not be cut off.

<span id="an_56:6">56:6</span> And as for those from a strange country,
who are joined to the Lord, to give worship to him and honour to his
name, to be his servants, even everyone who keeps the Sabbath holy, and
keeps his agreement with me:

<span id="an_56:7">56:7</span> I will make them come to my holy
mountain, and will give them joy in my house of prayer; I will take
pleasure in the burned offerings which they make on my altar: for my
house will be named a house of prayer for all peoples.

<span id="an_56:8">56:8</span> The Lord God, who gets together the
wandering ones of Israel, says, I will get together others in addition
to those of Israel who have come back.

<span id="an_56:9">56:9</span> All you beasts of the field, come
together for your meat, even all you beasts of the wood.

<span id="an_56:10">56:10</span> His watchmen are blind, they are all
without knowledge; they are all dogs without tongues, unable to make a
sound; stretched out dreaming, loving sleep.

<span id="an_56:11">56:11</span> Yes, the dogs are for ever looking for
food; while these, the keepers of the sheep, are without wisdom: they
have all gone after their pleasure, every one looking for profit; they
are all the same.

<span id="an_56:12">56:12</span> Come, they say, I will get wine, and we
will take strong drink in full measure; and tomorrow will be like today,
full of pleasure.

<span id="an_57:1">57:1</span> The upright man goes to his death, and no
one gives a thought to it; and god-fearing men are taken away, and no
one is troubled by it; for the upright man is taken away because of
evil-doing, and goes into peace.

<span id="an_57:2">57:2</span> They are at rest in their last
resting-places, every one going straight before him.

<span id="an_57:3">57:3</span> But come near, you sons of her who is
wise in secret arts, the seed of her who is false to her husband, and of
the loose woman.

<span id="an_57:4">57:4</span> Of whom do you make sport? against whom
is your mouth open wide and your tongue put out? are you not
uncontrolled children, a false seed,

<span id="an_57:5">57:5</span> You who are burning with evil desire
among the oaks, under every green tree; putting children to death in the
valleys, under the cracks of the rocks?

<span id="an_57:6">57:6</span> Among the smooth stones of the valley is
your heritage; they, even they, are your part: even to them have you
made a drink offering and a meal offering. Is it possible for such
things to be overlooked by me?

<span id="an_57:7">57:7</span> You have put your bed on a high mountain:
there you went up to make your offering.

<span id="an_57:8">57:8</span> And on the back of the doors and on the
pillars you have put your sign: for you have been false to me with
another; you have made your bed wide, and made an agreement with them;
you had a desire for their bed where you saw it

<span id="an_57:9">57:9</span> And you went to Melech with oil and much
perfume, and you sent your representatives far off, and went as low as
the underworld.

<span id="an_57:10">57:10</span> You were tired with your long journeys;
but you did not say, There is no hope: you got new strength, and so you
were not feeble.

<span id="an_57:11">57:11</span> And of whom were you in fear, so that
you were false, and did not keep me in mind, or give thought to it? Have
I not been quiet, keeping myself secret, and so you were not in fear of
me?

<span id="an_57:12">57:12</span> I will make clear what your
righteousness is like and your works; you will have no profit in them.

<span id="an_57:13">57:13</span> Your false gods will not keep you safe
in answer to your cry; but the wind will take them, they will be gone
like a breath: but he who puts his hope in me will take the land, and
will have my holy mountain as his heritage.

<span id="an_57:14">57:14</span> And I will say, Make it high, make it
high, get ready the way, take the stones out of the way of my people.

<span id="an_57:15">57:15</span> For this is the word of him who is high
and lifted up, whose resting-place is eternal, whose name is Holy: my
resting-place is in the high and holy place, and with him who is crushed
and poor in spirit, to give life to the spirit of the poor, and to make
strong the heart of the crushed.

<span id="an_57:16">57:16</span> For I will not give punishment for
ever, or be angry without end: for from me breath goes out; and I it was
who made the souls.

<span id="an_57:17">57:17</span> I was quickly angry with his evil ways,
and sent punishment on him, veiling my face in wrath: and he went on,
turning his heart from me.

<span id="an_57:18">57:18</span> I have seen his ways, and I will make
him well: I will give him rest, comforting him and his people who are
sad.

<span id="an_57:19">57:19</span> I will give the fruit of the lips:
Peace, peace, to him who is near and to him who is far off, says the
Lord; and I will make him well.

<span id="an_57:20">57:20</span> But the evil-doers are like the
troubled sea, for which there is no rest, and its waters send up earth
and waste.

<span id="an_57:21">57:21</span> There is no peace, says my God, for the
evil-doers.

<span id="an_58:1">58:1</span> Make a loud cry, do not be quiet, let
your voice be sounding like a horn, and make clear to my people their
evil doings, and to the family of Jacob their sins.

<span id="an_58:2">58:2</span> Though they make prayer to me every day,
and take pleasure in the knowledge of my ways: like a nation which has
done righteousness, and has not given up the rules of their God, they
make requests to me for the right orders, it is their delight to come
near to God.

<span id="an_58:3">58:3</span> They say, Why have we kept ourselves from
food, and you do not see it? why have we kept ourselves from pleasure,
and you take no note of it? If, in the days when you keep from food, you
take the chance to do your business, and get in your debts;

<span id="an_58:4">58:4</span> If keeping from food makes you quickly
angry, ready for fighting and giving blows with evil hands; your holy
days are not such as to make your voice come to my ears on high.

<span id="an_58:5">58:5</span> Have I given orders for such a day as
this? a day for keeping yourselves from pleasure? is it only a question
of the bent head, of putting on haircloth, and being seated in the dust?
is this what seems to you a holy day, well-pleasing to the Lord?

<span id="an_58:6">58:6</span> Is not this the holy day for which I have
given orders: to let loose those who have wrongly been made prisoners,
to undo the bands of the yoke, and to let the crushed go free, and every
yoke be broken?

<span id="an_58:7">58:7</span> Is it not to give your bread to those in
need, and to let the poor who have no resting-place come into your
house? to put a robe on the unclothed one when you see him, and not to
keep your eyes shut for fear of seeing his flesh?

<span id="an_58:8">58:8</span> Then will light be shining on you like
the morning, and your wounds will quickly be well: and your
righteousness will go before you, and the glory of the Lord will come
after you.

<span id="an_58:9">58:9</span> Then at the sound of your voice, the Lord
will give an answer; at your cry he will say, Here am I. If you take
away from among you the yoke, the putting out of the finger of shame,
and the evil word;

<span id="an_58:10">58:10</span> And if you give your bread to those in
need of it, so that the troubled one may have his desire; then you will
have light in the dark, and your night will be as the full light of the
sun:

<span id="an_58:11">58:11</span> And the Lord will be your guide at all
times; in dry places he will give you water in full measure, and will
make strong your bones; and you will be like a watered garden, and like
an ever-flowing spring.

<span id="an_58:12">58:12</span> And your sons will be building again
the old waste places: you will make strong the bases of old generations:
and you will be named, He who puts up the broken walls, and, He who
makes ready the ways for use.

<span id="an_58:13">58:13</span> If you keep the Sabbath with care, not
doing your business on my holy day; and if the Sabbath seems to you a
delight, and the new moon of the Lord a thing to be honoured; and if you
give respect to him by not doing your business, or going after your
pleasure, or saying unholy words;

<span id="an_58:14">58:14</span> Then the Lord will be your delight; and
I will put you on the high places of the earth; and I will give you the
heritage of Jacob your father: for the mouth of the Lord has said it.

<span id="an_59:1">59:1</span> Truly, the Lord's hand has not become
short, so that he is unable to give salvation; and his ear is not shut
from hearing:

<span id="an_59:2">59:2</span> But your sins have come between you and
your God, and by your evil doings his face has been veiled from you, so
that he will give you no answer.

<span id="an_59:3">59:3</span> For your hands are unclean with blood,
and your fingers with sin; your lips have said false things, and your
tongue gives out deceit.

<span id="an_59:4">59:4</span> No one puts forward an upright cause, or
gives a true decision: their hope is in deceit, and their words are
false; they are with child with sin, and give birth to evil.

<span id="an_59:5">59:5</span> They give birth to snake's eggs, and make
spider's threads: whoever takes their eggs for food comes to his death,
and the egg which is crushed becomes a poison-snake.

<span id="an_59:6">59:6</span> Their twisted threads will not make
clothing, and their works will give them nothing for covering
themselves: their works are works of sin, and violent acts are in their
hands.

<span id="an_59:7">59:7</span> Their feet go quickly to evil, and they
take delight in the death of the upright; their thoughts are thoughts of
sin; wasting and destruction are in their ways.

<span id="an_59:8">59:8</span> They have no knowledge of the way of
peace, and there is no sense of what is right in their behaviour: they
have made for themselves ways which are not straight; whoever goes in
them has no knowledge of peace.

<span id="an_59:9">59:9</span> For this cause our right is far from us,
and righteousness does not overtake us: we are looking for light, but
there is only the dark; for the shining of the sun, but our way is in
the night.

<span id="an_59:10">59:10</span> We go on our way, like blind men
feeling for the wall, even like those who have no eyes: we are running
against things in daylight as if it was evening; our place is in the
dark like dead men.

<span id="an_59:11">59:11</span> We make noises of grief, like bears,
and sad sounds like doves: we are looking for our right, but it is not
there; for salvation, but it is far from us.

<span id="an_59:12">59:12</span> For our evil doings are increased
before you, and our sins give witness against us: for our evil doings
are with us, and we have knowledge of our sins:

<span id="an_59:13">59:13</span> We have gone against the Lord, and been
false to him, turning away from our God, our words have been
uncontrolled, and in our hearts are thoughts of deceit.

<span id="an_59:14">59:14</span> And the right is turned back, and
righteousness is far away: for good faith is not to be seen in the
public places, and upright behaviour may not come into the town.

<span id="an_59:15">59:15</span> Yes, faith is gone; and he whose heart
is turned from evil comes into the power of the cruel: and the Lord saw
it, and he was angry that there was no one to take up their cause.

<span id="an_59:16">59:16</span> And he saw that there was no man, and
was surprised that there was no one to take up their cause: so his arm
gave salvation, and he made righteousness his support.

<span id="an_59:17">59:17</span> Yes, he put on righteousness as a
breastplate, and salvation as a head-dress; and he put on punishment as
clothing, and wrath as a robe.

<span id="an_59:18">59:18</span> He will give them the right reward of
their doings, wrath to his attackers, punishment to his haters, and even
on the sea-lands he will send punishment.

<span id="an_59:19">59:19</span> So they will see the name of the Lord
from the west, and his glory from the east: for he will come like a
rushing stream, forced on by a wind of the Lord.

<span id="an_59:20">59:20</span> And as a saviour he will come to Zion,
turning away sin from Jacob, says the Lord.

<span id="an_59:21">59:21</span> And as for me, this is my agreement
with them, says the Lord: my spirit which is on you, and my words which
I have put in your mouth, will not go away from your mouth, or from the
mouth of your seed, or from the mouth of your seed's seed, says the
Lord, from now and for ever.

<span id="an_60:1">60:1</span> Up! let your face be bright, for your
light has come, and the glory of the Lord is shining on you.

<span id="an_60:2">60:2</span> For truly, the earth will be dark, and
the peoples veiled in blackest night; but the Lord will be shining on
you, and his glory will be seen among you.

<span id="an_60:3">60:3</span> And nations will come to your light, and
kings to your bright dawn.

<span id="an_60:4">60:4</span> Let your eyes be lifted up, and see: they
are all coming together to you: your sons will come from far, and your
daughters taken with loving care.

<span id="an_60:5">60:5</span> Then you will see, and be bright with
joy, and your heart will be shaking with increase of delight: for the
produce of the sea will be turned to you, the wealth of the nations will
come to you.

<span id="an_60:6">60:6</span> You will be full of camel-trains, even
the young camels of Midian and Ephah; all from Sheba will come, with
gold and spices, giving word of the great acts of the Lord.

<span id="an_60:7">60:7</span> All the flocks of Kedar will come
together to you, the sheep of Nebaioth will be ready for your need; they
will be pleasing offerings on my altar, and my house of prayer will be
beautiful.

<span id="an_60:8">60:8</span> Who are these coming like a cloud, like a
flight of doves to their windows?

<span id="an_60:9">60:9</span> Vessels of the sea-lands are waiting for
me, and the ships of Tarshish first, so that your sons may come from
far, and their silver and gold with them, to the place of the name of
the Lord your God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he has made
you beautiful.

<span id="an_60:10">60:10</span> And men from strange countries will be
building up your walls, and their kings will be your servants: for in my
wrath I sent punishment on you, but in my grace I have had mercy on you.

<span id="an_60:11">60:11</span> Your doors will be open at all times;
they will not be shut day or night; so that men may come into you with
the wealth of the nations, with their kings at their head.

<span id="an_60:12">60:12</span> For the nation or kingdom which will
not be your servant will come to destruction; such nations will be
completely waste.

<span id="an_60:13">60:13</span> The glory of Lebanon will come to you,
the cypress, the plane, and the sherbin-tree together, to make my holy
place beautiful; and the resting-place of my feet will be full of glory.

<span id="an_60:14">60:14</span> And the sons of those who were cruel to
you will come before you with bent heads; and those who made sport of
you will go down on their faces at your feet; and you will be named, The
Town of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_60:15">60:15</span> And though you were turned away from,
and hated, and had no helper, I will make you a pride for ever, a joy
from generation to generation.

<span id="an_60:16">60:16</span> And you will take the milk of the
nations, flowing from the breast of kings; and you will see that I, the
Lord, am your saviour, and he who takes up your cause, the Strong One of
Jacob.

<span id="an_60:17">60:17</span> In place of brass, I will give gold,
and for iron silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: and I will
make Peace your judge, and Righteousness your overseer.

<span id="an_60:18">60:18</span> Violent acts will no longer be seen in
your land, wasting or destruction in your limits; but your walls will be
named, Salvation, and your doors Praise.

<span id="an_60:19">60:19</span> The sun will not be your light by day,
and the moon will no longer be bright for you by night: but the Lord
will be to you an eternal light, and your God your glory.

<span id="an_60:20">60:20</span> Your sun will never again go down, or
your moon keep back her light: for the Lord will be your eternal light,
and the days of your sorrow will be ended.

<span id="an_60:21">60:21</span> Your people will all be upright, the
land will be their heritage for ever; the branch of my planting, the
work of my hands, to be for my glory.

<span id="an_60:22">60:22</span> The smallest of their families will
become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I, the Lord, will
make it come quickly in its time.

<span id="an_61:1">61:1</span> The spirit of the Lord is on me, because
I am marked out by him to give good news to the poor; he has sent me to
make the broken-hearted well, to say that the prisoners will be made
free, and that those in chains will see the light again;

<span id="an_61:2">61:2</span> To give knowledge that the year of the
Lord's good pleasure has come, and the day of punishment from our God;
to give comfort to all who are sad;

<span id="an_61:3">61:3</span> To give them a fair head-dress in place
of dust, the oil of joy in place of the clothing of grief, praise in
place of sorrow; so that they may be named trees of righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, and so that he may have glory.

<span id="an_61:4">61:4</span> And they will be building again the old
broken walls, and will make new the old waste places, and will put up
again the towns which have been waste for long generations.

<span id="an_61:5">61:5</span> And men from strange countries will be
your herdsmen, and those who are not Israelites will be your ploughmen
and vine-keepers.

<span id="an_61:6">61:6</span> But you will be named the priests of the
Lord, the servants of our God: you will have the wealth of the nations
for your food, and you will be clothed with their glory.

<span id="an_61:7">61:7</span> As they had twice as much grief, and
marks of shame were their heritage, so in their land they will be
rewarded twice over, and will have eternal joy.

<span id="an_61:8">61:8</span> For I, the Lord, take pleasure in upright
judging; I will not put up with the violent taking away of right; and I
will certainly give them their reward, and I will make an eternal
agreement with them.

<span id="an_61:9">61:9</span> And their seed will be noted among the
nations, and their offspring among the peoples: it will be clear to all
who see them that they are the seed to which the Lord has given his
blessing.

<span id="an_61:10">61:10</span> I will be full of joy in the Lord, my
soul will be glad in my God; for he has put on me the clothing of
salvation, covering me with the robe of righteousness, as the husband
puts on a fair head-dress, and the bride makes herself beautiful with
jewels.

<span id="an_61:11">61:11</span> For as the earth puts out buds, and as
the garden gives growth to the seeds which are planted in it, so the
Lord will make righteousness and praise to be flowering before all the
nations.

<span id="an_62:1">62:1</span> Because of Zion I will not keep quiet,
and because of Jerusalem I will take no rest, till her righteousness
goes out like the shining of the sun, and her salvation like a burning
light.

<span id="an_62:2">62:2</span> And the nations will see your
righteousness, and all kings your glory: and you will have a new name,
given by the mouth of the Lord.

<span id="an_62:3">62:3</span> And you will be a fair crown in the hand
of the Lord, and a king's head-dress in the hand of your God.

<span id="an_62:4">62:4</span> You will not now be named, She who is
given up; and your land will no longer be named, The waste land: but you
will have the name, My pleasure is in her, and your land will be named,
Married: for the Lord has pleasure in you, and your land will be
married.

<span id="an_62:5">62:5</span> For as a young man takes a virgin for his
wife, so will your maker be married to you: and as a husband has joy in
his bride, so will the Lord your God be glad over you.

<span id="an_62:6">62:6</span> I have put watchmen on your walls, O
Jerusalem; they will not keep quiet day or night: you who are the Lord's
recorders, take no rest,

<span id="an_62:7">62:7</span> And give him no rest, till he puts
Jerusalem in her place to be praised in the earth.

<span id="an_62:8">62:8</span> The Lord has taken an oath by his right
hand, and by the arm of his strength, Truly, I will no longer give your
grain to be food for your haters; and men of strange countries will not
take the wine for which your work has been done:

<span id="an_62:9">62:9</span> But those who have got in the grain will
have it for their food, and will give praise to the Lord; and those who
have got in the grapes will take the wine of them in the open places of
my holy house.

<span id="an_62:10">62:10</span> Go through, go through the doors; make
ready the way of the people; let the highway be lifted up; let the
stones be taken away; let a flag be lifted up over the peoples.

<span id="an_62:11">62:11</span> The Lord has sent out word to the end
of the earth, Say to the daughter of Zion, See, your saviour comes;
those whom he has made free are with him, and those to whom he has given
salvation go before him.

<span id="an_62:12">62:12</span> And they will be named, The holy
people, Those whose cause has been taken up by the Lord: and you will be
named, Desired, A town not given up.

<span id="an_63:1">63:1</span> Who is this who comes from Edom, with
blood-red robes from Bozrah? he whose clothing is fair, stepping with
pride in his great strength? I whose glory is in the right, strong for
salvation.

<span id="an_63:2">63:2</span> Why is your clothing red, and why are
your robes like those of one who is crushing the grapes?

<span id="an_63:3">63:3</span> I have been crushing the grapes by
myself, and of the peoples there was no man with me: in my wrath and in
my passion, they were crushed under my feet; and my robes are marked
with their life-blood, and all my clothing is red.

<span id="an_63:4">63:4</span> For the day of punishment is in my heart,
and the year for the payment of the price for my people has come.

<span id="an_63:5">63:5</span> And I saw that there was no helper, and I
was wondering that no one gave them support: so my arm did the work of
salvation, and my wrath was my support.

<span id="an_63:6">63:6</span> And in my passion the peoples were
crushed under my feet, and broken in my wrath, and I put down their
strength to the earth.

<span id="an_63:7">63:7</span> I will give news of the mercies of the
Lord, and his great acts, even all the things the Lord has done for us,
in his great grace to the house of Israel; even all he has done for us
in his unnumbered mercies.

<span id="an_63:8">63:8</span> For he said, Truly they are my people,
children who will not be false: so he was their saviour out of all their
trouble.

<span id="an_63:9">63:9</span> It was no sent one or angel, but he
himself who was their saviour: in his love and in his pity he took up
their cause, and he took them in his arms, caring for them all through
the years.

<span id="an_63:10">63:10</span> But they went against him, causing
grief to his holy spirit: so he was turned against them, and made war on
them.

<span id="an_63:11">63:11</span> Then the early days came to their
minds, the days of Moses his servant: and they said, Where is he who
made the keeper of his flock come up from the sea? where is he who put
his holy spirit among them,

<span id="an_63:12">63:12</span> He who made the arm of his glory go at
the right hand of Moses, by whom the waters were parted before them, to
make himself an eternal name;

<span id="an_63:13">63:13</span> He who made them go through the deep
waters, like a horse in the waste land?

<span id="an_63:14">63:14</span> Like the cattle which go down into the
valley, they went without falling, the spirit of the Lord guiding them:
so you went before your people, to make yourself a great name.

<span id="an_63:15">63:15</span> Let your eyes be looking down from
heaven, from your holy and beautiful house: where is your deep feeling,
the working of your power? do not keep back the moving of your pity and
your mercies:

<span id="an_63:16">63:16</span> For you are our father, though Abraham
has no knowledge of us, and Israel gives no thought to us: you, O Lord,
are our father; from the earliest days you have taken up our cause.

<span id="an_63:17">63:17</span> O Lord, why do you send us wandering
from your ways, making our hearts hard, so that we have no fear of you?
Come back, because of your servants, the tribes of your heritage.

<span id="an_63:18">63:18</span> Why have evil men gone over your holy
place, so that it has been crushed under the feet of our haters?

<span id="an_63:19">63:19</span> We have become as those who were never
ruled by you, on whom your name was not named.

<span id="an_64:1">64:1</span> O let the heavens be broken open and come
down, so that the mountains may be shaking before you,

<span id="an_64:2">64:2</span> As when fire puts the brushwood in
flames, or as when water is boiling from the heat of the fire: to make
your name feared by your haters, so that the nations may be shaking
before you;

<span id="an_64:3">64:3</span> While you do acts of power for which we
are not looking, and which have not come to the ears of men in the past.

<span id="an_64:4">64:4</span> The ear has not had news of, or the eye
seen, ... any God but you, working for the man who is waiting for him.

<span id="an_64:5">64:5</span> Will you not have mercy on him who takes
pleasure in doing righteousness, even on those who keep in mind your
ways? Truly you were angry, and we went on doing evil, and sinning
against you in the past.

<span id="an_64:6">64:6</span> For we have all become like an unclean
person, and all our good acts are like a dirty robe: and we have all
become old like a dead leaf, and our sins, like the wind, take us away.

<span id="an_64:7">64:7</span> And there is no one who makes prayer to
your name, or who is moved to keep true to you: for your face is veiled
from us, and you have given us into the power of our sins.

<span id="an_64:8">64:8</span> But now, O Lord, you are our father; we
are the earth, and you are our maker; and we are all the work of your
hand.

<span id="an_64:9">64:9</span> Be not very angry, O Lord, and do not
keep our sins in mind for ever: give ear to our prayer, for we are all
your people.

<span id="an_64:10">64:10</span> Your holy towns have become a waste,
Zion has become a waste, Jerusalem is a mass of broken walls.

<span id="an_64:11">64:11</span> Our holy and beautiful house, where our
fathers gave praise to you, is burned with fire; and all the things of
our desire have come to destruction.

<span id="an_64:12">64:12</span> In view of all this, will you still do
nothing, O Lord? will you keep quiet, and go on increasing our
punishment?

<span id="an_65:1">65:1</span> I have been ready to give an answer to
those who did not make prayer to me; I have been offering myself to
those who were not searching for me; I said, Here am I, here am I, to a
nation which gave no respect to my name.

<span id="an_65:2">65:2</span> All day my hands have been stretched out
to an uncontrolled people, who go in an evil way, after the purposes of
their hearts;

<span id="an_65:3">65:3</span> A people who make me angry every day,
making offerings in gardens, and burning perfumes on bricks.

<span id="an_65:4">65:4</span> Who are seated in the resting-places of
the dead, and by night are in the secret places; who take pig's flesh
for food, and have the liquid of disgusting things in their vessels.

<span id="an_65:5">65:5</span> Who say, Keep away, do not come near me,
for fear that I make you holy: these are a smoke in my nose, a fire
burning all day.

<span id="an_65:6">65:6</span> See, it is recorded before me, says the
Lord: I will not keep back my hand, till I have sent punishment,

<span id="an_65:7">65:7</span> For their sins and the sins of their
fathers, who were burning perfumes on the mountains, and saying evil
things against me on the hills: so I will take the measure of their
sins, and will send the punishment for them into their breast.

<span id="an_65:8">65:8</span> This is the word of the Lord: As the new
wine is seen in the grapes, and they say, Do not send destruction on it,
for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants, in order that I
may not put an end to them all.

<span id="an_65:9">65:9</span> And I will take a seed out of Jacob, and
out of Judah one who will have my mountains for a heritage: and the
people I have taken to be mine will have it for themselves, and my
servants will have their resting-place there.

<span id="an_65:10">65:10</span> And Sharon will be a grass-land for the
flocks, and the valley of Achor a resting-place for the herds: for my
people whose hearts have been turned back to me.

<span id="an_65:11">65:11</span> But as for you who have given up the
Lord, who have no care for my holy mountain, who get ready a table for
Chance, and make offerings of mixed wine to Fate;

<span id="an_65:12">65:12</span> Your fate will be the sword, and you
will all go down to death: because when my voice came to you, you made
no answer; you did not give ear to my word; but you did what was evil in
my eyes, desiring what was not pleasing to me.

<span id="an_65:13">65:13</span> For this cause says the Lord God, My
servants will have food, but you will be in need of food: my servants
will have drink, but you will be dry: my servants will have joy, but you
will be shamed:

<span id="an_65:14">65:14</span> My servants will make songs in the joy
of their hearts, but you will be crying for sorrow, and making sounds of
grief from a broken spirit.

<span id="an_65:15">65:15</span> And your name will become a curse to my
people, and the Lord God will put you to death, and give his servants
another name:

<span id="an_65:16">65:16</span> So that he who is requesting a blessing
will make use of the name of the true God, and he who takes an oath will
do so by the true God; because the past troubles are gone out of mind,
and because they are covered from my eyes.

<span id="an_65:17">65:17</span> For see, I am making a new heaven and a
new earth: and the past things will be gone completely out of mind.

<span id="an_65:18">65:18</span> But men will be glad and have joy for
ever in what I am making; for I am making Jerusalem a delight, and her
people a joy.

<span id="an_65:19">65:19</span> And I will be glad over Jerusalem, and
have joy in my people: and the voice of weeping will no longer be
sounding in her, or the voice of grief.

<span id="an_65:20">65:20</span> No longer will there be there a child
whose days are cut short, or an old man whose days have not come to
their full measure: for the young man at his death will be a hundred
years old, and he whose life is shorter than a hundred years will seem
as one cursed.

<span id="an_65:21">65:21</span> And they will be building houses and
living in them; planting vine-gardens and getting the fruit of them.

<span id="an_65:22">65:22</span> They will no longer be building for the
use of others, or planting for others to have the fruit: for the days of
my people will be like the days of a tree, and my loved ones will have
joy in full measure in the work of their hands.

<span id="an_65:23">65:23</span> Their work will not be for nothing, and
they will not give birth to children for destruction; for they are a
seed to whom the Lord has given his blessing, and their offspring will
be with them.

<span id="an_65:24">65:24</span> And before they make their request I
will give an answer, and while they are still making prayer to me, I
will give ear.

<span id="an_65:25">65:25</span> The wolf and the lamb will take their
food together, and the lion will make a meal of grass like the ox: but
dust will be the snake's food. There will be no cause of pain or
destruction in all my holy mountain, says the Lord.

<span id="an_66:1">66:1</span> The Lord says, Heaven is the seat of my
power, and earth is the resting-place for my feet: what sort of house
will you make for me, and what place will be my resting-place?

<span id="an_66:2">66:2</span> For all these things my hand has made,
and they are mine, says the Lord; but to this man only will I give
attention, to him who is poor and broken in spirit, fearing my word.

<span id="an_66:3">66:3</span> He who puts an ox to death puts a man to
death; he who makes an offering of a lamb puts a dog to death; he who
makes a meal offering makes an offering of pig's blood; he who makes an
offering of perfumes for a sign gives worship to an image: as they have
gone after their desires, and their soul takes pleasure in their
disgusting things;

<span id="an_66:4">66:4</span> So I will go after trouble for them, and
will send on them what they are fearing: because no one made answer to
my voice, or gave ear to my word; but they did what was evil in my eyes,
going after that in which I took no pleasure.

<span id="an_66:5">66:5</span> Give ear to the word of the Lord, you who
are in fear at his word: your countrymen, hating you, and driving you
out because of my name, have said, Let the Lord's glory be made clear,
so that we may see your joy; but they will be put to shame.

<span id="an_66:6">66:6</span> There is a noise of war from the town, a
sound from the Temple, the voice of the Lord giving punishment to his
haters.

<span id="an_66:7">66:7</span> Before her pains came, she gave birth;
before her pains, she gave birth to a man-child.

<span id="an_66:8">66:8</span> When has such a story come to men's ears?
who has seen such things? will a land come to birth in one day? will a
nation be given birth in a minute? For when Zion's pains came on her,
she gave birth to her children straight away.

<span id="an_66:9">66:9</span> Will I by whom the birth was started, not
make it complete? says the Lord. Will I who make children come to birth,
let them be kept back? says your God.

<span id="an_66:10">66:10</span> Have joy with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her, all you her lovers: take part in her joy, all you who are
sorrowing for her:

<span id="an_66:11">66:11</span> So that you may take of the comfort
flowing from her breasts, and be delighted with the full measure of her
glory.

<span id="an_66:12">66:12</span> For the Lord says, See, I will make her
peace like a river, and the glory of the nations like an overflowing
stream, and she will take her children in her arms, gently caring for
them on her knees.

<span id="an_66:13">66:13</span> As to one who is comforted by his
mother, so will I give you comfort: and you will be comforted in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_66:14">66:14</span> And you will see it and your heart will
be glad, and your bones will get new strength, like young grass: and the
hand of the Lord will be seen at work for his servants, and his wrath
against his haters.

<span id="an_66:15">66:15</span> For the Lord is coming with fire, and
his war-carriages will be like the storm-wind; to give punishment in the
heat of his wrath, and his passion is like flames of fire.

<span id="an_66:16">66:16</span> For with fire and sword will the Lord
come, judging all the earth, and his sword will be on all flesh: and
great numbers will be put to death by him.

<span id="an_66:17">66:17</span> As for those who keep themselves
separate, and make themselves clean in the gardens, going after one in
the middle, taking pig's flesh for food, and other disgusting things,
such as the mouse: their works and their thoughts will come to an end
together, says the Lord.

<span id="an_66:18">66:18</span> And I am coming to get together all
nations and tongues: and they will come and will see my glory.

<span id="an_66:19">66:19</span> And I will put a sign among them, and I
will send those who are still living to the nations, to Tarshish, Put,
and Lud, Meshech and Rosh, Tubal and Javan, to the sea-lands far away,
who have not had word of me, or seen my glory; and they will give the
knowledge of my glory to the nations.

<span id="an_66:20">66:20</span> And they will take your countrymen out
of all the nations for an offering to the Lord, on horses, and in
carriages, and in carts, and on asses, and on camels, to my holy
mountain Jerusalem, says the Lord, as the children of Israel take their
offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_66:21">66:21</span> And some of them will I take for
priests and Levites, says the Lord.

<span id="an_66:22">66:22</span> For as the new heaven and the new earth
which I will make will be for ever before me, says the Lord, so will
your seed and your name be for ever.

<span id="an_66:23">66:23</span> And it will be, that from new moon to
new moon, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh will come to give
worship before me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_66:24">66:24</span> And they will go out to see the dead
bodies of the men who have done evil against me: for their worm will
ever be living, and their fire will never be put out, and they will be a
thing of fear to all flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah](jer)
