[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jo3)  [Next](rev) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Jude

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and the
brother of James, to those of God's selection who have been made holy by
God the Father and are kept safe for Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May mercy and peace and love be increased
in you.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> My loved ones, while my thoughts were full
of a letter which I was going to send you about our common salvation, it
was necessary for me to send you one requesting you with all my heart to
go on fighting strongly for the faith which has been given to the saints
once and for ever.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> For certain men have come among you
secretly, marked out before in the holy Writings for this evil fate, men
without the fear of God, turning his grace into an unclean thing, and
false to our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Now it is my purpose to put you in mind,
though you once had knowledge of all these things, of how the Lord,
having taken a people safely out of Egypt, later sent destruction on
those who had no faith;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And the angels who did not keep to their
kingdom but went out from the place which was theirs, he has put in
eternal chains and in dark night till the great day of the judging.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the towns
near them, having like these, given themselves up to unclean desires and
gone after strange flesh, have been made an example, undergoing the
punishment of eternal fire.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> In the same way these dreamers make the
flesh unclean, having no respect for authorities, and say evil of
rulers.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Now when Michael, one of the chief angels,
was fighting against the Evil One for the body of Moses, fearing to make
use of violent words against him, he only said, May the Lord be your
judge.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> But these men say evil about such things
as they have no knowledge of; and the things of which they have natural
knowledge, like beasts without reason, are the cause of their
destruction.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> A curse on them! They have gone in the
way of Cain, running uncontrolled into the error of Balaam for reward,
and have come to destruction by saying evil against the Lord, like
Korah.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> These men are unseen rocks at your
love-feasts, when they take part in them with you, keepers of sheep who
without fear take the food of the sheep; clouds without water rushing
before the wind, wasted trees without fruit, twice dead, pulled up by
the roots,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Violent waves of the sea, streaming with
their shame, wandering stars for whom the darkest night is kept in store
for ever.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The prophet Enoch, who was the seventh
after Adam, said of these men, The Lord came with tens of thousands of
his saints,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> To be the judge of all, and to give a
decision against all those whose lives are unpleasing to him, because of
the evil acts which they have done, and because of all the hard things
which sinners without fear of God have said against him.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These are the men who make trouble, ever
desiring change, going after evil pleasures, using high-sounding words,
respecting men's position in the hope of reward.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But you, my loved ones, keep in memory
the words which were said before by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> How they said to you, In the last days
there will be men who, guided by their evil desires, will make sport of
holy things.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> These are the men who make divisions,
natural men, not having the Spirit.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But you, my loved ones, building
yourselves up on your most holy faith, and making prayers in the Holy
Spirit,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Keep yourselves in the love of God,
looking for life eternal through the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And have pity on those who are in doubt;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And to some give salvation, pulling them
out of the fire; and on some have mercy with fear, hating even the
clothing which is made unclean by the flesh.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Now to him who is able to keep you from
falling, and to give you a place in his glory, free from all evil, with
great joy,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> To the only God our Saviour, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, let us give glory and honour and authority and
power, before all time and now and for ever. So be it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation](rev)
