[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jos)  [Next](rut.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Judges

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now after the death of Joshua, the children
of Israel made request to the Lord, saying, Who is to go up first to
make war for us against the Canaanites?

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the Lord said, Judah is to go up: see,
I have given the land into his hands.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Then Judah said to Simeon his brother, Come
up with me into my heritage, so that we may make war against the
Canaanites; and I will then go with you into your heritage. So Simeon
went with him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And Judah went up; and the Lord gave the
Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hands; and they overcame ten
thousand of them in Bezek.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And they came across Adoni-zedek, and made
war on him; and they overcame the Canaanites and the Perizzites.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But Adoni-zedek went in flight; and they
went after him and overtook him, and had his thumbs and his great toes
cut off.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And Adoni-zedek said, Seventy kings, whose
thumbs and great toes had been cut off, got broken meat under my table:
as I have done, so has God done to me in full. And they took him to
Jerusalem, and he came to his end there.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Then the children of Judah made an attack
on Jerusalem, and took it, burning down the town after they had put its
people to the sword without mercy.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> After that the children of Judah went down
to make war on the Canaanites living in the hill-country and in the
south and in the lowlands.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And Caleb went against the Canaanites of
Hebron: (now in earlier times Hebron was named Kiriath-arba:) and he put
Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai to the sword.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And from there he went up against the
people of Debir. (Now the name of Debir in earlier times was
Kiriath-sepher.)

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Caleb said, I will give Achsah, my
daughter, as wife to the man who overcomes Kiriath-sepher and takes it.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's
younger brother, took it; so he gave him his daughter Achsah for his
wife.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Now when she came to him, he put into her
mind the idea of requesting a field from her father: and she got down
from her ass; and Caleb said to her, What is it?

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And she said to him, Give me a blessing;
because you have put me in a dry south-land, now give me springs of
water. So Caleb gave her the higher spring and the lower spring.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Now Hobab the Kenite, Moses'
father-in-law, had come up out of the town of palm-trees, with the
children of Judah, into the waste land of Arad; and he went and was
living among the Amalekites;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Judah went with Simeon, his brother,
and overcame the Canaanites living in Zephath, and put it under the
curse; and he gave the town the name of Hormah.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Then Judah took Gaza and its limit, and
Ashkelon and its limit, and Ekron and its limit.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the Lord was with Judah; and he took
the hill-country for his heritage; but he was unable to make the people
of the valley go out, for they had war-carriages of iron.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses
had said; and he took the land of the three sons of Anak, driving them
out from there.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And the children of Judah did not make
the Jebusites who were living in Jerusalem go out; the Jebusites are
still living with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And the family of Joseph went up against
Beth-el, and the Lord was with them.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> So they sent men to make a search round
Beth-el. (Now the name of the town in earlier times was Luz.)

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And the watchers saw a man coming out of
the town, and said to him, If you will make clear to us the way into the
town, we will be kind to you.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> So he made clear to them the way into the
town, and they put it to the sword; but they let the man and all his
family get away safe.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And he went into the land of the
Hittites, building a town there and naming it Luz: which is its name to
this day.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And Manasseh did not take away the land
of the people of Beth-shean and its daughter-towns, or of Taanach and
its daughter-towns, or of the people of Dor and its daughter-towns, or
of the people of Ibleam and its daughter-towns, or of the people of
Megiddo and its daughter-towns, driving them out; but the Canaanites
would go on living in that land.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And whenever Israel became strong, they
put the Canaanites to forced work, without driving them out completely.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And Ephraim did not make the Canaanites
who were living in Gezer go out; but the Canaanites went on living in
Gezer among them.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Zebulun did not make the people of Kitron
or the people of Nahalol go out; but the Canaanites went on living among
them and were put to forced work.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And Asher did not take the land of the
people of Acco, or Zidon, or Ahlab, or Achzib, or Helbah, or Aphik, or
Rehob, driving them out;

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> But the Asherites went on living among
the Canaanites, the people of the land, without driving them out.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Naphtali did not take the land of the
people of Beth-shemesh or of Beth-anath, driving them out; but he was
living among the Canaanites in the land; however, the people of
Beth-shemesh and Beth-anath were put to forced work.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And the children of Dan were forced into
the hill-country by the Amorites, who would not let them come down into
the valley;

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> For the Amorites would go on living in
Mount Heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim; but the children of Joseph
became stronger than they, and put them to forced work.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And the limit of the Edomites went from
the slope of Akrabbim from Sela and up.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now the angel of the Lord came up from
Gilgal to Bochim. And he said, \*\*\* I took you out of Egypt, guiding
you into the land which I gave by an oath to your fathers; and I said,
My agreement with you will never be broken by me:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And you are to make no agreement with the
people of this land; you are to see that their altars are broken down:
but you have not given ear to my voice: what have you done?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And so I have said, I will not send them
out from before you; but they will be a danger to you, and their gods
will be a cause of falling to you.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Now on hearing these words which the angel
of the Lord said to all the children of Israel, the people gave
themselves up to loud crying and weeping.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they gave that place the name of
Bochim, and made offerings there to the Lord.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And Joshua let the people go away, and the
children of Israel went, every man to his heritage, to take the land for
themselves.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the people were true to the Lord all
the days of Joshua, and all the days of the responsible men who were
still living after the death of Joshua, and had seen all the great work
of the Lord which he had done for Israel.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And death came to Joshua, the son of Nun,
the servant of the Lord, he being a hundred and ten years old.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And they put his body in the earth in the
land of his heritage in Timnath-heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim to
the north of Mount Gaash.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And in time death overtook all that
generation; and another generation came after them, having no knowledge
of the Lord or of the things which he had done for Israel.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And the children of Israel did evil in
the eyes of the Lord and became servants to the Baals;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And they gave up the Lord, the God of
their fathers, who had taken them out of the land of Egypt, and went
after other gods, the gods of the peoples round about them, worshipping
them and moving the Lord to wrath.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And they gave up the Lord, and became the
servants of Baal and the Astartes.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the wrath of the Lord was burning
against Israel, and he gave them up into the hands of those who
violently took their property, and into the hands of their haters all
round them, so that they were forced to give way before them.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Wherever they went out, the hand of the
Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had taken his oath it would
be; and things became very hard for them.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then the Lord gave them judges, as their
saviours from the hands of those who were cruel to them.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But still they would not give ear to
their judges, but went after other gods and gave them worship; quickly
turning from the way in which their fathers had gone, keeping the orders
of the Lord; but they did not do so.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And whenever the Lord gave them judges,
then the Lord was with the judge, and was their saviour from the hands
of their haters all the days of the judge; for the Lord was moved by
their cries of grief because of those who were cruel to them.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But whenever the judge was dead, they
went back and did more evil than their fathers, going after other gods,
to be their servants and their worshippers; giving up nothing of their
sins and their hard-hearted ways.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the wrath of the Lord was burning
against Israel, and he said, Because this nation has not been true to my
agreement which I made with their fathers, and has not given ear to my
voice;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> From now on I will not go on driving out
from before them any of the nations which at the death of Joshua were
still living in this land;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> In order to put Israel to the test, and
see if they will keep the way of the Lord, walking in it as their
fathers did, or not.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> So the Lord let those nations go on
living in the land, not driving them out quickly, and did not give them
up into the hands of Joshua.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now these are the nations which the Lord
kept in the land for the purpose of testing Israel by them, all those
who had had no experience of all the wars of Canaan;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Only because of the generations of the
children of Israel, for the purpose of teaching them war--only those who
up till then had no experience of it;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The five chiefs of the Philistines, and all
the Canaanites and the Zidonians and the Hivites living in Mount
Lebanon, from the mountain Baal-hermon as far as Hamath:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For the purpose of testing Israel by them,
to see if they would give ear to the orders of the Lord, which he had
given to their fathers by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Now the children of Israel were living
among the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And they took as wives the daughters of
these nations and gave their daughters to their sons, and became
servants to their gods.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the children of Israel did evil in the
eyes of the Lord, and put out of their minds the Lord their God, and
became servants to the Baals and the Astartes.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> So the wrath of the Lord was burning
against Israel, and he gave them up into the hands of Cushan-rishathaim,
king of Mesopotamia; and the children of Israel were his servants for
eight years.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And when the children of Israel made prayer
to the Lord, he gave them a saviour, Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's
younger brother.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the spirit of the Lord came on him
and he became judge of Israel, and went out to war, and the Lord gave up
Cushan-rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia, into his hands and he overcame
him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Then for forty years the land had peace,
till the death of Othniel, the son of Kenaz.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Then the children of Israel again did
evil in the eyes of the Lord; and the Lord made Eglon, king of Moab,
strong against Israel, because they had done evil in the Lord's eyes.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Eglon got together the people of
Ammon and Amalek, and they went and overcame Israel and took the town of
palm-trees.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the children of Israel were servants
to Eglon, king of Moab, for eighteen years.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Then when the children of Israel made
prayer to the Lord, he gave them a saviour, Ehud, the son of Gera, the
Benjamite, a left-handed man; and the children of Israel sent an
offering by him to Eglon, king of Moab.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> So Ehud made himself a two-edged sword, a
cubit long, which he put on at his right side under his robe.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And he took the offering to Eglon, king
of Moab, who was a very fat man.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And after giving the offering, he sent
away the people who had come with the offering.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But he himself, turning back from the
stone images at Gilgal, said, I have something to say to you in secret,
O king. And he said, Let there be quiet. Then all those who were waiting
before him went out.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Then Ehud came in to him while he was
seated by himself in his summer-house. And Ehud said, I have a word from
God for you. And he got up from his seat.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And Ehud put out his left hand, and took
the sword from his right side, and sent it into his stomach;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the hand-part went in after the
blade, and the fat was joined up over the blade; for he did not take the
sword out of his stomach. And he went out into the ...

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then Ehud went out into the covered way,
shutting the doors of the summer-house on him and locking them.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Now when he had gone, the king's servants
came, and saw that the doors of the summer-house were locked; and they
said, It may be that he is in his summer-house for a private purpose.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And they went on waiting till they were
shamed, but the doors were still shut; so they took the key, and,
opening them, saw their lord stretched out dead on the floor.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> But Ehud had got away while they were
waiting and had gone past the stone images and got away to Seirah.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And when he came there, he had a horn
sounded in the hill-country of Ephraim, and all the children of Israel
went down with him from the hill-country, and he at their head.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And he said to them, Come after me; for
the Lord has given the Moabites, your haters, into your hands. So they
went down after him and took the crossing-places of Jordan against Moab,
and let no one go across.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> At that time they put about ten thousand
men of Moab to the sword, every strong man and every man of war; not a
man got away.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> So Moab was broken that day under the
hand of Israel. And for eighty years the land had peace.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> And after him came Shamgar, the son of
Anath, who put to death six hundred Philistines with an ox-stick; and he
was another saviour of Israel.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the children of Israel again did evil
in the eyes of the Lord when Ehud was dead.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And the Lord gave them up into the hands of
Jabin, king of Canaan, who was ruling in Hazor; the captain of his army
was Sisera, who was living in Harosheth of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Then the children of Israel made prayer to
the Lord; for he had nine hundred iron war-carriages, and for twenty
years he was very cruel to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Now Deborah, a woman prophet, the wife of
Lapidoth, was judge of Israel at that time.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> (And she had her seat under the palm-tree
of Deborah between Ramah and Beth-el in the hill-country of Ephraim; and
the children of Israel came up to her to be judged.)

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And she sent for Barak, the son of Abinoam,
from Kedesh-naphtali, and said to him, Has not the Lord, the God of
Israel, given orders saying, Go and get your force into line in Mount
Tabor, and take with you ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali
and of the children of Zebulun?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I will make Sisera, the captain of
Jabin's army, with his war-carriages and his forces, come against you at
the river Kishon, where I will give him into your hands.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And Barak said to her, If you will go with
me then I will go; but if you will not go with me I will not go.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And she said, I will certainly go with you:
though you will get no honour in your undertaking, for the Lord will
give Sisera into the hands of a woman. So Deborah got up and went with
Barak to Kedesh.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then Barak sent for Zebulun and Naphtali
to come to Kedesh; and ten thousand men went up after him, and Deborah
went up with him.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Now Heber the Kenite, separating himself
from the rest of the Kenites, from the children of Hobab, the
brother-in-law of Moses, had put up his tent as far away as the oak-tree
in Zaanannim, by Kedesh.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And word was given to Sisera that Barak,
the son of Abinoam, had gone up to Mount Tabor.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> So Sisera got together all his
war-carriages, nine hundred war-carriages of iron, and all the people
who were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles as far as the river
Kishon.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then Deborah said to Barak, Up! for today
the Lord has given Sisera into your hands: has not the Lord gone out
before you? So Barak went down from Mount Tabor and ten thousand men
after him.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And the Lord sent fear on Sisera and all
his war-carriages and all his army before Barak; and Sisera got down
from his war-carriage and went in flight on foot.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> But Barak went after the war-carriages
and the army as far as Harosheth of the Gentiles; and all Sisera's army
was put to the sword; not a man got away.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But Sisera went in flight on foot to the
tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite; for there was peace between
Jabin, king of Hazor, and the family of Heber the Kenite.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Jael went out to Sisera, and said to
him, Come in, my lord, come in to me without fear. So he went into her
tent, and she put a cover over him.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Then he said to her, Give me now a little
water, for I have need of a drink. And opening a skin of milk, she gave
him drink, and put the cover over him again.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And he said to her, Take your place at
the door of the tent, and if anyone comes and says to you, Is there any
man here, say, No.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Then Jael, Heber's wife, took a tent-pin
and a hammer and went up to him quietly, driving the pin into his head,
and it went through his head into the earth, for he was in a deep sleep
from weariness; and so he came to his end.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Then Jael went out, and meeting Barak
going after Sisera, said to him, Come, and I will let you see the man
you are searching for. So he came into her tent and saw, and there was
Sisera stretched out dead with the tent-pin in his head.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> So that day God overcame Jabin, king of
Canaan, before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And the power of the children of Israel
went on increasing against Jabin, king of Canaan, till he was cut off.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> At that time Deborah and Barak, the son of
Abinoam, made this song, saying:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Because of the flowing hair of the fighters
in Israel, because the people gave themselves freely, give praise to the
Lord.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Give attention, O kings; give ear, O
rulers; I, even I, will make a song to the Lord; I will make melody to
the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Lord, when you went out from Seir, moving
like an army from the field of Edom, the earth was shaking and the
heavens were troubled, and the clouds were dropping water.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> The mountains were shaking before the Lord,
before the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> In the days of Shamgar, the son of Anath,
in the days of Jael, the highways were not used, and travellers went by
side roads.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Country towns were no more in Israel,
\*\*\* were no more, till you, Deborah, came up, till you came up as a
mother in Israel.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> They had no one to make arms, there were no
more armed men in the towns; was there a body-cover or a spear to be
seen among forty thousand in Israel?

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Come, you rulers of Israel, you who gave
yourselves freely among the people: give praise to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Let them give thought to it, who go on
white asses, and those who are walking on the road.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Give ear to the women laughing by the
water-springs; there they will give again the story of the upright acts
of the Lord, all the upright acts of his arm in Israel.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Awake! awake! Deborah: awake! awake! give
a song: Up! Barak, and take prisoner those who took you prisoner, O son
of Abinoam.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Then the chiefs went down to the doors;
the Lord's people went down among the strong ones.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Out of Ephraim they came down into the
valley; after you, Benjamin, among your tribesmen; from Machir came down
the captains, and from Zebulun those in whose hand is the ruler's rod.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Your chiefs, Issachar, were with Deborah;
and Naphtali was true to Barak; into the valley they went rushing out at
his feet. In Reuben there were divisions, and great searchings of heart.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Why did you keep quiet among the sheep,
hearing nothing but the watchers piping to the flocks?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Gilead was living over Jordan; and Dan
was waiting in his ships; Asher kept in his place by the sea's edge,
living by his inlets.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> It was the people of Zebulun who put
their lives in danger, even to death, with Naphtali on the high places
of the field.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> The kings came on to the fight, the kings
of Canaan were warring; in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo: they took
no profit in money.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> The stars from heaven were fighting; from
their highways they were fighting against Sisera.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> The river Kishon took them violently
away, stopping their flight, the river Kishon. Give praise, O my soul,
to the strength of the Lord!

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Then loudly the feet of the horses were
sounding with the stamping, the stamping of their war-horses.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> A curse, a curse on Meroz! said the angel
of the Lord. A bitter curse on her townspeople! Because they came not to
the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord among the strong ones.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Blessings be on Jael, more than on all
women! Blessings greater than on any in the tents!

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> His request was for water, she gave him
milk; she put butter before him on a fair plate.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> She put out her hand to the tent-pin, and
her right hand to the workman's hammer; and she gave Sisera a blow,
crushing his head, wounding and driving through his brow.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Bent at her feet he went down, he was
stretched out; bent at her feet he went down; where he was bent down,
there he went down in death.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Looking out from the window she gave a
cry, the mother of Sisera was crying out through the window, Why is his
carriage so long in coming? When will the noise of his wheels be
sounding?

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Her wise women gave answer to her, yes,
she made answer again to herself,

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Are they not getting, are they not
parting the goods among them: a young girl or two to every man; and to
Sisera robes of coloured needlework, worked in fair colours on this side
and on that, for the neck of the queen?

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> So may destruction come on all your
haters, O Lord; but let your lovers be like the sun going out in his
strength. And for forty years the land had peace.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the children of Israel did evil in the
eyes of the Lord; and the Lord gave them up into the hand of Midian for
seven years.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And Midian was stronger than Israel; and
because of the Midianites, the children of Israel made holes for
themselves in the mountains, and hollows in the rocks, and strong
places.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And whenever Israel's grain was planted,
the Midianites and the Amalekites and the people of the east came up
against them;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And put their army in position against
them; and they took all the produce of the earth as far as Gaza, till
there was no food in Israel, or any sheep or oxen or asses.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For they came up regularly with their oxen
and their tents; they came like the locusts in number; they and their
camels were without number; and they came into the land for its
destruction.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And Israel was in great need because of
Midian; and the cry of the children of Israel went up to the Lord.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And when the cry of the children of Israel,
because of Midian, came before the Lord,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> The Lord sent a prophet to the children of
Israel, who said to them, The Lord the God of Israel, has said, I took
you up from Egypt, out of the prison-house;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And I took you out of the hands of the
Egyptians and out of the hands of all who were cruel to you, and I sent
them out by force from before you and gave you their land;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And I said to you, I am the Lord your
God; you are not to give worship to the gods of the Amorites in whose
land you are living, but you did not give ear to my voice.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Now the angel of the Lord came and took
his seat under the oak-tree in Ophrah, in the field of Joash the
Abiezrite; and his son Gideon was crushing grain in the place where the
grapes were crushed, so that the Midianites might not see it.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the angel of the Lord came before his
eyes, and said to him, The Lord is with you, O man of war.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then Gideon said to him, O my lord, if
the Lord is with us why has all this come on us? And where are all his
works of power, of which our fathers have given us word, saying, Did not
the Lord take us out of Egypt? But now he has given us up, handing us
over to the power of Midian.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the Lord, turning to him, said, Go in
the strength you have and be Israel's saviour from Midian: have I not
sent you?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And he said to him, O Lord, how may I be
the saviour of Israel? See, my family is the poorest in Manasseh, and I
am the least in my father's house.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Then the Lord said to him, Truly, I will
be with you, and you will overcome the Midianites as if they were one
man.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> So he said to him, If now I have grace in
your eyes, then give me a sign that it is you who are talking to me.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Do not go away till I come with my
offering and put it before you. And he said, I will not go away before
you come back.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Then Gideon went in and made ready a
young goat, and with an ephah of meal he made unleavened cakes: he put
the meat in a basket and the soup in which it had been cooked he put in
a pot, and he took it out to him under the oak-tree and gave it to him
there.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And the angel of God said to him, Take
the meat and the unleavened cakes and put them down on the rock over
there, draining out the soup over them. And he did so.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then the angel of the Lord put out the
stick which was in his hand, touching the meat and the cakes with the
end of it; and a flame came up out of the rock, burning up the meat and
the cakes: and the angel of the Lord was seen no longer.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Then Gideon was certain that he was the
angel of the Lord; and Gideon said, I am in fear, O Lord God! for I have
seen the angel of the Lord face to face.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> But the Lord said to him, Peace be with
you; have no fear: you are in no danger of death.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Then Gideon made an altar there to the
Lord, and gave it the name Yahweh-shalom; to this day it is in Ophrah of
the Abiezrites.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> The same night the Lord said to him, Take
ten men of your servants and an ox seven years old, and after pulling
down the altar of Baal which is your father's, and cutting down the holy
tree by its side,

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Make an altar to the Lord your God on the
top of this rock, in the ordered way and take the ox and make a burned
offering with the wood of the holy tree which has been cut down.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Then Gideon took ten of his servants and
did as the Lord had said to him; but fearing to do it by day, because of
his father's people and the men of the town, he did it by night.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And the men of the town got up early in
the morning, and they saw the altar of Baal broken down, and the holy
tree which was by it cut down, and the ox offered on the altar which had
been put up there.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And they said to one another, Who has
done this thing? And after searching with care, they said, Gideon, the
son of Joash, has done this thing.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Then the men of the town said to Joash,
Make your son come out to be put to death, for pulling down the altar of
Baal and cutting down the holy tree which was by it.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> But Joash said to all those who were
attacking him, Will you take up the cause of Baal? will you be his
saviour? Let anyone who will take up his cause be put to death while it
is still morning: if he is a god, let him take up his cause himself
because of the pulling down of his altar.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> So that day he gave him the name of
Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal take up his cause against him because his
altar has been broken down.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> Then all the Midianites and the
Amalekites and the people of the east, banding themselves together, went
over and put up their tents in the valley of Jezreel.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> But the spirit of the Lord came on
Gideon; and at the sound of his horn all Abiezer came together after
him.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And he sent through all Manasseh, and
they came after him; and he sent to Asher and Zebulun and Naphtali, and
they came up and were joined to the others.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> Then Gideon said to God, If you are going
to give Israel salvation by my hand, as you have said,

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> See, I will put the wool of a sheep on
the grain-floor; if there is dew on the wool only, while all the earth
is dry, then I will be certain that it is your purpose to give Israel
salvation by my hand as you have said.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And it was so: for he got up early on the
morning after, and twisting the wool in his hands, he got a basin full
of water from the dew on the wool.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> Then Gideon said to God, Do not be moved
to wrath against me if I say only this: let me make one more test with
the wool; let the wool now be dry, while the earth is covered with dew.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> And that night God did so; for the wool
was dry, and there was dew on all the earth round it.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Then Jerubbaal, that is, Gideon, and all
the people with him, got up early and put up their tents by the side of
the water-spring of Harod; the tents of Midian were on the north side of
him, under the hill of Moreh in the valley.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And the Lord said to Gideon, So great is
the number of your people, that if I give the Midianites into their
hands they will be uplifted in pride over me and will say, I myself have
been my saviour.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So now, let it be given out to the people
that anyone who is shaking with fear is to go back from Mount Galud. So
twenty-two thousand of the people went back, but there were still ten
thousand.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then the Lord said to Gideon, There are
still more people than is necessary; take them down to the water so that
I may put them to the test for you there; then whoever I say is to go
with you will go, and whoever I say is not to go will not go.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> So he took the people down to the water;
and the Lord said to Gideon, Put on one side by themselves all those
drinking up the water with their tongues like a dog; and in the same
way, all those who go down on their knees to the water while drinking.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Now the number of those who took up the
water with their tongues was three hundred; all the rest of the people
went down on their knees to the water.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And the Lord said to Gideon, By those three
hundred who were drinking with their tongues I will give you salvation
and give the Midianites into your hands; let the rest of the people go
away, every man to his place.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> So they took the vessels of the people, and
their horns from their hands, and he sent them away, every man to his
tent, keeping only the three hundred; and the tents of Midian were lower
down in the valley.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> The same night the Lord said to him, Up! go
down now against their army, for I have given them into your hands.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> But if you have fear of going down, take
your servant Purah with you and go down to the tents;

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And after hearing what they are saying,
you will get strength to go down against the army. So he went down with
his servant Purah to the outer line of the tents of the armed men.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Now the Midianites and the Amalekites and
all the people of the east were covering the valley like locusts; and
their camels were like the sand by the seaside, without number.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> When Gideon came there, a man was giving
his friend an account of his dream, saying, See, I had a dream about a
cake of barley bread which, falling into the tents of Midian, came on to
the tent, overturning it so that it was stretched out flat on the earth.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And his friend in answer said, This is
certainly the sword of Gideon, the son of Joash, the men of Israel: into
their hands God has given up all the army of Midian.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Then Gideon, hearing the story of the
dream and the sense in which they took it, gave worship; then he went
back to the tents of Israel, and said, Up! for the Lord has given the
army of Midian into your hands.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Then separating the three hundred men
into three bands, he gave every man a horn, and a vessel in which was a
flaming branch.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And he said to them, Keep your eyes on
me, and do what I do; when I come to the outer line of tents, whatever I
do, you are to do the same.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> At the sound of my horn, and the horns of
those who are with me, let your horns be sounded all round the tents,
and say, For the Lord and for Gideon.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> So Gideon and the three hundred men who
were with him came to the outer line of tents, at the start of the
middle watch, when the watchmen had only then taken their stations; and
the horns were sounded and the vessels broken.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> So the three bands all gave a loud note
on their horns, and when the vessels had been broken, they took the
flaming branches in their left hands, and the horns in their right hands
ready for blowing, crying out, For the Lord and for Gideon.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Then they made a line round the tents,
every man in his place; and all the army, awaking from sleep, came
running out, and with loud cries went in flight.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the three hundred gave a loud note on
their horns, and every man's sword was turned by the Lord against his
brother all through the army; and the army went in flight as far as
Beth-shittah in the direction of Zeredah, to the edge of Abel-meholah by
Tabbath.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And the men of Israel came together from
Naphtali and from Asher and all Manasseh, and went after Midian.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Then Gideon sent through all the
hill-country of Ephraim saying, Come down against Midian, and keep the
ways across Jordan before they come. So all the men of Ephraim, massing
themselves together, kept the ways across Jordan.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And they took the two chiefs of Midian,
Oreb and Zeeb; and they put Oreb to death at the rock of Oreb, and Zeeb
they put to death at the place of the grape-crushing in Zeeb, and they
went after Midian; but the heads of Oreb and Zeeb they took across
Jordan to Gideon.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the men of Ephraim came and said to
him, Why did you not send for us when you went to war against Midian?
And they said sharp and angry words to him.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And he said to them, What have I done in
comparison with you? Is not that which Ephraim took up after the
grape-cutting better than all the grapes which Abiezer got in from the
grape-cutting?

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> God has given into your hands the chiefs of
Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; what have I been able to do in comparison with
you? And when he said this, their feeling about him became kinder.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Then Gideon came to Jordan and went over it
with his three hundred, overcome with weariness and in need of food.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he said to the men of Succoth, Give
bread cakes to my people, for they are overcome with weariness, and I am
going on after Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings of Midian.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> But the chiefs of Succoth said, Are the
hands of Zebah and Zalmunna even now in your hand that we are to give
bread to your army?

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Then Gideon said, Because of this, when the
Lord has given Zebah and Zalmunna into my hands, I will have you
stretched on a bed of thorns of the waste land and on sharp stems, and
have you crushed as grain is crushed on a grain-floor.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> So he went up from there to Penuel and made
the same request to the men of Penuel; but they gave him the same answer
as the men of Succoth had given.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> So he said to the men of Penuel, When I
come back in peace, I will have this tower broken down.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor and
their armies with them, about fifteen thousand men, those of all the
army of the children of the east who were still living; for a hundred
and twenty thousand of their swordsmen had been put to death.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And Gideon went up by the way used by the
people living in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and made an
attack on the army when they had no thought of danger.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Zebah and Zalmunna went in flight;
and he went after them, and took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and
Zalmunna, and put all the army to the curse.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then Gideon, the son of Joash, went back
from the fight:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And taking prisoner a young man of the
people of Succoth, he got from him, in answer to his questions, a list
of the chiefs of Succoth and the responsible men, seventy-seven men.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> So he came to the men of Succoth and
said, Here are Zebah and Zalmunna, on account of whom you made sport of
me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna even now in your hand,
that we are to give bread to your army who are overcome with weariness?

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Then he took the responsible men of the
town and had them crushed on a bed of thorns and sharp stems.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And he had the tower of Penuel broken
down and the men of the town put to death.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Then he said to Zebah and Zalmunna, Where
are the men whom you put to death at Tabor? And they gave answer, As you
are, so were they; every one of them was like a king's son.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And he said, They were my brothers, my
mother's sons: by the life of the Lord, if you had kept them safe, I
would not put you to death.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Then he said to Jether, his oldest son,
Up! Put them to death. But the boy did not take out his sword, fearing
because he was still a boy.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Up! Put an
end to us yourself: for you have a man's strength. Then Gideon got up
and put Zebah and Zalmunna to death and took the ornaments which were on
their camels' necks.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Then the men of Israel said to Gideon, Be
our ruler, you and your son and your son's son after him; for you have
been our saviour from the hands of Midian.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> But Gideon said to them, I will not be a
ruler over you, and my son will not be a ruler over you: it is the Lord
who will be ruler over you.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Then Gideon said to them, I have a
request to make to you; let every man give me the ear-rings he has
taken. (For they had gold ear-rings, because they were Ishmaelites.)

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And they gave answer, We will gladly give
them. So they put down a robe, every man dropping into it the ear-rings
he had taken.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> The weight of the gold ear-rings which he
got from them was one thousand, seven hundred shekels of gold; in
addition to the moon-ornaments and jewels and the purple robes which
were on the kings of Midian, and the chains on their camels' necks.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And Gideon made an ephod from them and
put it up in his town Ophrah; and all Israel went after it there and
were false to the Lord; and it became a cause of sin to Gideon and his
house.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> So Midian was broken before the children
of Israel and the Midianites never got back their strength. And the land
had peace for forty years, in the days of Gideon.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And Jerubbaal, the son of Joash, went
back to his house and was living there.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Gideon had seventy sons, the offspring of
his body; for he had a number of wives.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And the servant-wife he had in Shechem
had a son by him, to whom he gave the name Abimelech.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And Gideon, the son of Joash, came to his
end when he was very old, and his body was put in the resting-place of
Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And after the death of Gideon, the
children of Israel again went after the gods of Canaan and were false to
the Lord, and made Baal-berith their god.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And the children of Israel did not keep
in their minds the Lord their God, who had been their saviour from all
their haters on every side;

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> And they were not kind to the house of
Jerubbaal, that is, Gideon, in reward for all the good he had done to
Israel.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal, went
to Shechem to his mother's family, and said to them and to all the
family of his mother's father,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Say now in the ears of all the townsmen of
Shechem, Is it better for you to be ruled by all the seventy sons of
Jerubbaal or by one man only? And keep in mind that I am your bone and
your flesh.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> So his mother's family said all this about
him in the ears of all the townsmen of Shechem: and their hearts were
turned to Abimelech, for they said, He is our brother.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And they gave him seventy shekels of silver
from the house of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech got the support of a
number of uncontrolled and good-for-nothing persons.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Then he went to his father's house at
Ophrah, and put his brothers, the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, to death on
the same stone; however, Jotham, the youngest, kept himself safe by
going away to a secret place.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And all the townsmen of Shechem and all
Beth-millo came together and went and made Abimelech their king, by the
oak of the pillar in Shechem.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Now Jotham, on hearing of it, went to the
top of Mount Gerizim, and crying out with a loud voice said to them,
Give ear to me, you townsmen of Shechem, so that God may give ear to
you.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> One day the trees went out to make a king
for themselves; and they said to the olive-tree, Be king over us.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> But the olive-tree said to them, Am I to
give up my wealth of oil, by which men give honour to God, and go waving
over the trees?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Then the trees said to the fig-tree, You
come and be king over us.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> But the fig-tree said to them, Am I to
give up my sweet taste and my good fruit and go waving over the trees?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Then the trees said to the vine, You come
and be king over us.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But the vine said to them, Am I to give
up my wine, which makes glad God and men, to go waving over the trees?

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Then all the trees said to the thorn, You
come and be king over us.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And the thorn said to the trees, If it is
truly your desire to make me your king, then come and put your faith in
my shade; and if not, may fire come out of the thorn, burning up the
cedars of Lebanon.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So now, if you have done truly and
uprightly in making Abimelech king, and if you have done well to
Jerubbaal and his house in reward for the work of his hands;

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> (For my father made war for you, and put
his life in danger, and made you free from the hands of Midian;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And you have gone against my father's
family this day, and have put to death his sons, even seventy men on one
stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his servant-wife, king over
the townsmen of Shechem because he is your brother;)

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> If then you have done what is true and
upright to Jerubbaal and his family this day, may you have joy in
Abimelech, and may he have joy in you;

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> But if not, may fire come out from
Abimelech, burning up the townsmen of Shechem and Beth-millo; and may
fire come out from the townsmen of Shechem and Beth-millo, for the
destruction of Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Then Jotham straight away went in flight
to Beer, and was living there for fear of his brother Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> So Abimelech was chief over Israel for
three years.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And God sent an evil spirit between
Abimelech and the townsmen of Shechem; and the townsmen of Shechem were
false to Abimelech;

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> So that punishment for the violent attack
made on the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, and for their blood, might come
on Abimelech, their brother, who put them to death, and on the townsmen
of Shechem who gave him their help in putting his brothers to death.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And the townsmen of Shechem put secret
watchers on the tops of the mountains, and they made attacks on all who
went by on the road and took their goods; and word of this came to
Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Then Gaal, the son of Ebed, came with his
brothers, and went over to Shechem; and the men of Shechem put their
faith in him.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And they went out into their fields and
got in the fruit of their vines, and when the grapes had been crushed,
they made a holy feast and went into the house of their god, and over
their food and drink they were cursing Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And Gaal, the son of Ebed, said, Who is
Abimelech and who is Shechem, that we are to be his servants? Is it not
right for the son of Jerubbaal and Zebul his captain to be servants to
the men of Hamor, the father of Shechem? But why are we to be his
servants?

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> If only I had authority over this people!
I would put Abimelech out of the way, and I would say to Abimelech, Make
your army strong, and come out.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Now Zebul, the ruler of the town, hearing
what Gaal, the son of Ebed, had said, was moved to wrath.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And he sent to Abimelech at Arumah,
saying, See, Gaal, the son of Ebed, and his brothers have come to
Shechem, and they are working up the town against you.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> So now, get up by night, you and your
people, and keep watch in the field secretly;

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And in the morning, when the sun is up,
get up early and make a rush on the town; and when he and his people
come out against you, do to them whatever you have a chance to do.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> So Abimelech and the people with him got
up by night, in four bands, to make a surprise attack on Shechem.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Gaal, the son of Ebed, went out, and
took his place at the doorway into the town; then Abimelech and his
people got up from the place where they had been waiting.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And when Gaal saw the people, he said to
Zebul, See! people are coming down from the tops of the mountains. And
Zebul said to him, You see the shade of the mountains like men.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And Gaal said again, See! people are
coming down from the middle of the land, and one band is coming by way
of the oak-tree of the Seers.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> Then Zebul said to him, Now where is your
loud talk when you said, Who is Abimelech that we are to be his
servants? Is this not the people whom you were rating so low? Go out
now, and make war on them.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> So Gaal went out at the head of the
townsmen of Shechem and made war on Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> And Abimelech went after him and he went
in flight before him; and a great number were falling by the sword all
the way up to the town.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> Then Abimelech went back to Arumah; and
Zebul sent Gaal and his brothers away and would not let them go on
living in Shechem.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> Now the day after, the people went out
into the fields; and news of it came to Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And he took his people, separating them
into three bands, and was waiting secretly in the field; and when he saw
the people coming out of the town, he went up and made an attack on
them.

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> And Abimelech with his band made a rush,
and took up their position at the doorway into the town; and the other
two bands made a rush on all those who were in the fields, and overcame
them.

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> And all that day Abimelech was fighting
against the town; and he took it, and put to death the people who were
in it, and had the town pulled down and covered with salt.

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> Then all the townsmen of the tower of
Shechem, hearing of it, went into the inner room of the house of
El-berith.

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> And word was given to Abimelech that all
the men of the tower of Shechem were there together.

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> Then Abimelech went up to Mount Zalmon,
with all his people; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand and, cutting
down branches of trees, took them and put them on his back. And he said
to the people who were with him, Be quick and do as you have seen me do.

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> So all the people got branches, every man
cutting down a branch, and they went with Abimelech at their head and,
massing the branches against the inner room, put fire to the room over
them; so all those who were in the tower of Shechem, about a thousand
men and women, were burned to death with it.

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> Then Abimelech went to Thebez, and put
his army in position against Thebez and took it.

<span id="an_9:51">9:51</span> But in the middle of the town there was a
strong tower, to which all the men and women of the town went in flight
and, shutting themselves in, went up to the roof of the tower.

<span id="an_9:52">9:52</span> And Abimelech came to the tower and made
an attack on it, and got near to the door of the tower for the purpose
of firing it.

<span id="an_9:53">9:53</span> But a certain woman sent a great stone,
such as is used for crushing grain, on to the head of Abimelech,
cracking the bone.

<span id="an_9:54">9:54</span> Then quickly crying out to his
body-servant, he said to him, Take out your sword and put an end to me
straight away, so that men may not say of me, His death was the work of
a woman. So the young man put his sword through him, causing his death.

<span id="an_9:55">9:55</span> And when the men of Israel saw that
Abimelech was dead, they went away, every man to his place.

<span id="an_9:56">9:56</span> In this way Abimelech was rewarded by God
for the evil he had done to his father in putting his seventy brothers
to death;

<span id="an_9:57">9:57</span> And God sent back on to the heads of the
men of Shechem all the evil they had done, and the curse of Jotham, the
son of Jerubbaal, came on them.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now after Abimelech, Tola, the son of
Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, became the saviour of Israel;
he was living in Shamir in the hill-country of Ephraim.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> He was judge over Israel for twenty-three
years; and at his death his body was put to rest in the earth in Shamir.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And after him came Jair the Gileadite,
who was judge over Israel for twenty-two years.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he had thirty sons, who went on
thirty young asses; and they had thirty towns in the land of Gilead,
which are named Havvoth-Jair to this day.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And at the death of Jair his body was put
to rest in the earth in Kamon.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And again the children of Israel did evil
in the eyes of the Lord, worshipping the Baals and Astartes, and the
gods of Aram and the gods of Zidon and the gods of Moab and the gods of
the children of Ammon and the gods of the Philistines; they gave up the
Lord and were servants to him no longer.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the wrath of the Lord was burning
against Israel, and he gave them up into the hands of the Philistines
and into the hands of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And that year the children of Israel were
crushed under their yoke; for eighteen years all the children of Israel
on the other side of Jordan, in the land of the Amorites which is in
Gilead, were cruelly crushed down.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And the children of Ammon went over
Jordan, to make war against Judah and Benjamin and the house of Ephraim;
and Israel was in great trouble.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Then the children of Israel, crying out
to the Lord, said, Great is our sin against you, for we have given up
our God and have been servants to the Baals.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And the Lord said to the children of
Israel, Were not the Egyptians and the Amorites and the children of
Ammon and the Philistines

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the Zidonians and Amalek and Midian
crushing you down, and in answer to your cry did I not give you
salvation from their hands?

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But, for all this, you have given me up
and have been servants to other gods: so I will be your saviour no
longer.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Go, send up your cry for help to the
gods of your selection; let them be your saviours in the time of your
trouble.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the children of Israel said to the
Lord, We are sinners; do to us whatever seems good to you: only give us
salvation this day.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> So they put away the strange gods from
among them, and became the Lord's servants; and his soul was angry
because of the sorrows of Israel.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Then the children of Ammon came
together and put their army in position in Gilead. And the children of
Israel came together and put their army in position in Mizpah.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the people of Israel said to one
another, Who will be the first to make an attack on the children of
Ammon? We will make him head over all Gilead.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a great
man of war; he was the son of a loose woman, and Gilead was his father.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And Gilead's wife gave birth to sons, and
when her sons became men, they sent Jephthah away, saying, You have no
part in the heritage of our father's house, for you are the son of
another woman.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> So Jephthah went in flight from his
brothers and was living in the land of Tob, where a number of
good-for-nothing men, joining Jephthah, went out with him on his
undertakings.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Now after a time the children of Ammon
made war against Israel.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And when the children of Ammon made war
against Israel, the responsible men of Gilead went to get Jephthah back
from the land of Tob;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And they said to Jephthah, Come and be
our chief so that we may make war against the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But Jephthah said to the responsible men
of Gilead, Did you not, in your hate for me, send me away from my
father's house? Why do you come to me now when you are in trouble?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the responsible men of Gilead said to
Jephthah, That is the reason we have come back to you; so go with us and
make war against the children of Ammon, and we will make you our head
over all the people of Gilead.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Then Jephthah said to the responsible men
of Gilead, If you take me back to make war against the children of
Ammon, and if with the help of the Lord I overcome them, will you make
me your head?

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And the responsible men of Gilead said
to Jephthah, May the Lord be our witness: we will certainly do as you
say.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> So Jephthah went with the responsible
men of Gilead, and the people made him head and chief over them; and
Jephthah said all these things before the Lord in Mizpah.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Then Jephthah sent men to the king of
the children of Ammon, saying, What have you against me that you have
come to make war against my land?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the king of the children of Ammon
said to the men sent by Jephthah, Because Israel, when he came up out of
Egypt, took away my land, from the Arnon as far as the Jabbok and as far
as Jordan: so now, give me back those lands quietly.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Jephthah sent again to the king of
the children of Ammon,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And said to him, This is the word of
Jephthah: Israel did not take away the land of Moab or the land of the
children of Ammon;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But when they came up from Egypt,
Israel went through the waste land to the Red Sea and came to Kadesh;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Then Israel sent men to the king of
Edom saying, Let me now go through your land; but the king of Edom did
not give ear to them. And in the same way he sent to the king of Moab,
but he would not; so Israel went on living in Kadesh.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Then he went on through the waste land
and round the land of Edom and the land of Moab, and came by the east
side of the land of Moab, and put up their tents on the other side of
the Arnon; they did not come inside the limit of Moab, for the Arnon was
the limit of Moab.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And Israel sent men to Sihon, king of
the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said to him, Let me now go
through your land to my place.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But Sihon would not give way and let
Israel go through his land; and Sihon got together all his people, and
put his army in position in Jahaz, and made war on Israel.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And the Lord, the God of Israel, gave
Sihon and all his people into the hands of Israel, and they overcame
them; so all the land of the Amorites, the people of that land, became
Israel's.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> All the limit of the Amorites was
theirs, from the Arnon as far as the Jabbok and from the waste land even
to Jordan.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> So now the Lord, the God of Israel, has
taken away their land from the Amorites and given it to his people
Israel; are you then to have it?

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Do you not keep the lands of those whom
Chemosh your god sends out from before you? So we will keep all the
lands of those whom the Lord our God sends out from before us.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> What! are you any better than Balak,
the son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he ever take up a cause against
Israel or make war against them?

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> While Israel was living in Heshbon and
its daughter-towns and in Aroer and its daughter-towns and in all the
towns which are by the side of the Arnon, for three hundred years, why
did you not get them back at that time?

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> So I have done no wrong against you,
but you are doing wrong to me in fighting against me: may the Lord, who
is Judge this day, be judge between the children of Israel and the
children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> The king of the children of Ammon,
however, did not give ear to the words which Jephthah sent to him.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Then the spirit of the Lord came on
Jephthah, and he went through Gilead and Manasseh, and came to Mizpeh of
Gilead; and from Mizpeh of Gilead he went over to the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And Jephthah took an oath to the Lord,
and said, If you will give the children of Ammon into my hands,

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Then whoever comes out from the door of
my house, meeting me when I come back in peace from the children of
Ammon, will be the Lord's and I will give him as a burned offering.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> So Jephthah went over to the children
of Ammon to make war on them; and the Lord gave them into his hands.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And he made an attack on them from
Aroer all the way to Minnith, overrunning twenty towns, as far as
Abel-cheramim, and put great numbers to the sword. So the children of
Ammon were crushed before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Then Jephthah came back to his house in
Mizpah, and his daughter came out, meeting him on his way with music and
with dances; she was his only child; he had no other sons or daughters.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And when he saw her he was overcome
with grief, and said, Ah! my daughter! I am crushed with sorrow, and it
is you who are the chief cause of my trouble; for I have made an oath to
the Lord and I may not take it back.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And she said to him, My father, you
have made an oath to the Lord; do then to me whatever you have said; for
the Lord has sent a full reward on your haters, on the children of
Ammon.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> Then she said to her father, Only do
this for me: let me have two months to go away into the mountains with
my friends, weeping for my sad fate.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And he said, Go then. So he sent her
away for two months; and she went with her friends to the mountains,
weeping for her sad fate.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And at the end of two months she went
back to her father, who did with her as he had said in his oath: and she
had never been touched by a man. So it became a rule in Israel,

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> For the women to go year by year
sorrowing for the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite, four days in every
year.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now the men of Ephraim came together and
took up arms and went over to Zaphon; and they said to Jephthah, Why did
you go over to make war against the children of Ammon without sending
for us to go with you? Now we will put your house on fire over you.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And Jephthah said to them, I and my
people were in danger, and the children of Ammon were very cruel to us,
and when I sent for you, you gave me no help against them.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> So when I saw that there was no help to
be had from you, I put my life in my hand and went over against the
children of Ammon, and the Lord gave them into my hands: why then have
you come up to me this day to make war on me?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then Jephthah got together all the men of
Gilead and made war on Ephraim; and the men of Gilead overcame Ephraim.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And the Gileadites took the
crossing-places of Jordan against the Ephraimites; and when any of the
men of Ephraim who had gone in flight said, let me go over; the men of
Gilead said to him, Are you an Ephraimite? And if he said, No;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Then they said to him, Now say
Shibboleth; and he said Sibboleth, and was not able to say it in the
right way; then they took him and put him to death at the
crossing-places of Jordan; and at that time forty-two thousand
Ephraimites were put to death.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Now Jephthah was judge of Israel for six
years. And Jephthah the Gileadite came to his death, and his body was
put to rest in his town, Mizpeh of Gilead.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And after him, Ibzan of Beth-lehem was
judge of Israel.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> He had thirty sons, and thirty daughters
whom he sent to other places, and he got thirty wives from other places
for his sons. And he was judge of Israel for seven years.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And Ibzan came to his death and his
body was put to rest at Beth-lehem.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And after him, Elon the Zebulonite was
judge of Israel; and he was judge of Israel for ten years.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Elon the Zebulonite came to his
death, and his body was put to rest in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And after him, Abdon, the son of
Hillel, the Pirathonite, was judge of Israel.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> He had forty sons and thirty sons' sons
who went on seventy young asses; and he was judge of Israel for eight
years.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And Abdon, the son of Hillel, came to
his death, and his body was put to rest in Pirathon in the land of
Ephraim, in the hill-country of the Amalekites.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the children of Israel again did evil
in the eyes of the Lord; and the Lord gave them into the hands of the
Philistines for forty years.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Now there was a certain man of Zorah of
the family of the Danites, and his name was Manoah; and his wife had
never given birth to a child.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And the angel of the Lord came to the
woman, and said to her, See now! though you have never given birth to
children, you will be with child and give birth to a son.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Now then take care to have no wine or
strong drink and to take no unclean thing for food;

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> For you are with child and will give
birth to a son; his hair is never to be cut, for the child is to be
separate to God from his birth; and he will take up the work of freeing
Israel from the hands of the Philistines.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Then the woman came in, and said to her
husband, A man came to me, and his form was like the form of a god,
causing great fear; I put no question to him about where he came from,
and he did not give me his name;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> But he said to me, You are with child and
will give birth to a son; and now do not take any wine or strong drink
or let anything unclean be your food; for the child will be separate to
God from his birth to the day of his death.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Then Manoah made prayer to the Lord, and
said, O Lord, let the man of God whom you sent come to us again and make
clear to us what we are to do for the child who is to come.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And God gave ear to the voice of Manoah;
and the angel of God came to the woman again when she was seated in the
field; but her husband Manoah was not with her.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> So the woman, running quickly, gave her
husband the news, saying, I have seen the man who came to me the other
day.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And Manoah got up and went after his
wife, and came up to the man and said to him, Are you the man who was
talking to this woman? And he said, I am.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And Manoah said, Now when your words
come true, what is to be the rule for the child and what will be his
work?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And the angel of the Lord said to
Manoah, Let the woman take note of what I have said to her.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> She is to have nothing which comes from
the vine for her food, and let her take no wine or strong drink or
anything which is unclean; let her take care to do all I have given her
orders to do.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And Manoah said to the angel of the
Lord, Now let us keep you while we make ready a young goat for you.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And the angel of the Lord said to
Manoah, Though you keep me I will not take of your food; but if you will
make a burned offering, let it be offered to the Lord. For it had not
come into Manoah's mind that he was the angel of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Then Manoah said to the angel of the
Lord, What is your name, so that when your words come true we may give
you honour?

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> But the angel of the Lord said to him,
Why are you questioning me about my name, seeing that it is a wonder?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> So Manoah took the young goat with its
meal offering, offering it on the rock to the Lord, who did strange
things.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And when the flame went up to heaven
from the altar, the angel of the Lord went up in the flame of the altar,
while Manoah and his wife were looking on; and they went down on their
faces to the earth.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But the angel of the Lord was seen no
more by Manoah and his wife. Then it was clear to Manoah that he was the
angel of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And Manoah said to his wife, Death will
certainly be our fate, for it is a god whom we have seen.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But his wife said to him, If the Lord
was purposing our death, he would not have taken our burned offering and
our meal offering, or have given us such orders about the child.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> So the woman gave birth to a son, and
gave him the name Samson; and he became a man and the blessing of the
Lord was on him.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And the spirit of the Lord first came
on him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now Samson went down to Timnah, and saw a
woman in Timnah, of the daughters of the Philistines;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And when he came back he said to his
father and mother, I have seen a woman in Timnah, of the daughters of
the Philistines: get her now for me for my wife.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Then his father and mother said to him,
Is there no woman among the daughters of your relations or among all my
people, that you have to go for your wife to the Philistines, who are
without circumcision? But Samson said to his father, Get her for me, for
she is pleasing to me.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Now his father and mother had no
knowledge that this was the purpose of the Lord, who had the destruction
of the Philistines in mind. Now the Philistines at that time were ruling
over Israel.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Then Samson went down to Timnah (and his
father and his mother,) and came to the vine-gardens of Timnah; and a
young lion came rushing out at him.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And the spirit of the Lord came on him
with power, and, unarmed as he was, pulling the lion in two as one might
do to a young goat, he put him to death; (but he said nothing to his
father and mother of what he had done.)

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> So he went down and had talk with the
woman; and she was pleasing to Samson.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Then after a time he went back to take
her; and turning from the road to see the dead body of the lion, he saw
a mass of bees in the body of the lion, and honey there.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And he took the honey in his hand, and
went on, tasting it on the way; and when he came to his father and
mother he gave some to them; but did not say that he had taken the honey
from the body of the lion.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Then Samson went down to the woman, and
made a feast there, as was the way among young men.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And he took thirty friends, and they
were with him.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And Samson said, Now I have a hard
question for you: if you are able to give me the answer before the seven
days of the feast are over, I will give you thirty linen robes and
thirty changes of clothing;

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> But if you are not able to give me the
answer, then you will have to give me thirty linen robes and thirty
changes of clothing. And they said to him, Put your hard question and
let us see what it is.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And he said, Out of the taker of food
came food, and out of the strong came the sweet. And at the end of three
days they were still not able to give the answer.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> So on the fourth day they said to
Samson's wife, Get from your husband the answer to his question by some
trick or other, or we will have you and your father's house burned with
fire; did you get us here to take all we have?

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Then Samson's wife, weeping over him,
said, Truly you have no love for me but only hate; you have put a hard
question to the children of my people and have not given me the answer.
And he said to her, See, I have not given the answer even to my father
or my mother; am I to give it to you?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And all the seven days of the feast she
went on weeping over him; and on the seventh day he gave her the answer,
because she gave him no peace; and she sent word of it to the children
of her people.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Then on the seventh day, before he went
into the bride's room, the men of the town said to him, What is sweeter
than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? And he said to them, If
you had not been ploughing with my cow you would not have got the answer
to my question.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the spirit of the Lord came rushing
on him, and he went down to Ashkelon and, attacking thirty men there,
took their clothing from them, and gave it to the men who had given the
answer to his hard question. Then, full of wrath, he went back to his
father's house.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But Samson's wife was given to the
friend who had been his best man.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now a short time after, at the time of
the grain-cutting, Samson, taking with him a young goat, went to see his
wife; and he said, I will go in to my wife into the bride's room. But
her father would not let him go in.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And her father said, It seemed to me that
you had only hate for her; so I gave her to your friend: but is not her
younger sister fairer than she? so please take her in place of the
other.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Then Samson said to them, This time I
will give payment in full to the Philistines, for I am going to do them
great evil.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> So Samson went and got three hundred
foxes and some sticks of fire-wood; and he put the foxes tail to tail
with a stick between every two tails;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Then firing the sticks, he let the foxes
loose among the uncut grain of the Philistines, and all the corded stems
as well as the living grain and the vine-gardens and the olives went up
in flames.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Then the Philistines said, Who has done
this? And they said, Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite, because he
took his wife and gave her to his friend. So the Philistines came up and
had her and her father's house burned.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And Samson said to them, If you go on
like this, truly I will take my full payment from you; and that will be
the end of it.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And he made an attack on them, driving
them in uncontrolled flight, and causing great destruction; then he went
away to his safe place in the crack of the rock at Etam.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Then the Philistines went and put up
their tents in Judah, all round Lehi.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And the men of Judah said, Why have you
come up against us? And they said, We have come up to take Samson, and
to do to him as he has done to us.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Then three thousand of the men of Judah
went down to the crack of the rock of Etam, and said to Samson, Is it
not clear to you that the Philistines are our rulers? What is this you
have done to us? And he said to them, I only did to them as they did to
me.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then they said to him, We have come
down to take you and give you up into the hands of the Philistines. And
Samson said to them, Give me your oath that you will not make an attack
on me yourselves.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And they said, No; we will take you and
give you up into their hands, but truly we will not put you to death. So
knotting two new cords round him they took him up from the rock.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And when he came to Lehi, the
Philistines came out, meeting him with loud cries; then the spirit of
the Lord came rushing on him, and the cords on his arms became like
grass which has been burned with fire, and the bands came falling off
his hands.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And taking up the mouth-bone of an ass
newly dead, which he saw by chance on the earth, he put to death a
thousand men with it.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And Samson said, With a red ass's
mouth-bone I have made them red with blood, with a red ass's mouth-bone
I have sent destruction on a thousand men.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And having said these words, he let the
mouth-bone go out of his hand; so that place was named Ramath-lehi.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> After this, he was in great need of
water, and crying out to the Lord, he said, You have given this great
salvation by the hand of your servant, and now need of water will be my
death; and I will be given into the hands of this people who are without
circumcision.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Then God made a crack in the hollow
rock in Lehi and water came out of it; and after drinking, his spirit
came back to him and he was strong again; so that place was named
En-hakkore; it is in Lehi to this day.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And he was judge of Israel in the days
of the Philistines for twenty years.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now Samson went to Gaza, and there he saw
a loose woman and went in to her.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And it was said to the Gazites, Samson is
here. So they went round, watching for him all day at the doorway of the
town, but at night they kept quiet, saying, When daylight comes we will
put him to death.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And Samson was there till the middle of
the night; then he got up, and took a grip on the doors of the town,
pulling them up, together with their two supports and their locks, and
put them on his back and took them up to the top of the hill in front of
Hebron.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Now after this, he was in love with a
woman in the valley of Sorek, named Delilah.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And the chiefs of the Philistines came up
to her, and said to her, Make use of your power over him and see what is
the secret of his great strength, and how we may get the better of him,
and put bands on him, so that we may make him feeble; and every one of
us will give you eleven hundred shekels of silver.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> So Delilah said to Samson, Make clear to
me now what is the secret of your great strength, and how you may be put
in bands and made feeble.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And Samson said to her, If seven new
bow-cords which have never been made dry are knotted round me, I will
become feeble and will be like any other man.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> So the chiefs of the Philistines gave her
seven new bow-cords which had never been made dry, and she had them
tightly knotted round him.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Now she had men waiting secretly in the
inner room; and she said to him, The Philistines are on you, Samson. And
the cords were broken by him as a twist of thread is broken when touched
by a flame. So the secret of his strength did not come to light.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Then Delilah said to Samson, See, you
have been making sport of me with false words; now, say truly how may
you be put in bands?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And he said to her, If they only put
round me new thick cords which have never been used, then I will become
feeble and will be like any other man.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> So Delilah took new thick cords,
knotting them tightly round him, and said to him, The Philistines are on
you, Samson. And men were waiting secretly in the inner room. And the
cords were broken off his arms like threads.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Then Delilah said to Samson, Up to now
you have made sport of me with false words; now say truly, how may you
be put in bands? And he said to her, If you get the seven twists of my
hair worked into the cloth you are making and fixed with the pin, I will
become feeble and will be like any other man.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> So while he was sleeping she got the
seven twists of his hair worked into her cloth and fixed with the pin,
and said to him, The Philistines are on you, Samson. Then awaking from
his sleep, he got up quickly, pulling up cloth and machine together.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And she said to him, Why do you say you
are my lover when your heart is not mine? Three times you have made
sport of me, and have not made clear to me the secret of your great
strength.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> So day after day she gave him no peace,
for ever questioning him till his soul was troubled to death.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And opening all his heart to her, he
said to her, My head has never been touched by a blade, for I have been
separate to God from the day of my birth: if my hair is cut off, then my
strength will go from me and I will become feeble, and will be like any
other man.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And when Delilah saw that he had let
her see into his heart, she sent word to the chiefs of the Philistines
saying, Come up this time, for he has let out all his heart to me. Then
the chiefs of the Philistines came to her, with the money in their
hands.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And she made him go to sleep on her
knees; and she sent for a man and had his seven twists of hair cut off;
and while it was being done he became feeble and his strength went from
him.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then she said, The Philistines are on
you, Samson. And awaking from his sleep, he said, I will go out as at
other times, shaking myself free. But he was not conscious that the Lord
had gone from him.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> So the Philistines took him and put out
his eyes; then they took him down to Gaza, and, chaining him with bands
of brass, put him to work crushing grain in the prison-house.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> But the growth of his hair was starting
again after it had been cut off.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And the chiefs of the Philistines came
together to make a great offering to Dagon their god, and to be glad;
for they said, Our god has given into our hands Samson our hater.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And when the people saw him, they gave
praise to their god; for they said, Our god has given into our hands the
one who was fighting against us, who made our country waste, and who put
great numbers of us to death.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Now when their hearts were full of joy,
they said, Send for Samson to make sport for us. And they sent for
Samson out of the prison-house, and he made sport before them; and they
put him between the pillars.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And Samson said to the boy who took him
by the hand, Let me put my hand on the pillars supporting the house, so
that I may put my back against them.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Now the house was full of men and
women; and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and about three
thousand men and women were on the roof, looking on while Samson made
sport.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And Samson, crying out to the Lord,
said, O Lord God, do have me now in mind, and do make me strong only
this once, O God, so that I may take one last payment from the
Philistines for my two eyes.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> Then Samson put his arms round the two
middle pillars supporting the house, putting his weight on them, on one
with his right hand and on the other with his left.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And Samson said, Let death overtake me
with the Philistines. And he put out all his strength, and the house
came down on the chiefs and on all the people who were in it. So the
dead whom he sent to destruction by his death were more than all those
on whom he had sent destruction in his life.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> Then his brothers and his father's
people came down and took him up and put his body to rest in the earth
between Zorah and Eshtaol in the resting-place of Manoah his father. And
he had been judge of Israel for twenty years.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Now there was a man of the hill-country
of Ephraim named Micah.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And he said to his mother, The eleven
hundred shekels of silver which were taken from you, about which you
took an oath and said in my hearing, I have given this silver to the
Lord from my hand for myself, to make a pictured image and a metal
image: see, I have the silver, for I took it: so now I will give it back
to you. And his mother said, May the blessing of the Lord be on my son.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And he gave back the eleven hundred
shekels of silver to his mother, and his mother said, I have made the
silver holy to the Lord from me for my son, to make a pictured image and
a metal image.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> So he gave the silver back to his mother.
Then his mother took two hundred shekels of silver and gave them to a
metal-worker who made a pictured image and a metal image from them: and
it was in the house of Micah.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the man Micah had a house of gods;
and he made an ephod and family gods and put one of his sons in the
position of priest.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> In those days there was no king in
Israel: every man did as seemed right to him.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Now there was a young man living in
Beth-lehem-judah, of the family of Judah and a Levite, who was not a
townsman of the place.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And he went away from the town of
Beth-lehem-judah, looking for somewhere to make his living-place; and on
his journey he came to the hill-country of Ephraim, to the house of
Micah.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And Micah said to him, Where do you come
from? And he said to him, I am a Levite from Beth-lehem-judah, and I am
looking for a living-place.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Then Micah said to him, Make your
living-place with me, and be a father and a priest to me, and I will
give you ten shekels of silver a year and your clothing and food.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And the Levite said he would make his
living-place with the man, and he became to him as one of his sons.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And Micah gave the position to the
Levite, and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of
Micah.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Then Micah said, Now I am certain that
the Lord will do me good, seeing that the Levite has become my priest.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> In those days there was no king in
Israel, and in those days the Danites were looking for a heritage for
themselves, to be their living-place; for up to that time no
distribution of land had been made to them among the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> So the children of Dan sent five men from
among their number, strong men, from Zorah and from Eshtaol, to take a
look at the land and make a search through it; and they said to them, Go
and make a search through the land; and they came to the hill-country of
Ephraim, to the house of Micah, where they made a stop for the night.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> When they were near the house of Micah,
hearing a voice which was not strange to them, that of the young Levite,
they went out of their road to his place, and said to him, How did you
come here? and what are you doing in this place? and why are you here?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And he said to them, This is what Micah
did for me, and he gave me payment and I became his priest.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Then they said, Do get directions from
God for us, to see if the journey on which we are going will have a good
outcome.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And the priest said to them, Go in peace:
your way is guided by the Lord.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Then the five men went on their way and
came to Laish and saw the people who were there, living without thought
of danger, like the Zidonians, quiet and safe; for they had everything
on earth for their needs, and they were far from the Zidonians and had
no business with Aram.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> So they came back to their brothers in
Zorah and Eshtaol, and their brothers said to them, What news have you?

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And they said, Up! and let us go against
Laish; for we have seen the land, and it is very good: why are you doing
nothing? Do not be slow to go in and take the land for your heritage.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> When you come there you will come to a
people living without thought of danger; and the land is wide, and God
has given it into your hands: a place where there is everything on earth
for man's needs.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> So six hundred men of the Danites from
Zorah and Eshtaol went out armed with instruments of war.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And they went up and put up their tents
in Kiriath-jearim in Judah: so that place is named Mahaneh-dan to this
day. It is to the west of Kiriath-jearim.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> From there they went on to the
hill-country of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Then the five men who had gone to make
a search through the country of Laish, said to their brothers, Have you
knowledge that in these houses there is an ephod and family gods and a
pictured image and a metal image? So now you see what to do.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And turning from their road they came
to the house of the young Levite, the house of Micah, and said to him,
Is it well with you?

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And the six hundred armed men of the
Danites took their places by the doorway.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Then the five men who had gone to make
a search through the land, went in and took the pictured image and the
ephod and the family gods and the metal image; and the priest was by the
doorway with the six hundred armed men.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And when they went into Micah's house
and took out the pictured image and the ephod and the family gods and
the metal image, the priest said to them, What are you doing?

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And they said to him, Be quiet; say
nothing, and come with us and be our father and priest; is it better for
you to be priest to one man's house or to be priest to a tribe and a
family in Israel?

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Then the priest's heart was glad, and
he took the ephod and the family gods and the pictured image and went
with the people.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> So they went on their way again,
putting the little ones and the oxen and the goods in front of them.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> When they had gone some way from the
house of Micah, the men from the houses near Micah's house came together
and overtook the children of Dan,

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Crying out to them. And the Danites,
turning round, said to Micah, What is your trouble, that you have taken
up arms?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And he said, You have taken my gods
which I made, and my priest, and have gone away; what is there for me
now? Why then do you say to me, What is your trouble?

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And the children of Dan said to him,
Say no more, or men of bitter spirit may make an attack on you, causing
loss of your life and the lives of your people.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> Then the children of Dan went on their
way; and when Micah saw that they were stronger than he, he went back to
his house.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And they took that which Micah had
made, and his priest, and came to Laish, to a people living quietly and
without thought of danger, and they put them to the sword without mercy,
burning down their town.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And they had no saviour, because it was
far from Zidon, and they had no business with Aram; and it was in the
valley which is the property of Beth-rehob. And building up the town
again they took it for their living-place.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And they gave the town the name of Dan,
after Dan their father, who was the son of Israel: though the town had
been named Laish at first.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> (And the children of Dan put up the
pictured image for themselves; and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son
of Moses, and his sons were priests for the tribe of the Danites till
the day when the ark was taken prisoner.)

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And they put up for themselves the
image which Micah had made, and it was there all the time that the house
of God was in Shiloh.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Now in those days, when there was no king
in Israel, a certain Levite was living in the inmost parts of the
hill-country of Ephraim, and he got for himself a servant-wife from
Beth-lehem-judah.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And his servant-wife was angry with him,
and went away from him to her father's house at Beth-lehem-judah, and
was there for four months.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Then her husband got up and went after
her, with the purpose of talking kindly to her, and taking her back with
him; he had with him his young man and two asses: and she took him into
her father's house, and her father, when he saw him, came forward to him
with joy.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And his father-in-law, the girl's father,
kept him there for three days; and they had food and drink and took
their rest there.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Now on the fourth day they got up early
in the morning and he made ready to go away; but the girl's father said
to his son-in-law, Take a little food to keep up your strength, and then
go on your way.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> So seating themselves they had food and
drink, the two of them together; and the girl's father said to the man,
If it is your pleasure, take your rest here tonight, and let your heart
be glad.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And the man got up to go away, but his
father-in-law would not let him go, so he took his rest there again for
the night.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then early on the morning of the fifth
day he got up to go away; but the girl's father said, Keep up your
strength; so the two of them had a meal, and the man and his woman and
his servant did not go till after the middle of the day.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And when they got up to go away, his
father-in-law, the girl's father, said to him, Now evening is coming on,
so do not go tonight; see, the day is almost gone; take your rest here
and let your heart be glad, and tomorrow early, go on your way back to
your house.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> But the man would not be kept there
that night, and he got up and went away and came opposite to Jebus
(which is Jerusalem); and he had with him the two asses, ready for
travelling, and his woman.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> When they got near Jebus the day was
far gone; and the servant said to his master, Now let us go from our
road into this town of the Jebusites and take our night's rest there.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> But his master said to him, We will not
go out of our way into a strange town, whose people are not of the
children of Israel; but we will go on to Gibeah.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And he said to his servant, Come, let
us go on to one of these places, stopping for the night in Gibeah or
Ramah.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> So they went on their way; and the sun
went down when they were near Gibeah in the land of Benjamin.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And they went off the road there with
the purpose of stopping for the night in Gibeah: and he went in, seating
himself in the street of the town, for no one took them into his house
for the night.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Now when it was evening they saw an old
man coming back from his work in the fields; he was from the
hill-country of Ephraim and was living in Gibeah: but the men of the
place were Benjamites.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And when he saw the traveller in the
street of the town, the old man said, Where are you going? and where do
you come from?

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And he said to him, We are on our way
from Beth-lehem-judah to the inmost parts of the hill-country of
Ephraim: I came from there and went to Beth-lehem-judah: now I am on my
way back to my house, but no man will take me into his house.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> But we have dry grass and food for our
asses, as well as bread and wine for me, and for the woman, and for the
young man with us: we have no need of anything.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And the old man said, Peace be with
you; let all your needs be my care; only do not take your rest in the
street.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> So he took them into his house and gave
the asses food; and after washing their feet they took food and drink.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> While they were taking their pleasure
at the meal, the good-for-nothing men of the town came round the house,
giving blows on the door; and they said to the old man, the master of
the house, Send out that man who came to your house, so that we may take
our pleasure with him.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> So the man, the master of the house,
went out to them, and said, No, my brothers, do not this evil thing;
this man has come into my house, and you are not to do him this wrong.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> See, here is my daughter, a virgin, and
his servant-wife: I will send them out for you to take them and do with
them whatever you will. But do no such thing of shame to this man.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> But the men would not give ear to him:
so the man took his woman and sent her out to them; and they took her by
force, using her for their pleasure all night till the morning; and when
dawn came they let her go.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Then at the dawn of day the woman came,
and, falling down at the door of the man's house where her master was,
was stretched there till it was light.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> In the morning her master got up, and
opening the door of the house went out to go on his way; and he saw his
servant-wife stretched on the earth at the door of the house with her
hands on the step.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And he said to her, Get up and let us
be going; but there was no answer; so he took her up and put her on the
ass, and went on his way and came to his house.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And when he had come to his house, he
got his knife, and took the woman, cutting her up bone by bone into
twelve parts, which he sent through all Israel.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And he gave orders to the men whom he
sent, saying, This is what you are to say to all the men of Israel, Has
ever an act like this been done from the day when the children of Israel
came out of Egypt to this day? Give thought to it, turning it over in
your minds, and give your opinion of it.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Then all the children of Israel took up
arms, and the people came together like one man, from Dan to Beer-sheba,
and the land of Gilead, before the Lord at Mizpah.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And the chiefs of the people, out of all
the tribes of Israel, took their places in the meeting of the people of
God, four hundred thousand footmen armed with swords.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> (Now the children of Benjamin had word
that the children of Israel had gone up to Mizpah.) And the children of
Israel said, Make clear how this evil thing took place.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Then the Levite, the husband of the dead
woman, said in answer, I came to Gibeah in the land of Benjamin, I and
my servant-wife, for the purpose of stopping there for the night.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And the townsmen of Gibeah came together
against me, going round the house on all sides by night; it was their
purpose to put me to death, and my servant-wife was violently used by
them and is dead.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> So I took her, cutting her into parts
which I sent through all the country of the heritage of Israel: for they
have done an act of shame in Israel.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Here you all are, you children of Israel;
give now your suggestions about what is to be done.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Then all the people got up as one man and
said, Not one of us will go to his tent or go back to his house:

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> But this is what we will do to Gibeah: we
will go up against it by the decision of the Lord;

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And we will take ten men out of every
hundred, through all the tribes of Israel, a hundred out of every
thousand, a thousand out of every ten thousand, to get food for the
people, so that they may give to Gibeah of Benjamin the right punishment
for the act of shame they have done in Israel.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> So all the men of Israel were banded
together against the town, united like one man.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And the tribes of Israel sent men
through all the tribe of Benjamin saying, What is this evil which has
been done among you?

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Now give up those good-for-nothing
persons in Gibeah so that we may put them to death, clearing away the
evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not give ear to the
voice of their brothers, the children of Israel.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And the children of Benjamin came
together from all their towns to Gibeah, to go to war with the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And the children of Benjamin who came
that day from the towns were twenty-six thousand men armed with swords,
in addition to the people of Gibeah, numbering seven hundred of the best
fighting-men,

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Who were left-handed, able to send a
stone at a hair without error.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And the men of Israel, other than
Benjamin, were four hundred thousand in number, all armed with swords;
they were all men of war.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And they got up and went up to Beth-el
to get directions from God, and the children of Israel said, Who is to
be the first to go up to the fight against the children of Benjamin? And
the Lord said, Judah is to go up first.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> So the children of Israel got up in the
morning and put themselves in position against Gibeah.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And the men of Israel went out to war
against Benjamin (and the men of Israel put their forces in fighting
order against them at Gibeah).

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Then the children of Benjamin came out
from Gibeah, cutting down twenty-two thousand of the Israelites that
day.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> But the people, the men of Israel,
taking heart again, put their forces in order and took up the same
position as on the first day.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Now the children of Israel went up,
weeping before the Lord till evening, requesting the Lord and saying, Am
I to go forward again to the fight against the children of Benjamin my
brother? And the Lord said, Go up against him.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> So the children of Israel went forward
against the children of Benjamin the second day.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And the second day Benjamin went out
against them from Gibeah, cutting down eighteen thousand men of the
children of Israel, all swordsmen.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Then all the children of Israel, and
all the people, went up to Beth-el, weeping and waiting there before the
Lord, going without food all day till evening, and offering burned
offerings and peace-offerings before the Lord.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And the children of Israel made request
to the Lord, (for the ark of the agreement of the Lord was there in
those days,

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the
son of Aaron, was in his place before it,) and said, Am I still to go on
with the fight against the children of Benjamin my brother, or am I to
give it up? And the Lord said, Go on; for tomorrow I will give him into
your hands.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> So Israel put men secretly all round
Gibeah to make a surprise attack on it.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And the children of Israel went up
against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in
fighting order against Gibeah as before.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And the children of Benjamin went out
against the people, moving away from the town; and as before, at their
first attack, they put to death about thirty men of Israel on the
highways, of which one goes up to Beth-el and the other to Gibeah, and
in the open country.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And the children of Benjamin said, They
are giving way before us as at first. But the children of Israel said,
Let us go in flight and get them away from the town, into the highways.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> So all the men of Israel got up and put
themselves in fighting order at Baal-tamar: and those who had been
waiting secretly to make a surprise attack came rushing out of their
place on the west of Geba.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And they came in front of Gibeah, ten
thousand of the best men in all Israel, and the fighting became more
violent; but the children of Benjamin were not conscious that evil was
coming on them.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> Then the Lord sent sudden fear on
Benjamin before Israel; and that day the children of Israel put to death
twenty-five thousand, one hundred men of Benjamin, all of them
swordsmen.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> So the children of Benjamin saw that
they were overcome: and the men of Israel had given way before Benjamin,
putting their faith in the watchers who were to make the surprise attack
on Gibeah.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And the watchers, rushing on Gibeah and
overrunning it, put all the town to the sword without mercy.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Now the sign fixed between the men of
Israel and those making the surprise attack was that when they made a
pillar of smoke go up from the town,

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> The men of Israel were to make a turn
about in the fight. And Benjamin had overcome and put to death about
thirty of the men of Israel, and were saying, Certainly they are falling
back before us as in the first fight.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> Then the sign went up out of the town
in the pillar of smoke, and the Benjamites, turning back, saw all the
town going up in smoke to heaven.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> And the men of Israel had made a turn
about, and the men of Benjamin were overcome with fear, for they saw
that evil had overtaken them.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> So turning their backs on the men of
Israel, they went in the direction of the waste land; but the fight
overtook them; and those who came out of the town were heading them off
and putting them to the sword.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And crushing Benjamin down, they went
after them, driving them from Nohah as far as the east side of Gibeah.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> Eighteen thousand men of Benjamin came
to their death, all strong men of war.

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> And turning, they went in flight to the
rock of Rimmon in the waste land: and on the highways five thousand of
them were cut off by the men of Israel, who, pushing on hard after them
to Geba, put to death two thousand more.

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> So twenty-five thousand of the
swordsmen of Benjamin came to their end that day, all strong men of war.

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> But six hundred men, turning back, went
in flight to the rock of Rimmon in the waste land, and were living on
the rock of Rimmon for four months.

<span id="an_20:48">20:48</span> And the men of Israel, turning again
against the children of Benjamin, put to the sword without mercy all the
towns and the cattle and everything there was, burning every town which
came into their hands.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Now the men of Israel had taken an oath
in Mizpah, saying, Not one of us will give his daughter as a wife to
Benjamin.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And the people came to Beth-el, waiting
there till evening before God, and gave themselves up to bitter weeping.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And they said, O Lord, the God of Israel,
why has this fate come on Israel, that today one tribe has been cut off
from Israel?

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Then on the day after, the people got up
early and made an altar there, offering burned offerings and
peace-offerings.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And the children of Israel said, Who is
there among all the tribes of Israel, who did not come up to the Lord at
the meeting of all Israel? For they had taken a great oath that whoever
did not come up to Mizpah to the Lord was to be put to death.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the children of Israel were moved
with pity for Benjamin their brother, saying, Today one tribe has been
cut off from Israel.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> What are we to do about wives for those
who are still living? For we have taken an oath by the Lord that we will
not give them our daughters for wives.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And they said, Which one of the tribes of
Israel did not come up to Mizpah to the Lord? And it was seen that no
one had come from Jabesh-gilead to the meeting.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> For when the people were numbered, not
one man of the people of Jabesh-gilead was present.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> So they (the meeting) sent twelve
thousand of the best fighting-men, and gave them orders, saying, Go and
put the people of Jabesh-gilead to the sword without mercy, with their
women and their little ones.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And this is what you are to do: every
male, and every woman who has had sex relations with a man, you are to
put to the curse, but you are to keep safe the virgins. And they did so.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Now there were among the people of
Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins who had never had sex relations
with a man; these they took to their tents in Shiloh in the land of
Canaan.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And all the meeting sent to the men of
Benjamin who were in the rock of Rimmon, offering them peace.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Then Benjamin came back; and they gave
them the women whom they had kept from death among the women of
Jabesh-gilead: but still there were not enough for them.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And the people were moved with pity for
Benjamin, because the Lord had let his wrath loose on the tribes of
Israel.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Then the responsible men of the meeting
said, What are we to do about wives for the rest of them, seeing that
the women of Benjamin are dead?

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And they said, How is the rest of
Benjamin to be given offspring so that one tribe of Israel may not be
put out of existence,

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Seeing that we may not give them our
daughters as wives? For the children of Israel had taken an oath,
saying, Cursed is he who gives a wife to Benjamin.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And they said, See, every year there is
a feast of the Lord in Shiloh, which is to the north of Beth-el, on the
east side of the highway which goes up from Beth-el to Shechem, and on
the south of Lebonah.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And they said to the men of Benjamin,
Go into the vine-gardens, waiting there secretly,

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And watching; and if the daughters of
Shiloh come out to take part in the dances, then come from the
vine-gardens and take a wife for every one of you from among the
daughters of Shiloh, and go back to the land of Benjamin.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And when their fathers or their
brothers come and make trouble, you are to say to them, Give them to us
as an act of grace; for we did not take them as wives for ourselves in
war; and if you yourselves had given them to us you would have been
responsible for the broken oath.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> So the men of Benjamin did this, and
got wives for themselves for every one of their number, taking them away
by force from the dance; then they went back to their heritage, building
up their towns and living in them.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Then the children of Israel went away
from there, every man to his tribe and his family, every man went back
to his heritage.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> In those days there was no king in
Israel: every man did what seemed right to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth](rut.md)
