[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe2)  [Next](jo2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 1 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> That which was from the first, which has
come to our ears, and which we have seen with our eyes, looking on it
and touching it with our hands, about the Word of life

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> (And the life was made clear to us, and we
have seen it and are witnessing to it and giving you word of that
eternal life which was with the Father and was seen by us);

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We give you word of all we have seen and
everything which has come to our ears, so that you may be united with
us; and we are united with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And we are writing these things to you so
that our joy may be made complete.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> This is the word which came to us from him
and which we give to you, that God is light and in him there is nothing
dark.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> If we say we are joined to him, and are
walking still in the dark, our words are false and our acts are untrue:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But if we are walking in the light, as he
is in the light, we are all united with one another, and the blood of
Jesus his Son makes us clean from all sin.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If we say that we have no sin, we are false
to ourselves and there is nothing true in us.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> If we say openly that we have done wrong,
he is upright and true to his word, giving us forgiveness of sins and
making us clean from all evil.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> If we say that we have no sin, we make
him false and his word is not in us.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My little children, I am writing these
things to you so that you may be without sin. And if any man is a
sinner, we have a friend and helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, the
upright one:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> He is the offering for our sins; and not
for ours only, but for all the world.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And by this we may be certain that we have
knowledge of him, if we keep his laws.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The man who says, I have knowledge of him,
and does not keep his laws, is false, and there is nothing true in him:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But in every man who keeps his word, the
love of God is made complete. By this we may be certain that we are in
him:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> He who says that he is living in him, will
do as he did.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> My loved ones, I do not give you a new law,
but an old law which you had from the first; this old law is the word
which came to your ears.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Again, I give you a new law, which is true
in him and in you; for the night is near its end and the true light is
even now shining out.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> He who says that he is in the light, and
has hate in his heart for his brother, is still in the dark.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> He who has love for his brother is in the
light, and there is no cause of error in him.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But he who has hate for his brother is in
the dark, walking in the dark with no knowledge of where he is going,
unable to see because of the dark.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I am writing to you, my children, because
you have forgiveness of sins through his name.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I am writing to you, fathers, because you
have knowledge of him who was from the first. I am writing to you, young
men, because you have overcome the Evil One. I have sent a letter to
you, children, because you have knowledge of the Father.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> I have sent a letter to you, fathers,
because you have knowledge of him who was from the first. I have sent a
letter to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God is
in you, and because you have overcome the Evil One.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Have no love for the world or for the
things which are in the world. If any man has love for the world, the
love of the Father is not in him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Because everything in the world, the
desire of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, and the pride of life, is
not of the Father but of the world.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the world and its desires is coming
to an end: but he who does God's pleasure is living for ever.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Little children, it is the last hour; and
as you were given word that the Antichrist would come, so now a number
of Antichrists have come to you; and by this we are certain that it is
the last hour.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They went out from us but they were not
of us; if they had been of us they would still be with us: but they went
out from us so that it might be made clear that they were not of us.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And you have the Spirit from the Holy One
and you all have knowledge.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I have not sent you this letter because
you have no knowledge of what is true, but because you have knowledge,
and because that which is false has nothing in common with that which is
true.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who is false but he who says that Jesus
is not the Christ? He is the Antichrist who has no belief in the Father
or the Son.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> He who has no belief in the Son has not
the Father: he who makes clear his belief in the Son has the Father.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But as for you, keep in your hearts the
things which were made clear to you from the first. If you keep these
things in your hearts you will be kept in the Father and the Son.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And this is the hope which he gave you,
even eternal life.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> I am writing these things to you about
those whose purpose is that you may be turned out of the true way.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> As for you, the Spirit which he gave you
is still in you, and you have no need of any teacher; but as his Spirit
gives you teaching about all things, and is true and not false, so keep
your hearts in him, through the teaching which he has given you.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And now, my children, keep your hearts in
him; so that at his revelation, we may have no fear or shame before him
at his coming.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> If you have knowledge that he is upright,
it is clear to you that everyone who does righteousness is his
offspring.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> See what great love the Father has given us
in naming us the children of God; and such we are. For this reason the
world does not see who we are, because it did not see who he was.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> My loved ones, now we are children of God,
and at present it is not clear what we are to be. We are certain that at
his revelation we will be like him; for we will see him as he is.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And everyone who has this hope in him makes
himself holy, even as he is holy.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Everyone who is a sinner goes against the
law, for sin is going against the law.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And you have knowledge that he came to take
away sin: and in him there is no sin.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Anyone who is in him does no sin; anyone
who is a sinner has not seen him and has no knowledge of him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> My little children, let no man take you out
of the true way: he who does righteousness is upright, even as he is
upright;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> The sinner is a child of the Evil One; for
the Evil One has been a sinner from the first. And the Son of God was
seen on earth so that he might put an end to the works of the Evil One.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Anyone who is a child of God does no sin,
because he still has God's seed in him; he is not able to be a sinner,
because God is his Father.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In this way it is clear who are the
children of God and who are the children of the Evil One; anyone who
does not do righteousness or who has no love for his brother, is not a
child of God.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Because this is the word which was given
to you from the first, that we are to have love for one another;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Not being of the Evil One like Cain, who
put his brother to death. And why did he put him to death? Because his
works were evil and his brother's works were good.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Do not be surprised, my brothers, if the
world has no love for you.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> We are conscious that we have come out of
death into life because of our love for the brothers. He who has no love
is still in death.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Anyone who has hate for his brother is a
taker of life, and you may be certain that no taker of life has eternal
life in him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> In this we see what love is, because he
gave his life for us; and it is right for us to give our lives for the
brothers.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But if a man has this world's goods, and
sees that his brother is in need, and keeps his heart shut against his
brother, how is it possible for the love of God to be in him?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> My little children, do not let our love
be in word and in tongue, but let it be in act and in good faith.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> In this way we may be certain that we are
true, and may give our heart comfort before him,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> When our heart says that we have done
wrong; because God is greater than our heart, and has knowledge of all
things.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> My loved ones, if our heart does not say
that we have done wrong, we have no fear before him;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And he gives us all our requests, because
we keep his laws and do the things which are pleasing in his eyes.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And this is his law, that we have faith
in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love for one another, even as
he said to us.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> He who keeps his laws is in God and God
is in him. And the Spirit which he gave us is our witness that he is in
us.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> My loved ones, do not put your faith in
every spirit, but put them to the test, to see if they are from God:
because a great number of false prophets have gone out into the world.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> By this you may have knowledge of the
Spirit of God: every spirit which says that Jesus Christ has come in the
flesh is of God:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And every spirit which does not say this is
not from God: this is the spirit of Antichrist, of which you have had
word; and it is in the world even now.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> You are of God, my little children, and you
have overcome them because he who is in you is greater than he who is in
the world.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> They are of the world, so their talk is the
world's talk, and the world gives ear to them.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> We are of God: he who has the knowledge of
God gives ear to us; he who is not of God does not give ear to us. By
this we may see which is the true spirit, and which is the spirit of
error.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> My loved ones, let us have love for one
another: because love is of God, and everyone who has love is a child of
God and has knowledge of God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He who has no love has no knowledge of God,
because God is love.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And the love of God was made clear to us
when he sent his only Son into the world so that we might have life
through him.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And this is love, not that we had love
for God, but that he had love for us, and sent his Son to be an offering
for our sins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> My loved ones, if God had such love for
us, it is right for us to have love for one another.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> No man has ever seen God: if we have love
for one another, God is in us and his love is made complete in us:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And his Spirit which he has given us is
the witness that we are in him and he is in us.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And we have seen and give witness that
the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Everyone who says openly that Jesus is
the Son of God, has God in him and is in God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And we have seen and had faith in the
love which God has for us. God is love, and everyone who has love is in
God, and God is in him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In this way love is made complete in us,
so that we may be without fear on the day of judging, because as he is,
so are we in this world.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> There is no fear in love: true love has
no room for fear, because where fear is, there is pain; and he who is
not free from fear is not complete in love.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> We have the power of loving, because he
first had love for us.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> If a man says, I have love for God, and
has hate for his brother, his words are false: for how is the man who
has no love for his brother whom he has seen, able to have love for God
whom he has not seen?

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And this is the word which we have from
him, that he who has love for God is to have the same love for his
brother.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Everyone who has faith that Jesus is the
Christ is a child of God: and everyone who has love for the Father has
love for his child.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> In this way, we are certain that we have
love for the children of God, when we have love for God and keep his
laws.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For loving God is keeping his laws: and his
laws are not hard.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Anything which comes from God is able to
overcome the world: and the power by which we have overcome the world is
our faith.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Who is able to overcome the world but the
man who has faith that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This is he who came by water and by blood,
Jesus Christ; not by water only but by water and by blood.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And the Spirit is the witness, because the
Spirit is true.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> There are three witnesses, the Spirit, the
water, and the blood: and all three are in agreement.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If we take the witness of men to be true,
the witness of God is greater: because this is the witness which God has
given about his Son.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He who has faith in the Son of God has
the witness in himself: he who has not faith in God makes him false,
because he has not faith in the witness which God has given about his
Son.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And his witness is this, that God has
given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He who has the Son has the life; he who
has not the Son of God has not the life.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> I have put these things in writing for
you who have faith in the name of the Son of God, so that you may be
certain that you have eternal life.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And we are certain that if we make any
request to him which is right in his eyes, he will give ear to us:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And if we are certain that he gives ear
to all our requests, we are equally certain that we will get our
requests.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If a man sees his brother doing a sin
which is not bad enough for death, let him make a prayer to God, and God
will give life to him whose sin was not bad enough for death. There is a
sin whose punishment is death: I do not say that he may make such a
request then.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> All evil-doing is sin: but death is not
the punishment for every sort of sin.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> We are certain that one who is a child of
God will do no sin, but the Son of God keeps him so that he is not
touched by the Evil One.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> We are certain that we are of God, but
all the world is in the power of the Evil One.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And we are certain that the Son of God
has come, and has given us a clear vision, so that we may see him who is
true, and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the
true God and eternal life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> My little children, keep yourselves from
false gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John](jo2)
