[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sa2)  [Next](kg2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 1 Kings

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now King David was old and far on in years;
and though they put covers over him, his body was cold.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> So his servants said to him, Let search be
made for a young virgin for my lord the king, to take care of him and be
waiting on him; and you may take her in your arms, and so my lord the
king will be warm.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So after searching through all the land of
Israel for a fair young girl, they saw Abishag the Shunammite, and took
her to the king.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Now she was very beautiful; and she took
care of the king, waiting on him at all times; but the king had no
connection with her.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Then Adonijah, the son of Haggith, lifting
himself up in pride, said, I will become king; and he made ready his
carriages of war and his horsemen, with fifty runners to go before him.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Now all his life his father had never gone
against him or said to him, Why have you done so? and he was a very
good-looking man, and younger than Absalom.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he had talk with Joab, the son of
Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest; and they were on his side and
gave him their support.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah, the son
of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet and Shimei and Rei, and David's men
of war did not take the side of Adonijah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then Adonijah put to death sheep and oxen
and fat beasts by the stone of Zoheleth, by En-rogel; and he sent for
all his brothers, the king's sons, and all the men of Judah, the king's
servants, to come to him:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> But he did not send for Nathan the
prophet and Benaiah and the other men of war and Solomon his brother.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then Nathan said to Bath-sheba, the
mother of Solomon, Has it not come to your ears that Adonijah, the son
of Haggith, has made himself king without the knowledge of David our
lord?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> So now, let me make a suggestion, so that
you may keep your life safe and the life of your son Solomon.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Come now, go to King David and say to
him, Did you not, O my lord, take an oath to me, your servant, saying,
Truly Solomon your son will be king after me, seated on the seat of my
kingdom? why then is Adonijah acting as king?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And while you are still talking there
with the king, see, I will come in after you and say that your story is
true.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Then Bath-sheba went into the king's
room; now the king was very old, and Abishag the Shunammite was waiting
on him.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Bath-sheba went down on her face on
the earth before the king giving him honour. And he said, What is your
desire?

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And she said to him, My lord, you took an
oath by the Lord your God and gave your word to your servant, saying,
Truly, Solomon your son will be king after me, seated on the seat of my
kingdom.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And now, see, Adonijah has made himself
king without my lord's knowledge;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And has put to death oxen and fat beasts
and sheep in great numbers, and has sent for all the sons of the king,
and Abiathar the priest, and Joab, the captain of the army; but he has
not sent for Solomon your servant.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And now, my lord the king, the eyes of
all Israel are on you, waiting for you to say who is to take the place
of my lord the king after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For as things are, it will come about,
when my lord the king is sleeping with his fathers, that I and Solomon
my son will be made outlaws.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And while she was still talking with the
king, Nathan the prophet came in.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they said to the king, Here is Nathan
the prophet. And when he came in before the king, he went down on his
face on the earth.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And Nathan said, O my lord king, have you
said, Adonijah is to be king after me, seated on the seat of my kingdom?

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Because today he has gone down and has
put to death oxen and fat beasts and sheep in great numbers, and has
sent for all the king's sons to come to him, with the captains of the
army and Abiathar the priest; and they are feasting before him and
crying, Long life to King Adonijah!

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> But me, your servant, and Zadok the
priest, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and your servant Solomon, he
has not sent for.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Has this thing been done by my lord the
king, without giving word to your servants who was to be placed on my
lord the king's seat after him?

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then King David in answer said, Send for
Bath-sheba to come to me. And she came in and took her place before the
king.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And the king took an oath, and said, By
the living Lord, who has been my saviour from all my troubles,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> As I took an oath to you by the Lord, the
God of Israel, saying, Certainly Solomon your son will become king after
me, seated on my seat in my place; so will I do this day.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Then Bath-sheba went down on her face on
the earth before the king giving him honour, and said, May my lord King
David go on living for ever.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And King David said, Send for Zadok the
priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada. And
they came before the king.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And the king said to them, Take with you
the servants of your lord, and put Solomon my son on my beast, yes,
mine, and take him down to Gihon;

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And there let Zadok the priest and Nathan
the prophet put the holy oil on him to make him king over Israel; and
sounding the horn say, Long life to King Solomon!

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Then come up after him and he will come
in and take his place on the seat of my kingdom; for he is to be king in
my place, and I have given orders that he is to be ruler over Israel and
over Judah.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada,
answering the king, said, So be it: and may the Lord, the God of my lord
the king, say so.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> As the Lord has been with my lord the
king, even so may he be with Solomon and make the seat of his authority
greater than that of my lord King David.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the
Pelethites, went down and put Solomon on King David's beast and took him
to Gihon.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And Zadok the priest took the vessel of
oil out of the Tent, and put the holy oil on Solomon. And when the horn
was sounded, all the people said, Long life to King Solomon!

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And all the people came up after him,
piping with pipes, and they were glad with great joy, so that the earth
was shaking with the sound.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And it came to the ears of Adonijah and
all the guests who were with him, when their meal was ended. And Joab,
hearing the sound of the horn, said, What is the reason of this noise as
if the town was worked up?

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And while the words were on his lips,
Jonathan, the son of Abiathar the priest, came; and Adonijah said, Come
in; for you are a man of good faith and the news which you have for us
will be good.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And Jonathan, answering, said to
Adonijah, Not so, but our lord King David has made Solomon king:

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And he sent with him Zadok the priest,
and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and the
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and they put him on the king's beast:

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet put the holy oil on him and made him king in Gihon; and they
came back from there with joy, and the town was all worked up. This is
the noise which has come to your ears.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> And now Solomon is seated on the seat of
the kingdom.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> And the king's servants came to our lord
King David, blessing him and saying, May God make the name of Solomon
better than your name, and the seat of his authority greater than your
seat; and the king was bent low in worship on his bed.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> Then the king said, May the God of Israel
be praised, who has given one of my seed to be king in my place this day
and has let my eyes see it.

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> And all the guests of Adonijah got up in
fear and went away, every man to his place.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> And Adonijah himself was full of fear
because of Solomon; and he got up and went to the altar, and put his
hands on its horns.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> And they gave Solomon word of it, saying,
See, Adonijah goes in such fear of King Solomon, that he has put his
hands on the horns of the altar, saying, Let King Solomon first give me
his oath that he will not put his servant to death with the sword.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> And Solomon said, If he is seen to be a
man of good faith, not a hair of him will be touched; but if any
wrongdoing is seen in him, he is to be put to death.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> So King Solomon sent, and they took him
down from the altar. And he came and gave honour to King Solomon; and
Solomon said to him, Go to your house.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now the time of David's death came near;
and he gave orders to Solomon his son, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I am going the way of all the earth: so be
strong and be a man;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And keep the orders of the Lord your God,
walking in his ways, keeping his laws and his orders and his rules and
his words, as they are recorded in the law of Moses; so that you may do
well in all you do and wherever you go,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> So that the Lord may give effect to what he
said of me, If your children give attention to their ways, living
uprightly before me with all their heart and their soul, you will never
be without a man to be king in Israel.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now you have knowledge of what Joab, the
son of Zeruiah, did to me, and to the two captains of the army of
Israel, Abner, the son of Ner, and Amasa, the son of Jether, whom he put
to death, taking payment for the blood of war in time of peace, and
making the band of my clothing and the shoes on my feet red with the
blood of one put to death without cause.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> So be guided by your wisdom, and let not
his white head go down to the underworld in peace.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But be good to the sons of Barzillai the
Gileadite, and let them be guests at your table; for so they came to me
when I went in flight from Absalom your brother.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Now you have with you Shimei, the son of
Gera the Benjamite of Bahurim, who put a bitter curse on me on the day
when I went to Mahanaim; but he came down to see me at Jordan, and I
gave him my oath by the Lord, saying, I will not put you to death by the
sword.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But do not let him be free from punishment,
for you are a wise man; and it will be clear to you what you have to do
with him; see that his white head goes down to the underworld in blood.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Then David went to rest with his fathers,
and his body was put into the earth in the town of David.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> David was king over Israel for forty
years: for seven years he was king in Hebron and for thirty-three years
in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Solomon took his place on the seat of
David his father, and his kingdom was made safe and strong.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then Adonijah, the son of Haggith, came
to Bath-sheba, the mother of Solomon. And she said, Come you in peace?
And he said, Yes, in peace.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then he said, I have something to say to
you. And she said, Say on.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And he said, You saw how the kingdom was
mine, and all Israel had the idea that I would be their king; but now
the kingdom is turned about, and has become my brother's, for it was
given to him by the Lord.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now I have one request to make to you,
and do not say, No, to me. And she said to him, Say on.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then he said, Will you go to Solomon the
king (for he will not say, No, to you) and put before him my request
that he will give me Abishag the Shunammite for a wife?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And Bath-sheba said, Good! I will make
your request to the king.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> So Bath-sheba went to King Solomon to
have talk with him on Adonijah's account. And the king got up to come to
her, and went down low to the earth before her; then he took his place
on the king's seat and had a seat made ready for the king's mother and
she took her place at his right hand.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then she said, I have one small request
to make to you; do not say, No, to me. And the king said, Say on, my
mother, for I will not say, No, to you.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite
be given to Adonijah your brother for a wife.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Then King Solomon made answer and said to
his mother, Why are you requesting me to give Abishag the Shunammite to
Adonijah? Take the kingdom for him in addition, for he is my older
brother, and Abiathar the priest and Joab, the son of Zeruiah, are on
his side.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Then King Solomon took an oath by the
Lord, saying, May God's punishment be on me if Adonijah does not give
payment for these words with his life.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Now by the living Lord, who has given me
my place on the seat of David my father, and made me one of a line of
kings, as he gave me his word, truly Adonijah will be put to death this
day.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And King Solomon sent Benaiah, the son of
Jehoiada, and he made an attack on him and put him to death.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And to Abiathar the priest the king said,
Go to Anathoth, to your fields; for death would be your right reward;
but I will not put you to death now, because you took up the ark of the
Lord God before David my father, and you were with him in all his
troubles.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> So Solomon let Abiathar be priest no
longer, so that he might make the word of the Lord come true which he
said about the sons of Eli in Shiloh.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And news of this came to Joab; for Joab
had been one of Adonijah's supporters, though he had not been on
Absalom's side. Then Joab went in flight to the Tent of the Lord, and
put his hands on the horns of the altar.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> And they said to King Solomon, Joab has
gone in flight to the Tent of the Lord and is by the altar. Then Solomon
sent Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, make an attack on him.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And Benaiah came to the Tent of the Lord
and said to him, The king says, Come out. And he said, No; but let death
come to me here. And Benaiah went back to the king and gave him word of
the answer which Joab had given.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And the king said, Do as he has said and
make an attack on him there, and put his body into the earth; so that
you may take away from me and from my family the blood of one put to
death by Joab without cause.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And the Lord will send back his blood on
his head, because of the attack he made on two men more upright and
better than himself, putting them to the sword without my father's
knowledge; even Abner, the son of Ner, captain of the army of Israel,
and Amasa, the son of Jether, captain of the army of Judah.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> So their blood will be on the head of
Joab, and on the head of his seed for ever; but for David and his seed
and his family and the seat of his kingdom, there will be peace for ever
from the Lord.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> So Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, went up,
and falling on him, put him to death; and his body was put to rest in
his house in the waste land.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And the king put Benaiah, the son of
Jehoiada, in his place over the army; and Zadok the priest he put in the
place of Abiathar.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Then the king sent for Shimei, and said
to him, Make a house for yourself in Jerusalem and keep there and go to
no other place.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> For be certain that on the day when you
go out and go over the stream Kidron, death will overtake you: and your
blood will be on your head.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And Shimei said to the king, Very well!
as my lord the king has said, so will your servant do. And for a long
time Shimei went on living in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> But after three years, two of the
servants of Shimei went in flight to Achish, son of Maacah, king of
Gath. And word was given to Shimei that his servants had gone to Gath.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> Then Shimei got up, and making ready his
ass, he went to Gath, to Achish, in search of his servants; and he sent
and got them from Gath.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> And news was given to Solomon that Shimei
had gone from Jerusalem to Gath and had come back again.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> Then the king sent for Shimei, and said
to him, Did I not make you take an oath by the Lord, protesting to you
and saying, Be certain that on the day when you go out from here,
wherever you go, death will overtake you? and you said to me, Very well!

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> Why then have you not kept the oath of
the Lord and the order which I gave you?

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And the king said to Shimei, You have
knowledge of all the evil which you did to David my father; and now the
Lord has sent back your evil on yourself.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> But a blessing will be on King Solomon,
and the kingdom of David will keep its place before the Lord for ever.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> So the king gave orders to Benaiah, the
son of Jehoiada; and he went out and, falling on him, put him to death.
And Solomon's authority over the kingdom was complete.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Solomon became the son-in-law of Pharaoh,
king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter as his wife, keeping her in
the town of David, till the house he was building for himself, and the
house of the Lord and the wall round Jerusalem, were complete.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> But all this time the people were making
their offerings in the high places, because no house had been put up to
the name of the Lord till those days.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Solomon, in his love for the Lord, kept
the laws of David his father; but he made offerings and let them go up
in smoke on the high places.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the king went to Gibeon to make an
offering there, because that was the chief high place: it was Solomon's
way to make a thousand burned offerings on that altar.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> In Gibeon, Solomon had a vision of the Lord
in a dream by night; and God said to him, Say what I am to give you.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And Solomon said, Great was your mercy to
David my father, as his life before you was true and upright and his
heart was true to you; and you have kept for him this greatest mercy, a
son to take his place this day.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And now, O Lord my God, you have made your
servant king in the place of David my father; and I am only a young boy,
with no knowledge of how to go out or come in.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And your servant has round him the people
of your selection, a people so great that they may not be numbered, and
no account of them may be given.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Give your servant, then, a wise heart for
judging your people, able to see what is good and what evil; for who is
able to be the judge of this great people?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Now these words and Solomon's request
were pleasing to the Lord.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And God said to him, Because your request
is for this thing, and not for long life for yourself or for wealth or
for the destruction of your haters, but for wisdom to be a judge of
causes;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> I have done as you said: I have given you
a wise and far-seeing heart, so that there has never been your equal in
the past, and never will there be any like you in the future.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And with this I have given you what you
made no request for: wealth and honour, so that no king was ever your
equal.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And if you go on in my ways, keeping my
laws and my orders as your father David did, I will give you a long
life.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Solomon, awakening, saw that it was a
dream; then he came to Jerusalem, where he went before the ark of the
agreement of the Lord, offering burned offerings and peace-offerings;
and he made a feast for all his servants.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then two loose women of the town came and
took their places before the king;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And one of them said, O my lord, I and
this woman are living in the same house; and I gave birth to a child by
her side in the house.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And three days after the birth of my
child, this woman had a child: we were together, no other-person was
with us in the house but we two only.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> In the night, this woman, sleeping on her
child, was the cause of its death.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And she got up in the middle of the night
and took my son from my side while your servant was sleeping; and she
took it in her arms and put her dead child in my arms.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And when I got up to give my child the
breast, I saw that it was dead; but in the morning, looking at it with
care, I saw that it was not my son.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the other woman said, No; but the
living child is my son and the dead one yours. But the first said, No;
the dead child is your son and the living one mine. So they kept on
talking before the king.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then the king said, One says, The living
child is my son, and yours is the dead: and the other says, Not so; but
your son is the dead one and mine is the living.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then he said, Get me a sword. So they
went and put a sword before the king.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And the king said, Let the living child
be cut in two and one half given to one woman and one to the other.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Then the mother of the living child came
forward, for her heart went out to her son, and she said, O my lord,
give her the child; do not on any account put it to death. But the other
woman said, It will not be mine or yours; let it be cut in two.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Then the king made answer and said, Give
her the child, and do not put it to death; she is the mother of it.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And news of this decision which the king
had made went through all Israel; and they had fear of the king, for
they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to give decisions.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now Solomon was king over all Israel.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And these were his chief men: Azariah, the
son of Zadok, was the priest;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha,
were scribes; Jehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, was the recorder;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, was head of
the army; Zadok and Abiathar were priests;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Azariah, the son of Nathan, was over those
in authority in the different divisions of the country; Zabud, the son
of Nathan, was priest and the king's friend;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Ahishar was controller of the king's house;
Adoniram, the son of Abda, was overseer of the forced work.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And Solomon put twelve overseers over all
Israel, to be responsible for the stores needed for the king and those
of his house; every man was responsible for one month in the year.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And these are their names: ... the son of
Hur in the hill country of Ephraim;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> ... the son of Deker in Makaz and Shaalbim
and Beth-shemesh and Elonbeth-hanan;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> ... the son of Hesed in Arubboth; Socoh
and all the land of Hepher were under his control;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> ... the son of Abinadab in all
Naphath-dor; his wife was Taphath, the daughter of Solomon.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Baana, the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and
Megiddo, and all Beth-shean which is by the side of Zarethan, under
Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as the far side of
Jokmeam;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> ... the son of Geber in Ramoth-gilead; he
had the towns of Jair, the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead, and the
country of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great towns with walls and
locks of brass.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Ahinadab, the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Ahimaaz in Naphtali; he took Basemath,
the daughter of Solomon, as his wife;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Baana, the son of Hushai, in Asher and
Aloth;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Jehoshaphat, the son of Paruah, in
Issachar;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Shimei, the son of Ela, in Benjamin;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Geber, the son of Uri, in the land of
Gilead, the country of Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of
Bashan; and one overseer had authority over all the overseers who were
in the land.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Judah and Israel were as great in number
as the sand by the seaside, and they took their food and drink with joy
in their hearts.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And Solomon was ruler over all the
kingdoms from the River to the land of the Philistines, and as far as
the edge of Egypt; men gave him offerings and were his servants all the
days of his life.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And the amount of Solomon's food for one
day was thirty measures of crushed grain and sixty measures of meal;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Ten fat oxen and twenty oxen from the
fields, and a hundred sheep, in addition to harts and gazelles and roes
and fat fowls.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For he had authority over all the country
on this side of the River, from Tiphsah to Gaza, over all the kings on
this side of the River; and he had peace round him on every side.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> So Judah and Israel were living safely,
every man under his vine and his fig-tree, from Dan as far as
Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And Solomon had four thousand boxed-off
spaces for horses for his carriages, and twelve thousand horsemen.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And those overseers, every man in his
month, saw that food was produced for Solomon and all his guests, they
took care that nothing was overlooked.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And they took grain and dry grass for the
horses and the carriage-horses, to the right place, every man as he was
ordered.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And God gave Solomon a great store of
wisdom and good sense, and a mind of wide range, as wide as the sand by
the seaside.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And Solomon's wisdom was greater than the
wisdom of all the people of the East and all the wisdom of Egypt.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For he was wiser than all men, even than
Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman and Calcol and Darda, the sons of Mahol;
and he had a great name among all the nations round about.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> He was the maker of three thousand wise
sayings, and of songs to the number of a thousand and five.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> He made sayings about all plants, from
the cedar in Lebanon to the hyssop hanging on the wall; and about all
beasts and birds and fishes and the small things of the earth.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> People came from every nation to give ear
to the wisdom of Solomon, from all the kings of the earth who had word
of his wisdom.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now Hiram, king of Tyre, hearing that
Solomon had been made king in place of his father, sent his servants to
him; for Hiram had ever been a friend to David.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And Solomon sent back word to Hiram,
saying,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> You have knowledge that David my father was
not able to make a house for the name of the Lord his God, because of
the wars which were round him on every side, till the Lord put all those
who were against him under his feet.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But now the Lord my God has given me rest
on every side; no one is making trouble, and no evil is taking place.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And so it is my purpose to make a house for
the name of the Lord my God, as he said to David my father, Your son,
whom I will make king in your place, will be the builder of a house for
my name.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> So now, will you have cedar-trees from
Lebanon cut down for me, and my servants will be with your servants; and
I will give you payment for your servants at whatever rate you say; for
it is common knowledge that we have no such wood-cutters among us as the
men of Zidon.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And these words of Solomon made Hiram glad,
and he said, Now may the Lord be praised who has given to David a wise
son to be king over this great people.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Then Hiram sent to Solomon, saying; The
words you sent have been given to me: I will do all your desire in the
question of cedar-wood and cypress-wood.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> My men will take them down from Lebanon to
the sea, where I will have them corded together to go by sea to whatever
place you say, and I will have them cut up there so that you may take
them away; as for payment, it will be enough if you give me food for my
people.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So Hiram gave Solomon all the cedar-wood
and cypress-wood he had need of;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand
measures of grain, as food for his people, and twenty measures of clear
oil; this he did every year.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Now the Lord had given Solomon wisdom, as
he had said to him; and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and
they made an agreement together.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Then King Solomon got together men for
the forced work through all Israel, thirty thousand men in number;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And sent them to Lebanon in bands of ten
thousand every month: for a month they were working in Lebanon and for
two months in their country, and Adoniram was in control of them.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Then he had seventy thousand for the work
of transport, and eighty thousand stone-cutters in the mountains;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> In addition to the chiefs of the
responsible men put by Solomon to oversee the work, three thousand and
three hundred in authority over the workmen.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> By the king's orders great stones, stones
of high price, were cut out, so that the base of the house might be made
of squared stone.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders
did the work of cutting them, and put edges on them, and got the wood
and the stone ready for the building of the house.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> In the four hundred and eightieth year
after the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the
fourth year that Solomon was king of Israel, in the month Ziv, which is
the second month, the building of the Lord's house was started.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The house which Solomon made for the Lord
was sixty cubits long, twenty cubits wide and thirty cubits high.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> The covered way before the Temple of the
house was twenty cubits long, as wide as the house, and ten cubits wide
in front of the house.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And for the house he made windows, with
network across.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And against the walls all round, and
against the walls of the Temple and of the inmost room, he put up wings,
with side rooms all round:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> The lowest line of them being five cubits
wide, the middle six cubits wide and the third seven cubits; for there
was a space all round the outside walls of the house so that the boards
supporting the rooms did not have to be fixed in the walls of the house.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> (And the stones used in the building of the
house were squared at the place where they were cut out; there was no
sound of hammer or axe or any iron instrument while they were building
the house.)

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> The door to the lowest side rooms was in
the right side of the house; and they went up by twisting steps into the
middle rooms, and from the middle into the third.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> So he put up the house and made it
complete, roofing it with boards of cedar-wood.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he put up the line of side rooms
against the walls of the house, fifteen cubits high, resting against the
house on boards of cedar-wood.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> (And the word of the Lord came to
Solomon, saying,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> About this house which you are building:
if you will keep my laws and give effect to my decisions and be guided
by my rules, I will give effect to my word which I gave to David your
father.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And I will be ever among the children of
Israel, and will not go away from my people.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> So Solomon made the building of the house
complete.)

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> The walls of the house were covered
inside with cedar-wood boards; from the floor to the roof of the house
they were covered inside with wood; and the floor was covered with
boards of cypress-wood.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And at the back of the house a further
space of twenty cubits was shut in with boards of cedar-wood, for the
inmost room.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And the house, that is, the Temple, in
front of the holy place was forty cubits long.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> (All the inside of the house was
cedar-wood, ornamented with designs of buds and flowers; no stonework
was to be seen inside.)

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And he made ready an inmost room in the
middle of the house, in which to put the ark of the agreement of the
Lord.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And the inmost room was twenty cubits
square and twenty cubits high, plated over with clear gold, and he made
an altar of cedar-wood, plating it with gold.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Solomon had all the inside of the house
covered with gold, and he put chains of gold across in front of the
inmost room, which itself was covered with gold.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Plates of gold were put all through the
house till it was covered completely (and the altar in the inmost room
was all covered with gold).

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> In the inmost room he made two winged
beings of olive-wood, ten cubits high;

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> With outstretched wings five cubits wide;
the distance from the edge of one wing to the edge of the other was ten
cubits.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> The two winged ones were ten cubits high,
of the same size and form.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> The two of them were ten cubits high.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> These were placed inside the inner house,
their outstretched wings touching the walls of the house, one touching
one wall and one the other, while their other wings were touching in the
middle.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> These winged ones were plated over with
gold.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And all the walls of the house inside and
out were ornamented with forms of winged ones and palm-trees and open
flowers.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the floor of the house was covered
with gold, inside and out.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> For the way into the inmost room he made
doors of olive-wood, the arch and the door supports forming a five-sided
opening.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> On the olive-wood doors were cut designs
of winged ones and palm-trees and open flowers, all of them, with the
doors, plated with gold.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> Then he made pillars of olive-wood for
the way into the Temple; the pillars were square:

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And two folding doors of cypress-wood,
with two leaves.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> These were ornamented with designs of
winged ones and palm-trees and open flowers, plated over with gold.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> And the inner space was walled with three
lines of squared stones and a line of cedar-wood boards.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> In the fourth year the base of the house
was put in its place, in the month Ziv.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And in the eleventh year, in the month
Bul, which is the eighth month, the building of the house was complete
in every detail, as it had been designed. So he was seven years building
it.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Solomon was thirteen years building a house
for himself till it was complete.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And he made the house of the Woods of
Lebanon, which was a hundred cubits long and fifty cubits wide and
thirty cubits high, resting on four lines of cedar-wood pillars with
cedar-wood supports on the pillars.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And it was covered with cedar over the
forty-five supports which were on the pillars, fifteen in a line.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> There were three lines of window-frames,
window facing window in every line.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And all the doors and windows had square
frames, with the windows facing one another in three lines.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And he made a covered room of pillars,
fifty cubits long and thirty cubits wide, and ... with steps before it.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Then he made a covered room for his high
seat when he gave decisions; this was the covered room of judging; it
was covered with cedar-wood from floor to roof.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the house for his living-place, the
other open square in the covered room, was made in the same way. And
then he made a house like it for Pharaoh's daughter, whom Solomon had
taken as his wife.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> All these buildings were made, inside and
out, from base to crowning stone, and outside to the great walled
square, of highly priced stone, cut to different sizes with
cutting-instruments.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the base was of great masses of
highly priced stone, some ten cubits and some eight cubits square.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Overhead were highly priced stones cut to
measure, and cedar-wood.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The great outer square all round was
walled with three lines of squared stones and a line of cedar-wood
boards, round about the open square inside the house of the Lord and the
covered room of the king's house.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Then King Solomon sent and got Hiram from
Tyre.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> He was the son of a widow of the tribe of
Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass; he was
full of wisdom and knowledge and an expert worker in brass. He came to
King Solomon and did all his work for him.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> He it was who made the two brass pillars;
the first pillar was eighteen cubits high, and a line of twelve cubits
went round it; and the second was the same.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And he made the two crowns to be put on
the tops of the pillars, of brass made soft in the fire; the crowns were
five cubits high.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> There were nets of open-work for the
crowns on the tops of the pillars, a net of open-work for one and a net
of open-work for the other.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And he made ornaments of apples; and two
lines of apples all round over the network, covering the crowns of the
pillars, the two crowns in the same way.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The crowns on the tops of the pillars
were ornamented with a design of flowers, and were four cubits across.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And there were crowns on the two pillars
near the round part by the network, and there were two hundred apples in
lines round every crown.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> He put up the pillars at the doorway of
the Temple, naming the one on the right Jachin, and that on the left
Boaz.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> The tops of the pillars had a design of
flowers; and the work of making the pillars was complete.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And he made a great metal water-vessel
ten cubits across from edge to edge, five cubits high and thirty cubits
round.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And under the edge of it, circling it all
round for ten cubits, were two lines of flower buds, made together with
it from liquid metal.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> It was supported on twelve oxen, with
their back parts turned to the middle of it, three of them facing to the
north, three to the west, three to the south, and three to the east; the
vessel was resting on top of them.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> It was as thick as a man's open hand, and
was curved like the edge of a cup, like the flower of a lily: it would
take two thousand baths.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And he made ten wheeled bases of brass;
every one four cubits long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And the bases were made in this way;
their sides were square, fixed in a framework;

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And on the square sides between the
frames were lions, oxen, and winged ones; and the same on the frame; and
over and under the lions and the oxen and the winged ones were steps.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> Every base had four wheels of brass,
turning on brass rods, and their four angles had angle-plates under
them; the angle-plates under the base were of metal, and there were
ornaments at the side of every one.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> The mouth of it inside the angle-plate
was one cubit across; it was round like a pillar, a cubit and a half
across; it had designs cut on it; the sides were square, not round.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The four wheels were under the frames,
and the rods on which the wheels were fixed were in the base; the wheels
were a cubit and a half high.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> The wheels were made like
carriage-wheels, the rods on which they were fixed, the parts forming
their edges, their rods and the middle points of them, were all formed
out of liquid metal.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> And there were four angle-plates at the
four angles of every base, forming part of the structure of the base.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And at the top of the base there was a
round vessel, half a cubit high;

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> In the spaces of the flat sides and on
the frames of them, he made designs of winged ones, lions, and
palm-trees, with ornamented edges all round.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> All the ten bases were made in this way,
after the same design, of the same size and form.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> And he made ten brass washing-vessels,
everyone taking forty baths, and measuring four cubits; one vessel was
placed on every one of the ten bases.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> And he put the bases by the house, five
on the right side and five on the left; and he put the great
water-vessel on the right side of the house, to the east, facing south.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> And Hiram made the pots and spades and
the basins. So Hiram came to the end of all the work he did for King
Solomon in the house of the Lord:

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> The two pillars and the two cups of the
crowns which were on the tops of the two pillars; and the network
covering the two cups of the crowns on the tops of the pillars,

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> And the four hundred apples for the
network, two lines of apples for every network, covering the two cups of
the crowns on the pillars;

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> And the ten bases, with the ten
washing-vessels on them;

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> And the great water-vessel, with the
twelve oxen under it;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> And the pots and the spades and the
basins; all the vessels which Hiram made for King Solomon, for the house
of the Lord, were of polished brass.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> He made them of liquid metal in the
lowland of Jordan, at the way across the river, at Adama, between
Succoth and Zarethan.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> The weight of all these vessels was not
measured, because there was such a number of them; it was not possible
to get the weight of the brass.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> And Solomon had all the vessels made for
use in the house of the Lord: the altar of gold and the gold table on
which the holy bread was placed;

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> And the supports for the lights, five on
the right side and five on the left before the inmost room, of clear
gold; and the flowers and the lights and all the instruments of gold;

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> And the cups and the scissors and the
basins and the spoons and the fire-trays, all of gold; and the pins on
which the doors were turned, the doors of the inner house, the most holy
place, and the doors of the Temple, all of gold.

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> So all the work King Solomon had done in
the house of the Lord was complete. Then Solomon took the holy things
which David his father had given, the silver and the gold and all the
vessels, and put them in the store-houses of the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Then Solomon sent for all the responsible
men of Israel, and all the chiefs of the tribes, and the heads of
families of the children of Israel, to come to him in Jerusalem to take
the ark of the Lord's agreement up out of the town of David, which is
Zion.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And all the men of Israel came together to
King Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, the seventh month.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And all the responsible men of Israel came,
and the priests took up the ark.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They took up the ark of the Lord, and the
Tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels which were in the Tent; all
these the priests and the Levites took up.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And King Solomon and all the men of Israel
who had come together there, were with him before the ark, making
offerings of sheep and oxen more than might be numbered.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the priests took the ark of the
agreement of the Lord and put it in its place in the inner room of the
house, in the most holy place, under the wings of the winged ones.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For their wings were outstretched over the
place where the ark was, covering the ark and its rods.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> The rods were so long that their ends were
seen from the holy place, in front of the inmost room; but they were not
seen from outside: and there they are to this day.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> There was nothing in the ark but the two
flat stones which Moses put there at Horeb, where the Lord made an
agreement with the children of Israel when they came out of the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Now when the priests had come out of the
holy place, the house of the Lord was full of the cloud,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> So that the priests were not able to keep
their places to do their work because of the cloud, for the house of the
Lord was full of the glory of the Lord.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then Solomon said, O Lord, to the sun you
have given the heaven for a living-place, but your living-place was not
seen by men;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So I have made for you a living-place, a
house in which you may be for ever present.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Then, turning his face about, the king
gave a blessing to all the men of Israel; and they were all on their
feet together.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he said, Praise be to the Lord, the
God of Israel, who himself gave his word to David my father, and with
his strong hand has made his word come true, saying,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> From the day when I took my people Israel
out of Egypt, no town in all the tribes of Israel has been marked out by
me for the building of a house for the resting-place of my name; but I
made selection of David to be king over my people Israel.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Now it was in the heart of David my
father to put up a house for the name of the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But the Lord said to David my father, You
did well to have in your heart the desire to make a house for my name;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> But you yourself will not be the builder
of my house; but your son, the offspring of your body, he it is who will
put up a house for my name.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And the Lord has made his word come true;
for I have taken my father David's place on the seat of the kingdom of
Israel, as the Lord gave his word; and I have made a house for the name
of the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> In it I have made a place for the ark, in
which is the agreement which the Lord made with our fathers, when he
took them out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Then Solomon took his place before the
altar of the Lord, all the men of Israel being present, and stretching
out his hands to heaven,

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Said, O Lord, the God of Israel, there is
no God like you in heaven or on the earth; keeping faith and mercy
unchanging for your servants, while they go in your ways with all their
hearts.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And you have kept the word which you gave
to your servant David, my father; with your mouth you said it and with
your hand you have made it come true this day.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> So now, O Lord, the God of Israel, let
your word to your servant David, my father, come true, when you said,
You will never be without a man to take his place on the seat of the
kingdom of Israel before me, if only your children give attention to
their ways, walking before me as you have done.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> So now, O God of Israel, it is my prayer
that you will make your word come true which you said to your servant
David, my father.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But is it truly possible that God may be
housed on earth? see, heaven and the heaven of heavens are not wide
enough to be your resting-place; how much less this house which I have
made!

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Still, let your heart be turned to the
prayer of your servant, O Lord God, and to his prayer for grace; give
ear to the cry and the prayer which your servant sends up to you this
day;

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> That your eyes may be open to this house
night and day, to this place of which you have said, My name will be
there; hearing the prayer which your servant may make, turning to this
place.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Give ear to the prayers of your servant,
and the prayers of your people Israel, when they make their prayers,
turning to this place; give ear in heaven your living-place, and
hearing, have mercy.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> If a man does wrong to his neighbour, and
has to take an oath, and comes before your altar to take his oath in
this house:

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Then let your ear be open in heaven, and
be the judge of your servants, giving your decision against the
wrongdoer, so that punishment for his sins may come on his head; and, by
your decision, keeping from evil him who has done no wrong.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> When your people Israel are overcome in
war, because of their sin against you; if they are turned to you again,
honouring your name, making prayers to you and requesting your grace in
this house:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Then give ear in heaven, and let the sin
of your people Israel have forgiveness, and take them back again into
the land which you gave to their fathers.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> When heaven is shut up and there is no
rain, because of their sin against you; if they make prayers with their
faces turned to this place, honouring your name and turning away from
their sin when you send trouble on them:

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> Then give ear in heaven, so that the sin
of your servants, and of your people Israel, may have forgiveness, when
you make clear to them the good way in which they are to go; and send
rain on your land which you have given to your people for their
heritage.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> If there is no food in the land, or if
there is disease, or if the fruits of the earth are damaged through heat
or water, locust or worm; if their towns are shut in by their attackers;
whatever trouble, whatever disease there may be:

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> Whatever prayer or request for your grace
is made by any man, or by all your people Israel, whatever his trouble
may be, whose hands are stretched out to this house:

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> Give ear in heaven your living-place,
acting in mercy; and give to every man whose secret heart is open to
you, the reward of all his ways; for you, and you only, have knowledge
of the hearts of all the children of men:

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> So that they may give you worship all the
days of their life in the land which you gave to our fathers.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> And as for the man from a strange land,
who is not of your people Israel; when he comes from a far country
because of the glory of your name:

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> (For they will have news of your great
name and your strong hand and your out-stretched arm;) when he comes to
make his prayer, turning to this house:

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> Give ear in heaven your living-place, and
give him his desire, whatever it may be; so that all the peoples of the
earth may have knowledge of your name, worshipping you as do your people
Israel, and that they may see that this house which I have put up is
truly named by your name.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> If your people go out to war against
their attackers, by whatever way you may send them, if they make their
prayer to the Lord, turning their faces to this town of yours and to
this house which I have made for your name:

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> Give ear in heaven to their prayer and
their cry for grace, and see right done to them.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> If they do wrong against you, (for no man
is without sin,) and you are angry with them and give them up into the
power of those who are fighting against them, so that they take them
away as prisoners into a strange land, far off or near;

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> And if they take thought, in the land
where they are prisoners, and are turned again to you, crying out in
prayer to you in that land, and saying, We are sinners, we have done
wrong, we have done evil;

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> And with all their heart and soul are
turned again to you, in the land of those who took them prisoners, and
make their prayer to you, turning their eyes to this land which you gave
to their fathers, and to the town which you took for yourself, and the
house which I made for your name:

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> Then give ear to their prayer and to
their cry in heaven your living-place, and see right done to them;

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> Answering with forgiveness the people who
have done wrong against you, and overlooking the evil which they have
done against you; let those who made them prisoners be moved with pity
for them, and have pity on them;

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> For they are your people and your
heritage, which you took out of Egypt, out of the iron fireplace;

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> Let your eyes be open to your servant's
prayer for grace and to the prayer of your people Israel, hearing them
when their cry comes to you.

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> For you made them separate from all the
peoples of the earth, to be your heritage, as you said by Moses your
servant, when you took our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord God.

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> Then Solomon, after making all these
prayers and requests for grace to the Lord, got up from his knees before
the altar of the Lord, where his hands had been stretched out in prayer
to heaven;

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> And, getting on his feet, he gave a
blessing to all the men of Israel, saying with a loud voice,

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Praise be to the Lord who has given rest
to his people Israel, as he gave them his word to do; every word of all
his oath, which he gave by the hand of Moses his servant, has come true.

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> Now may the Lord our God be with us as he
was with our fathers; let him never go away from us or give us up;

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> Turning our hearts to himself, guiding us
to go in all his ways, to keep his orders and his laws and his
decisions, which he gave to our fathers.

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> And may these my words, the words of my
prayer to the Lord, be before the Lord our God day and night, so that he
may see right done to his servant and to his people Israel, day by day
as we have need.

<span id="an_8:60">8:60</span> So that all the peoples of the earth may
see that the Lord is God, and there is no other.

<span id="an_8:61">8:61</span> Then let your hearts be without sin
before the Lord our God, walking in his laws and keeping his orders as
at this day.

<span id="an_8:62">8:62</span> Now the king, and all Israel with him,
were making offerings before the Lord.

<span id="an_8:63">8:63</span> And Solomon gave to the Lord for
peace-offerings, twenty-two thousand oxen and a hundred and twenty
thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel kept the
feast of the opening of the Lord's house.

<span id="an_8:64">8:64</span> The same day the king made holy the
middle of the open square in front of the house of the Lord, offering
there the burned offering and the meal offering and the fat of the
peace-offerings; for there was not room on the brass altar of the Lord
for the burned offerings and the meal offerings and the fat of the
peace-offerings.

<span id="an_8:65">8:65</span> So Solomon and all Israel with him, a
very great meeting, (for the people had come together from the way into
Hamath to the river of Egypt,) kept the feast at that time before the
Lord our God, for two weeks, even fourteen days.

<span id="an_8:66">8:66</span> And on the eighth day he sent the people
away, and, blessing the king, they went to their tents full of joy and
glad in their hearts, because of all the good which the Lord had done to
David his servant and to Israel his people.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now when Solomon came to the end of
building the house of the Lord and the king's house, and all Solomon's
desires, which he had in mind were effected;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The Lord came to him again in a vision, as
he had done at Gibeon;

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the Lord said to him, Your prayers and
your requests for grace have come to my ears: I have made holy this
house which you have made, and I have put my name there for ever; my
eyes and my heart will be there at all times.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> As for you, if you will go on your way
before me, as David your father did, uprightly and with a true heart,
doing what I have given you orders to do, keeping my laws and my
decisions;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Then I will make the seat of your rule over
Israel certain for ever, as I gave my word to David your father, saying,
You will never be without a man to be king in Israel.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But if you are turned from my ways, you or
your children, and do not keep my orders and my laws which I have put
before you, but go and make yourselves servants to other gods and give
them worship:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Then I will have Israel cut off from the
land which I have given them; and this house, which I have made holy for
myself, I will put away from before my eyes; and Israel will be a public
example, and a word of shame among all peoples.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And this house will become a mass of broken
walls, and everyone who goes by will be overcome with wonder at it and
make whistling sounds; and they will say, Why has the Lord done so to
this land and to this house?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And their answer will be, Because they were
turned away from the Lord their God, who took their fathers out of the
land of Egypt; they took for themselves other gods and gave them worship
and became their servants: that is why the Lord has sent all this evil
on them.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Now at the end of twenty years, in which
time Solomon had put up the two houses, the house of the Lord and the
king's house,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> (Hiram, king of Tyre, had given Solomon
cedar-trees and cypress-trees and gold, as much as he had need of,) King
Solomon gave Hiram twenty towns in the land of Galilee.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> But when Hiram came from Tyre to see the
towns which Solomon had given him, he was not pleased with them.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And he said, What sort of towns are these
which you have given me, my brother? So they were named the land of
Cabul, to this day.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Hiram sent the king a hundred and
twenty talents of gold.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Now, this was the way of Solomon's system
of forced work for the building of the Lord's house and of the king's
house, and the Millo and the wall of Jerusalem and Megiddo and Gezer.
...

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Pharaoh, king of Egypt, came and took
Gezer, burning it down and putting to death the Canaanites living in the
town, and he gave it for a bride-offering to his daughter, Solomon's
wife. ...

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> ... and Solomon was the builder of Gezer
and Beth-horon the lower,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And Baalath and Tamar in the waste land,
in that land;

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And all the store-towns and the towns
which Solomon had for his war-carriages and for his horsemen, and
everything which it was his pleasure to put up in Jerusalem and in
Lebanon and in all the land under his rule.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> As for the rest of the Amorites, the
Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not
children of Israel;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Their children who were still in the
land, and whom the children of Israel had not been able to put to
complete destruction, them did Solomon put to forced work, to this day.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Solomon did not put the children of
Israel to forced work; they were the men of war, his servants, his
captains, and his chiefs, captains of his war-carriages and of his
horsemen.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> These were the chiefs of the overseers of
Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, in authority over the people who
did the work.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> At that time Solomon made Pharaoh's
daughter come up from the town of David to the house which he had made
for her: then he made the Millo.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Three times in the year it was Solomon's
way to give burned offerings and peace-offerings on the altar he had
made to the Lord, causing his fire-offering to go up on the altar before
the Lord.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And King Solomon made a sea-force of
ships in Ezion-geber, by Eloth, on the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Hiram sent his servants, who were
experienced seamen, in the sea-force with Solomon's men.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And they came to Ophir, where they got
four hundred and twenty talents of gold, and took it back to King
Solomon.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now the queen of Sheba, hearing great
things of Solomon, came to put his wisdom to the test with hard
questions.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And she came to Jerusalem with a very
great train, with camels weighted down with spices, and stores of gold
and jewels: and when she came to Solomon she had talk with him of
everything in her mind.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And Solomon gave her answers to all her
questions; there was no secret which the king did not make clear to her.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And when the queen of Sheba had seen all
the wisdom of Solomon, and the house which he had made,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And the food at his table, and all his
servants seated there, and those who were waiting on him in their
places, and their robes, and his wine-servants, and the burned offerings
which he made in the house of the Lord, there was no more spirit in her.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And she said to the king, The account
which was given to me in my country of your acts and your wisdom was
true.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But I had no faith in what was said about
you, till I came and saw for myself; and now I see that it was not half
the story; your wisdom and your wealth are much greater than they said.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Happy are your wives, happy are these
your servants whose place is ever before you, hearing your words of
wisdom.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> May the Lord your God be praised, whose
pleasure it was to put you on the seat of the kingdom of Israel; because
the Lord's love for Israel is eternal, he has made you king, to be their
judge in righteousness.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And she gave the king a hundred and
twenty talents of gold, and a great store of spices and jewels: never
again was such a wealth of spices seen as that which the queen of Sheba
gave King Solomon.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And the sea-force of Hiram, in addition
to gold from Ophir, came back with much sandal-wood and jewels.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And from the sandal-wood the king made
pillars for the house of the Lord, and for the king's house, and
instruments of music for the makers of melody: never has such
sandal-wood been seen to this day.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And King Solomon gave the queen of
Sheba all her desire, whatever she made request for, in addition to what
he gave her freely from the impulse of his heart. So she went back to
her country, she and her servants.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Now the weight of gold which came to
Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> In addition to what came to him from
the business of the traders, and from all the kings of the Arabians, and
from the rulers of the country.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And Solomon made two hundred
body-covers of hammered gold, every one having six hundred shekels of
gold in it.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And he made three hundred smaller
body-covers of hammered gold, with three pounds of gold in every cover:
and the king put them in the house of the Woods of Lebanon.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then the king made a great ivory seat,
plated with the best gold.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> There were six steps going up to it,
and the top of it was round at the back, there were arms on the two
sides of the seat, and two lions by the side of the arms;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And twelve lions were placed on the one
side and on the other side on the six steps: there was nothing like it
in any kingdom.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And all King Solomon's drinking-vessels
were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the Woods of Lebanon
were of the best gold; not one was of silver, for no one gave a thought
to silver in the days of King Solomon.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For the king had Tarshish-ships at sea
with the ships of Hiram; once every three years the Tarshish-ships came
with gold and silver and ivory and monkeys and peacocks.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And King Solomon was greater than all
the kings of the earth in wealth and in wisdom.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And from all over the earth they came
to see Solomon and to give ear to his wisdom, which God had put in his
heart.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And everyone took with him an offering,
vessels of silver and vessels of gold, and robes, and coats of metal,
and spices, and horses, and beasts of transport, regularly year by year.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And Solomon got together war-carriages
and horsemen; he had one thousand, four hundred carriages and twelve
thousand horsemen, whom he kept, some in the carriage-towns and some
with the king at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And the king made silver as common as
stones in Jerusalem and cedars like the sycamore-trees of the lowlands
in number.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Solomon's horses came from Egypt
and from Kue; the king's traders got them at a price from Kue.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> A war-carriage might be got from Egypt
for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty;
they got them at the same rate for all the kings of the Hittites and the
kings of Aram.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now a number of strange women were loved
by Solomon, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and
Hittites:

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> The nations of which the Lord had said to
the children of Israel, You are not to take wives from them and they are
not to take wives from you; or they will certainly make you go after
their gods: to these Solomon was united in love.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> He had seven hundred wives, daughters of
kings, and three hundred other wives; and through his wives his heart
was turned away.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For it came about that when Solomon was
old, his heart was turned away to other gods by his wives; and his heart
was no longer true to the Lord his God as the heart of his father David
had been.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For Solomon went after Ashtoreth, the
goddess of the Zidonians, and Milcom, the disgusting god of the
Ammonites.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And Solomon did evil in the eyes of the
Lord, not walking in the Lord's ways with all his heart as David his
father did.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then Solomon put up a high place for
Chemosh, the disgusting god of Moab, in the mountain before Jerusalem,
and for Molech, the disgusting god worshipped by the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And so he did for all his strange wives,
who made offerings with burning of perfumes to their gods.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And the Lord was angry with Solomon,
because his heart was turned away from the Lord, the God of Israel, who
had twice come to him in a vision;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And had given him orders about this
very thing, that he was not to go after other gods; but he did not keep
the orders of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> So the Lord said to Solomon, Because
you have done this, and have not kept my agreement and my laws, which I
gave you, I will take the kingdom away from you by force and will give
it to your servant.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> I will not do it in your life-time,
because of your father David, but I will take it from your son.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Still I will not take all the kingdom
from him; but I will give one tribe to your son, because of my servant
David, and because of Jerusalem, the town of my selection.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> So the Lord sent Hadad the Edomite to
make trouble for Solomon: he was of the king's seed in Edom.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And when David had sent destruction on
Edom, and Joab, the captain of the army, had gone to put the dead into
the earth, and had put to death every male in Edom;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> (For Joab and all Israel were there six
months till every male in Edom had been cut off;)

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Hadad, being still a young boy, went in
flight to Egypt, with certain Edomites, servants of his father;

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And they went on from Midian and came
to Paran; and, taking men from Paran with them, they came to Egypt, to
Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who gave him a house and gave orders for his
food and gave him land.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Now Hadad was very pleasing to Pharaoh,
so that he gave him the sister of his wife, Tahpenes the queen, for his
wife.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And the sister of Tahpenes had a son by
him, Genubath, whom Tahpenes took care of in Pharaoh's house; and
Genubath was living in Pharaoh's house among Pharaoh's sons.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Now when Hadad had news in Egypt that
David had been put to rest with his fathers, and that Joab, the captain
of the army, was dead, he said to Pharaoh, Send me back to my country.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> But Pharaoh said to him, What have you
been short of while you have been with me, that you are desiring to go
back to your country? And he said, Nothing; but even so, send me back.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And God sent another trouble-maker,
Rezon, the son of Eliada, who had gone in flight from his lord,
Hadadezer, king of Zobah:

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> He got some men together and made
himself captain of a band of outlaws; and went to Damascus and became
king there.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> He was a trouble to Israel all through
the days of Solomon. And this is the damage Hadad did: he was cruel to
Israel while he was ruler over Edom.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And there was Jeroboam, the son of
Nebat, an Ephraimite from Zeredah, a servant of Solomon, whose mother
was Zeruah, a widow; and his hand was lifted up against the king.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> The way in which his hand came to be
lifted up against the king was this: Solomon was building the Millo and
making good the damaged parts of the town of his father David;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And Jeroboam was an able and
responsible man; and Solomon saw that he was a good worker and made him
overseer of all the work given to the sons of Joseph.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Now at that time, when Jeroboam was
going out of Jerusalem, the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite came across him
on the road; now Ahijah had put on a new robe; and the two of them were
by themselves in the open country.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And Ahijah took his new robe in his
hands, parting it violently into twelve.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And he said to Jeroboam, Take ten of
the parts, for this is what the Lord has said: See, I will take the
kingdom away from Solomon by force, and will give ten tribes to you;

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> (But one tribe will be his, because of
my servant David, and because of Jerusalem, the town which, out of all
the tribes of Israel, I have made mine,)

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Because they are turned away from me to
the worship of Ashtoreth, the goddess of the Zidonians, and Chemosh, the
god of Moab, and Milcom, the god of the Ammonites; they have not been
walking in my ways or doing what is right in my eyes or keeping my laws
and my decisions as his father David did.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> But I will not take the kingdom from
him; I will let him be king all the days of his life, because of David
my servant, in whom I took delight because he kept my orders and my
laws.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> But I will take the kingdom from his
son, and give it to you.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And one tribe I will give to his son,
so that David my servant may have a light for ever burning before me in
Jerusalem, the town which I have made mine to put my name there.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And you I will take, and you will be
king over Israel, ruling over whatever is the desire of your soul.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And if you give attention to the orders
I give you, walking in my ways and doing what is right in my eyes and
keeping my laws and my orders as David my servant did; then I will be
with you, building up for you a safe house, as I did for David, and I
will give Israel to you.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> (So that I may send trouble for this on
the seed of David, but not for ever.)

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> And Solomon was looking for a chance to
put Jeroboam to death; but he went in flight to Egypt, to Shishak, king
of Egypt, and was in Egypt till the death of Solomon.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> Now the rest of the acts of Solomon,
and all he did, and his wisdom, are they not recorded in the book of the
acts of Solomon?

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> And the time Solomon was king in
Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> And Solomon went to rest with his
fathers, and was put into the earth in the town of David his father: and
Solomon went to rest with his fathers and Rehoboam his son became king
in his place.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Rehoboam went to Shechem, where all
Israel had come together to make him king,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And, hearing of it, Jeroboam, the son of
Nebat, who was still in Egypt, where he had gone in flight from Solomon,
and was living there, came back to his town Zeredah, in the hill-country
of Ephraim;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And all the men of Israel came to
Rehoboam and said,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Your father put a hard yoke on us: if you
will make the conditions under which your father kept us down less
cruel, and the weight of the yoke he put on us less hard, then we will
be your servants.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And he said to them, Go away for three
days and then come back to me again. So the people went away.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Then King Rehoboam took the opinion of
the old men who had been with Solomon his father when he was living, and
said, In your opinion, what answer am I to give to this people?

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And they said to him, If you will be a
servant to this people today, caring for them and giving them a gentle
answer, then they will be your servants for ever.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> But he gave no attention to the opinion
of the old men, and went to the young men of his generation who were
waiting before him:

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And said to them, What is your opinion?
What answer are we to give to this people who have said to me, Make less
the weight of the yoke which your father put on us?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And the young men of his generation
said to him, This is the answer to give to the people who came to you
saying, Your father put a hard yoke on us; will you make it less? say to
them, My little finger is thicker than my father's body;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> If my father put a hard yoke on you, I
will make it harder: my father gave you punishment with whips, but I
will give you blows with snakes.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> So all the people came to Rehoboam on
the third day, as the king had given orders, saying, Come back to me the
third day.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And the king gave them a rough answer,
giving no attention to the suggestion of the old men;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But giving them the answer put forward
by the young men, saying, My father made your yoke hard, but I will make
it harder; my father gave you punishment with whips, but I will give it
with snakes.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> So the king did not give ear to the
people; and this came about by the purpose of the Lord, so that what he
had said by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam, son of Nebat, might be
effected.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And when all Israel saw that the king
would give no attention to them, the people in answer said to the king,
What part have we in David? what is our heritage in the son of Jesse? to
your tents, O Israel; now see to your people, David. So Israel went away
to their tents.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> (But Rehoboam was still king over those
of the children of Israel who were living in the towns of Judah.)

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Then King Rehoboam sent Adoniram, the
overseer of the forced work; and he was stoned to death by all Israel.
And King Rehoboam went quickly and got into his carriage to go in flight
to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> So Israel was turned away from the
family of David to this day.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now when all Israel had news that
Jeroboam had come back, they sent for him to come before the meeting of
the people, and made him king over Israel: not one of them was joined to
the family of David but only the tribe of Judah.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> When Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he got
together all the men of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred and
eighty thousand of his best fighting-men, to make war against Israel and
get the kingdom back for Rehoboam, the son of Solomon.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But the word of God came to Shemaiah,
the man of God, saying,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Say to Rehoboam, the son of Solomon,
king of Judah, and to all the men of Judah and Benjamin and the rest of
the people:

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The Lord has said, You are not to go to
war against your brothers, the children of Israel; go back, every man to
his house, because this thing is my purpose. So they gave ear to the
word of the Lord, and went back, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Then Jeroboam made the town of Shechem
in the hill-country of Ephraim a strong place, and was living there; and
from there he went out and did the same to Penuel.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now the
kingdom will go back to the family of David:

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> If the people go up to make offerings
in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, their heart will be turned again
to their lord, to Rehoboam, king of Judah; and they will put me to death
and go back to Rehoboam, king of Judah.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> So after taking thought the king made
two oxen of gold; and he said to the people, You have been going up to
Jerusalem long enough; see! these are your gods, O Israel, who took you
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And he put one in Beth-el and the other
in Dan.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And this became a sin in Israel; for
the people went to give worship to the one at Beth-el, and to the other
at Dan.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And he made places for worship at the
high places, and made priests, who were not Levites, from among all the
people.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And Jeroboam gave orders for a feast in
the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast
which is kept in Judah, and he went up to the altar. And in the same
way, in Beth-el, he gave offerings to the oxen which he had made,
placing in Beth-el the priests of the high places he had made.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> He went up to the altar he had made in
Beth-el on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the month fixed by him
at his pleasure; and he gave orders for a feast for the people of
Israel, and went up to the altar, and there he made the smoke of his
offerings go up.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Then a man of God came from Judah by the
order of the Lord to Beth-el, where Jeroboam was by the altar, burning
offerings.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And by the order of the Lord he made an
outcry against the altar, saying, O altar, altar, the Lord has said,
From the seed of David will come a child, named Josiah, and on you he
will put to death the priests of the high places, who are burning
offerings on you, and men's bones will be burned on you.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> The same day he gave them a sign, saying,
This is the sign which the Lord has given: See, the altar will be broken
and the burned waste on it overturned.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Then the king, hearing the man of God
crying out against the altar at Beth-el, put out his hand from the
altar, saying, Take him prisoner. And his hand, stretched out against
him, became dead, and he had no power of pulling it back.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And the altar was broken and the burned
waste on it overturned; this was the sign which the man of God had given
by the word of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Then the king made answer and said to the
man of God, Make a prayer now for the grace of the Lord your God, and
for me, that my hand may be made well. And in answer to the prayer of
the man of God, the king's hand was made well again, as it was before.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And the king said to the man of God, Come
with me to my house for food and rest, and I will give you a reward.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But the man of God said to the king, Even
if you gave me half of all you have, I would not go in with you, and I
would not take food or a drink of water in this place;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For so I was ordered by the word of the
Lord, who said, You are not to take food or a drink of water, and you
are not to go back the way you came.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> So he went another way, and not by the
way he came to Beth-el.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Now there was an old prophet living in
Beth-el; and one of his sons came and gave him word of all the man of
God had done that day in Beth-el, and they gave their father an account
of the words he had said to the king.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then their father said to them, Which
way did he go? Now his sons had seen which way the man of God who came
from Judah had gone.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> So the prophet said to his sons, Make
ready an ass for me. So they made an ass ready, and he got on it,

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And went after the man of God, and came
up with him while he was seated under an oak-tree. And he said to him,
Are you the man of God who came from Judah? And he said, I am.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then he said to him, Come back to the
house with me and have a meal.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> But he said, I may not go back with you
or go into your house; and I will not take food or a drink of water with
you in this place;

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For the Lord said to me, You are not to
take food or water there, or go back again by the way you came.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Then he said to him, I am a prophet
like you; and an angel said to me by the word of the Lord, Take him back
with you and give him food and water. But he said false words to him.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> So he went back with him, and had a
meal in his house and a drink of water.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> But while they were seated at the
table, the word of the Lord came to the prophet who had taken him back;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And crying out to the man of God who
came from Judah, he said, The Lord says, Because you have gone against
the voice of the Lord, and have not done as you were ordered by the
Lord,

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> But have come back, and have taken food
and water in this place where he said you were to take no food or water;
your dead body will not be put to rest with your fathers.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Now after the meal he made ready the
ass for him, for the prophet whom he had taken back.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And he went on his way; but on the road
a lion came rushing at him and put him to death; and his dead body was
stretched in the road with the ass by its side, and the lion was there
by the body.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And some men, going by, saw the body
stretched out in the road with the lion by its side; and they came and
gave news of it in the town where the old prophet was living.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Then the prophet who had made him come
back, hearing it, said, It is the man of God, who went against the word
of the Lord; that is why the Lord has given him to the lion to be
wounded to death, as the Lord said.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And he said to his sons, Make ready the
ass for me. And they did so.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he went and saw the dead body
stretched out in the road with the ass and the lion by its side: the
lion had not taken the body for its food or done any damage to the ass.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Then the prophet took up the body of
the man of God and put it on the ass and took it back; and he came to
the town to put the body to rest with weeping.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And he put the body in the
resting-place made ready for himself, weeping and sorrowing over it,
saying, O my brother!

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And when he had put it to rest, he said
to his sons, When I am dead, then you are to put my body into the earth
with the body of this man of God, and put me by his bones so that my
bones may be kept safe with his bones.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> For the outcry he made by the word of
the Lord against the altar in Beth-el and against all the houses of the
high places in the towns of Samaria, will certainly come about.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> After this Jeroboam, not turning back
from his evil ways, still made priests for his altars from among all the
people; he made a priest of anyone desiring it, so that there might be
priests of the high places.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And this became a sin in the family of
Jeroboam, causing it to be cut off and sent to destruction from the face
of the earth.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time Abijah, the son of Jeroboam,
became ill.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And Jeroboam said to his wife, Now come,
put on different clothing so that you may not seem to be the wife of
Jeroboam, and go to Shiloh; see, Ahijah is there, the prophet who said I
would be king over this people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And take with you ten cakes of bread and
dry cakes and a pot of honey, and go to him: he will give you word of
what is to become of the child.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> So Jeroboam's wife did so, and got up and
went to Shiloh and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah was unable to
see, because he was very old.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And the Lord had said to Ahijah, The wife
of Jeroboam is coming to get news from you about her son, who is ill;
give her such and such an answer; for she will make herself seem to be
another woman.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Then Ahijah, hearing the sound of her
footsteps coming in at the door, said, Come in, O wife of Jeroboam; why
do you make yourself seem like another? for I am sent to you with bitter
news.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go, say to Jeroboam, These are the words
of the Lord, the God of Israel: Though I took you from among the people,
lifting you up to be a ruler over my people Israel,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And took the kingdom away by force from
the seed of David and gave it to you, you have not been like my servant
David, who kept my orders, and was true to me with all his heart, doing
only what was right in my eyes.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> But you have done evil more than any
before you, and have made for yourself other gods, and images of metal,
moving me to wrath, and turning your back on me.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> So I will send evil on the line of
Jeroboam, cutting off from his family every male child, those who are
shut up and those who go free in Israel; the family of Jeroboam will be
brushed away like a man brushing away waste till it is all gone.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Those of the family of Jeroboam who
come to death in the town, will become food for the dogs; and those on
whom death comes in the open country, will be food for the birds of the
air; for the Lord has said it.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Up, then! go back to your house; and in
the hour when your feet go into the town, the death of the child will
take place.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And all Israel will put his body to
rest, weeping over him, because he only of the family of Jeroboam will
be put into his resting-place in the earth; for of all the family of
Jeroboam, in him only has the Lord, the God of Israel, seen some good.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And the Lord will put up a king over
Israel who will send destruction on the family of Jeroboam in that day;

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And even now the hand of the Lord has
come down on Israel, shaking it like a river-grass in the water; and,
uprooting Israel from this good land, which he gave to their fathers, he
will send them this way and that on the other side of the River; because
they have made for themselves images, moving the Lord to wrath.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And he will give Israel up because of
the sins which Jeroboam has done and made Israel do.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Then Jeroboam's wife got up and went
away and came to Tirzah; and when she came to the doorway of the house,
death came to the child.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And all Israel put his body to rest,
weeping over him, as the Lord had said by his servant Ahijah the
prophet.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam,
how he made war and how he became king, are recorded in the book of the
history of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And Jeroboam was king for twenty-two
years, and was put to rest with his fathers, and Nadab his son became
king in his place.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, was
king in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he became king, and
he was king for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the town which the Lord
had made his out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there; his
mother's name was Naamah, an Ammonite woman.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And Judah did evil in the eyes of the
Lord, and made him more angry than their fathers had done by their sins.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> For they made high places and upright
stones and wood pillars on every high hill and under every green tree;

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And more than this, there were those in
the land who were used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods,
doing the same disgusting crimes as the nations which the Lord had sent
out before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Now in the fifth year of King Rehoboam,
Shishak, king of Egypt, came up against Jerusalem;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And took away all the stored wealth
from the house of the Lord, and from the king's house, and all the gold
body-covers which Solomon had made.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> So in their place King Rehoboam had
other body-covers made of brass, and gave them into the care of the
captains of the armed men who were stationed at the door of the king's
house.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And whenever the king went into the
house of the Lord, the armed men went with him taking the body-covers,
and then took them back to their room.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam,
and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the
kings of Judah?

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And there was war between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam all their days.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And Rehoboam went to rest with his
fathers, and was put into the earth with his fathers in the town of
David; his mother's name was Naamah, an Ammonite woman. And Abijam his
son became king in his place.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now in the eighteenth year of king
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, Abijam became king over Judah.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> For three years he was king in Jerusalem:
and his mother's name was Maacah, the daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And he did the same sins which his father
had done before him: his heart was not completely true to the Lord his
God, like the heart of David his father.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> But because of David, the Lord gave him a
light in Jerusalem, making his sons king after him, so that Jerusalem
might be safe;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Because David did what was right in the
eyes of the Lord, and never in all his life went against his orders, but
only in the question of Uriah the Hittite.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> ...

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and
all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the
kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Then Abijam went to rest with his
fathers, and they put him into the earth in the town of David: and Asa
his son became king in his place.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> In the twentieth year that Jeroboam was
king of Israel, Asa became king over Judah.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And he was king for forty-one years in
Jerusalem; his mother's name was Maacah, the daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Asa did what was right in the eyes of
the Lord, as David his father did.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Those used for sex purposes in the
worship of the gods he sent out of the country, and he took away all the
images which his fathers had made.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And he would not let Maacah his mother
be queen, because she had made a disgusting image for Asherah; and Asa
had the image cut down and burned by the stream Kidron.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The high places, however, were not
taken away: but still the heart of Asa was true to the Lord all his
life.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> He took into the house of the Lord all
the things which his father had made holy, and those which he himself
had made holy, silver and gold and vessels.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Now there was war between Asa and
Baasha, king of Israel, all their days.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And Baasha, king of Israel, went up
against Judah, building Ramah, so that no one was able to go out or in
to Asa, king of Judah.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Then Asa took all the silver and gold
which was still stored in the Lord's house, and in the king's house, and
sent them, in the care of his servants, to Ben-hadad, son of Tabrimmon,
son of Rezon, king of Aram, at Damascus, saying,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Let there be an agreement between me
and you as there was between my father and your father: see, I have sent
you an offering of silver and gold; go and put an end to your agreement
with Baasha, king of Israel, so that he may give up attacking me.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> So Ben-hadad did as King Asa said, and
sent the captains of his armies against the towns of Israel, attacking
Ijon and Dan and Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth as far as all the
land of Naphtali.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Baasha, hearing of it, put a stop
to the building of Ramah, and was living in Tirzah.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then King Asa got all Judah together,
making every man come; and they took away the stones and the wood with
which Baasha was building Ramah, and King Asa made use of them for
building Geba in the land of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Now the rest of the acts of Asa, and
his power, and all he did, and the towns of which he was the builder,
are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?
But when he was old he had a disease of the feet.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> So Asa went to rest with his fathers
and was put into the earth in the town of David his father: and
Jehoshaphat his son became king in his place.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, became king
over Israel in the second year that Asa was king of Judah; and he was
king of Israel for two years.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> He did evil in the eyes of the Lord,
copying the evil ways of his father, and the sin which he did and made
Israel do.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And Baasha, the son of Ahijah, of the
family of Issachar, made a secret design against him, attacking him at
Gibbethon, a town of the Philistines; for Nadab and the armies of Israel
were making war on Gibbethon.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> In the third year of the rule of Asa,
king of Judah, Baasha put him to death, and became king in his place.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And straight away when he became king,
he sent destruction on all the offspring of Jeroboam; there was not one
living person of all the family of Jeroboam whom he did not put to
death, so the word of the Lord, which he said by his servant Ahijah the
Shilonite, came about;

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Because of the sins which Jeroboam did
and made Israel do, moving the Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and
all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And there was war between Asa and
Baasha, king of Israel, all their days.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> In the third year of the rule of Asa,
king of Judah, Baasha, the son of Ahijah, became king over all Israel in
Tirzah, and was king for twenty-four years.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> He did evil in the eyes of the Lord,
copying the evil ways of Jeroboam and the sin which he made Israel do.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to Jehu,
son of Hanani, protesting against Baasha and saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Because I took you up out of the dust,
and made you ruler over my people Israel; and you have gone in the ways
of Jeroboam, and made my people Israel do evil, moving me to wrath by
their sins;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Truly, I will see that Baasha and all his
family are completely brushed away; I will make your family like the
family of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Anyone of the family of Baasha who comes
to death in the town, will become food for the dogs; and he to whom
death comes in the open country, will be food for the birds of the air.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and
what he did, and his power, are they not recorded in the book of the
history of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Baasha went to rest with his fathers,
and was put into the earth at Tirzah; and Elah his son became king in
his place.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And the Lord sent his word against Baasha
and his family by the mouth of the prophet Jehu, the son of Hanani,
because of all the evil he did in the eyes of the Lord, moving him to
wrath by the work of his hands, because he was like the family of
Jeroboam, and because he put it to death.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> In the twenty-sixth year that Asa was
king of Judah, Elah, the son of Baasha, became king of Israel in Tirzah,
and he was king for two years.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And his servant Zimri, captain of half
his war-carriages, made secret designs against him: now he was in
Tirzah, drinking hard in the house of Arza, controller of the king's
house in Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And Zimri went in and made an attack on
him and put him to death, in the twenty-seventh year that Asa was king
of Judah, and made himself king in his place.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And straight away when he became king
and took his place on the seat of the kingdom, he put to death all the
family of Baasha: not one male child of his relations or his friends
kept his life.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> So Zimri put to death all the family of
Baasha, so that the word which the Lord said against him by the mouth of
Jehu the prophet came about;

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Because of all the sins of Baasha, and
the sins of Elah his son, which they did and made Israel do, moving the
Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath by their foolish acts.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and
all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the twenty-seventh year of Asa, king
of Judah, Zimri was king for seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were
attacking Gibbethon in the land of the Philistines.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And news came to the people in the
tents that Zimri had made a secret design and had put the king to death:
so all Israel made Omri, the captain of the army, king that day in the
tents.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Then Omri went up from Gibbethon, with
all the army of Israel, and they made an attack on Tirzah, shutting in
the town on every side.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And when Zimri saw that the town was
taken, he went into the inner room of the king's house, and burning the
house over his head, came to his end,

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Because of his sin in doing evil in the
eyes of the Lord, in going in the way of Jeroboam and in his sin which
he made Israel do.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and
the secret design he made, are they not recorded in the book of the
history of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Then there was a division among the
people of Israel; half the people were for making Tibni, son of Ginath,
king, and half were supporting Omri.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> But the supporters of Omri overcame
those who were on the side of Tibni, the son of Ginath; and death came
to Tibni and to his brother Joram at that time: and Omri became king in
the place of Tibni.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> In the thirty-first year of Asa, king
of Judah, Omri became king over Israel, and he was king for twelve
years; for six years he was ruling in Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> He got the hill Samaria from Shemer for
the price of two talents of silver, and he made a town there, building
it on the hill and naming it Samaria, after Shemer the owner of the
hill.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Omri did evil in the eyes of the
Lord, even worse than all those before him,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Copying all the evil ways of Jeroboam,
the son of Nebat, and all the sins he did and made Israel do, moving the
Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath by their foolish ways.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Now the rest of the acts which Omri
did, and his great power, are they not recorded in the book of the
history of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> So Omri went to rest with his fathers,
and was put into the earth in Samaria; and Ahab his son became king in
his place.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> In the thirty-eighth year that Asa was
king of Judah, Ahab, the son of Omri, became king over Israel; and Ahab
was king in Samaria for twenty-two years.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And Ahab, the son of Omri, did evil in
the eyes of the Lord, even worse than all who went before him.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And as if copying the evil ways of
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, was a small thing for him, he took as his
wife Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of Zidon, and became a servant
and worshipper of Baal.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And he put up an altar for Baal in the
house of Baal which he had made in Samaria.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Ahab made an image of Asherah and
did more than all the kings of Israel before him to make the Lord, the
God of Israel, angry.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> In his days Hiel made Jericho; he put
its base in position at the price of Abiram, his oldest son, and he put
its doors in place at the price of his youngest son Segub; even as the
Lord had said by Joshua, the son of Nun.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And Elijah the Tishbite, of Tishbe in
Gilead, said to Ahab, By the living Lord, the God of Israel, whose
servant I am, there will be no dew or rain in these years, but only at
my word.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Then the word of the Lord came to him,
saying,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Go from here in the direction of the
east, and keep yourself in a secret place by the stream Cherith, east of
Jordan.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> The water of the stream will be your
drink, and by my orders the ravens will give you food there.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> So he went and did as the Lord said,
living by the stream Cherith, east of Jordan.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the ravens took him bread in the
morning and meat in the evening; and the water of the stream was his
drink.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Now after a time the stream became dry,
because there was no rain in the land.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Then the word of the Lord came to him,
saying,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Up! go now to Zarephath, in Zidon, and
make your living-place there; I have given orders to a widow woman there
to see that you have food.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So he got up and went to Zarephath; and
when he came to the door of the town, he saw a widow woman getting
sticks together; and crying out to her he said, Will you give me a
little water in a vessel for my drink?

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And when she was going to get it, he
said to her, And get me with it a small bit of bread.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Then she said, By the life of the Lord
your God, I have nothing but a little meal in my store, and a drop of
oil in the bottle; and now I am getting two sticks together so that I
may go in and make it ready for me and my son, so that we may have a
meal before our death.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Elijah said to her, Have no fear;
go and do as you have said, but first make me a little cake of it and
come and give it to me, and then make something for yourself and your
son.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> For this is the word of the Lord, the
God of Israel: The store of meal will not come to an end, and the bottle
will never be without oil, till the day when the Lord sends rain on the
earth.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> So she went and did as Elijah said; and
she and he and her family had food for a long time.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> The store of meal did not come to an
end, and the bottle was never without oil, as the Lord had said by the
mouth of Elijah.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Now after this, the son of the woman of
the house became ill, so ill that there was no breath in him.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And she said to Elijah, What have I to
do with you, O man of God? have you come to put God in mind of my sin,
and to put my son to death?

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And he said to her, Give your son to
me. And lifting him out of her arms, he took him up to his room and put
him down on his bed.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And crying to the Lord he said, O Lord
my God, have you sent evil even on the widow whose guest I am, by
causing her son's death?

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And stretching herself out on the child
three times, he made his prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord my God, be
pleased to let this child's life come back to him again.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And the Lord gave ear to the voice of
Elijah, and the child's spirit came into him again, and he came back to
life.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And Elijah took the child down from his
room into the house and gave him to his mother and said to her, See,
your son is living.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Then the woman said to Elijah, Now I am
certain that you are a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in your
mouth is true.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Now after a long time, the word of the
Lord came to Elijah, in the third year, saying, Go and let Ahab see you,
so that I may send rain on the earth.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> So Elijah went to let Ahab see him. Now
there was no food to be had in Samaria.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And Ahab sent for Obadiah, the controller
of the king's house. (Now Obadiah had the fear of the Lord before him
greatly;

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> For when Jezebel was cutting off the
prophets of the Lord, Obadiah took a hundred of them, and kept them
secretly in a hole in the rock, fifty at a time, and gave them bread and
water.)

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And Ahab said to Obadiah, Come, let us go
through all the country, to all the fountains of water and all the
rivers, and see if there is any grass to be had for the horses and the
transport beasts, so that we may be able to keep some of the beasts from
destruction.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> So they went through all the country,
covering it between them; Ahab went in one direction by himself, and
Obadiah went in another by himself.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And while Obadiah was on his way, he came
face to face with Elijah; and seeing who it was, he went down on his
face and said, Is it you, my lord Elijah?

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Elijah in answer said, It is I; now
go and say to your lord, Elijah is here.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And he said, What sin have I done, that
you would give up your servant into the hand of Ahab, and be the cause
of my death?

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> By the life of the Lord your God, there
is not a nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent in search of you;
and when they said, He is not here; he made them take an oath that they
had not seen you.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And now you say, Go, say to your lord,
Elijah is here.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And straight away, when I have gone
from you, the spirit of the Lord will take you away, I have no idea
where, so that when I come and give word to Ahab, and he sees you not,
he will put me to death: though I, your servant, have been a worshipper
of the Lord from my earliest years.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Has my lord not had word of what I did
when Jezebel was putting the Lord's prophets to death? how I kept a
hundred of them in a secret hole in the rock, fifty at a time, and gave
them bread and water?

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And now you say, Go and say to your
Lord, Elijah is here; and he will put me to death.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Elijah said, By the life of the
Lord of armies, whose servant I am, I will certainly let him see me
today.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> So Obadiah went to Ahab and gave him
the news; and Ahab went to see Elijah.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And when he saw Elijah, Ahab said to
him, Is it you, you troubler of Israel?

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Then he said in answer, I have not been
troubling Israel, but you and your family; because, turning away from
the orders of the Lord, you have gone after the Baals.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Now send, and get Israel together
before me at Mount Carmel, with the four hundred and fifty prophets of
Baal who get their food at Jezebel's table.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> So Ahab sent for all the children of
Israel, and got the prophets together at Mount Carmel.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And Elijah came near to all the people
and said, How long will you go on balancing between two opinions? if the
Lord is God, then give worship to him; but if Baal, give worship to him.
And the people said not a word in answer.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Then Elijah said to the people, I, even
I, am the only living prophet of the Lord; but Baal's prophets are four
hundred and fifty men.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Now, let them give us two oxen; and let
them take one for themselves, and have it cut up, and put it on the
wood, but put no fire under it; I will get the other ox ready, and put
it on the wood, and put no fire under it.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And do you make prayers to your god,
and I will make a prayer to the Lord: and it will be clear that the one
who gives an answer by fire is God. And all the people in answer said,
It is well said.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Then Elijah said to the prophets of
Baal, Take one ox for yourselves and get it ready first, for there are
more of you; and make your prayers to your god, but put no fire under.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> So they took the ox which was given
them, and made it ready, crying out to Baal from morning till the middle
of the day, and saying, O Baal, give ear to us. But there was no voice
and no answer. And they were jumping up and down before the altar they
had made.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And in the middle of the day, Elijah
made sport of them, saying, Give louder cries, for he is a god; he may
be deep in thought, or he may have gone away for some purpose, or he may
be on a journey, or by chance he is sleeping and has to be made awake.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> So they gave loud cries, cutting
themselves with knives and swords, as was their way, till the blood came
streaming out all over them.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And from the middle of the day they
went on with their prayers till the time of the offering; but there was
no voice, or any answer, or any who gave attention to them.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Then Elijah said to all the people,
Come near to me; and all the people came near. And he put up again the
altar of the Lord which had been broken down.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And Elijah took twelve stones, the
number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the Lord had said,
Israel will be your name:

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> And with the stones he made an altar to
the name of the Lord; and he made a deep drain all round the altar,
great enough to take two measures of seed.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> And he put the wood in order, and,
cutting up the ox, put it on the wood. Then he said, Get four vessels
full of water and put it on the burned offering and on the wood. And he
said, Do it a second time, and they did it a second time;

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And he said, Do it a third time, and
they did it a third time.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> And the water went all round the altar,
till the drain was full.

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> Then at the time of the offering,
Elijah the prophet came near and said, O Lord, the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Israel, let it be seen this day that you are God in
Israel, and that I am your servant, and that I have done all these
things by your order.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Give me an answer, O Lord, give me an
answer, so that this people may see that you are God, and that you have
made their hearts come back again.

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Then the fire of the Lord came down,
burning up the offering and the wood and the stones and the dust, and
drinking up the water in the drain.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> And when the people saw it, they all
went down on their faces, and said, The Lord, he is God, the Lord, he is
God.

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> And Elijah said to them, Take the
prophets of Baal, let not one of them get away. So they took them, and
Elijah made them go down to the stream Kishon, and put them to death
there.

<span id="an_18:41">18:41</span> Then Elijah said to Ahab, Up! take food
and drink, for there is a sound of much rain.

<span id="an_18:42">18:42</span> So Ahab went up to have food and drink,
while Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he went down on the
earth, putting his face between his knees.

<span id="an_18:43">18:43</span> And he said to his servant, Go now, and
take a look in the direction of the sea. And he went up, and after
looking said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times; and
he went seven times.

<span id="an_18:44">18:44</span> And the seventh time he said, I see a
cloud coming up out of the sea, as small as a man's hand. Then he said,
Go up and say to Ahab, Get your carriage ready and go down or the rain
will keep you back.

<span id="an_18:45">18:45</span> And after a very little time, the
heaven became black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain.
And Ahab went in his carriage to Jezreel.

<span id="an_18:46">18:46</span> And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah;
and he made himself strong, and went running before Ahab till they came
to Jezreel.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Ahab gave Jezebel news of all Elijah had
done, and how he had put all the prophets to death with the sword.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Then Jezebel sent a servant to Elijah,
saying, May the gods' punishment be on me if I do not make your life
like the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he got up, fearing for his life, and
went in flight, and came to Beer-sheba in Judah, parting there from his
servant;

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> While he himself went a day's journey
into the waste land, and took a seat under a broom-plant, desiring for
himself only death; for he said, It is enough: now, O Lord, take away my
life, for I am no better than my fathers.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And stretching himself on the earth, he
went to sleep under the broom-plant; but an angel, touching him, said to
him, Get up and have some food.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And looking up, he saw by his head a cake
cooked on the stones and a bottle of water. So he took food and drink
and went to sleep again.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And the angel of the Lord came again a
second time, and touching him said, Get up and have some food, or the
journey will be overmuch for your strength.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> So he got up and took food and drink, and
in the strength of that food he went on for forty days and nights, to
Horeb, the mountain of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And there he went into a hole in the rock
for the night; then the word of the Lord came to him, saying, What are
you doing here, Elijah?

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And he said, I have been burning for
the honour of the Lord, the God of armies; for the children of Israel
have not kept your agreement; they have made destruction of your altars,
and have put your prophets to death with the sword: till I, even I, am
the only one living; and now they are attempting to take away my life.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Then he said, Go out and take your
place on the mountain before the Lord. Then the Lord went by, and
mountains were parted by the force of a great wind, and rocks were
broken before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind. And after the
wind there was an earth-shock, but the Lord was not in the earth-shock.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And after the earth-shock a fire, but
the Lord was not in the fire. And after the fire, the sound of a soft
breath.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And Elijah, hearing it, went out,
covering his face with his robe, and took his place in the opening of
the hole. And there a voice came to him saying, What are you doing here,
Elijah?

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And he said, I have been burning for
the honour of the Lord, the God of armies; for the children of Israel
have not kept your agreement; they have had your altars broken down, and
have put your prophets to death with the sword: till I, even I, am the
only one living; and now they are attempting to take away my life.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And the Lord said to him, Go back on
your way through the waste land to Damascus; and when you come there,
put the holy oil on Hazael to make him king over Aram;

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And on Jehu, son of Nimshi, making him
king over Israel; and on Elisha, the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah, to
be prophet in your place.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And it will come about that the man who
gets away safe from the sword of Hazael, Jehu will put to death; and
whoever gets away safe from the sword of Jehu, Elisha will put to death.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> But I will keep safe seven thousand in
Israel, all those whose knees have not been bent to Baal, and whose
mouths have given him no kisses.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> So he went away from there and came
across Elisha, the son of Shaphat, ploughing with twelve yoke of oxen,
he himself walking with the twelfth; and Elijah went up to him and put
his robe on him.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And letting the oxen be where they
were, he came running after Elijah, and said, Only let me give a kiss to
my father and mother, and then I will come after you. But he said to
him, Go back again; for what have I done to you?

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he went back, and took the oxen and
put them to death, and cooking their flesh with the yokes of the oxen,
he gave the people a feast. Then he got up and went after Elijah and
became his servant.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Now Ben-hadad, king of Aram, got all his
army together, and thirty-two kings with him, and horses and carriages
of war; he went up and made war on Samaria, shutting it in.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he sent representatives into the town
to Ahab, king of Israel;

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And they said to him, Ben-hadad says,
Your silver and your gold are mine; and your wives and children are
mine.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And the king of Israel sent him an answer
saying, As you say, my lord king, I am yours with all I have.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Then the representatives came back again,
and said, These are the words of Ben-hadad: I sent to you saying, Give
up to me your silver and your gold, your wives and your children;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> But I will send my servants to you
tomorrow about this time, to make a search through your house and the
houses of your people, and everything which is pleasing in your eyes
they will take away in their hands.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Then the king of Israel sent for all the
responsible men of the land, and said, Now will you take note and see
the evil purpose of this man: he sent for my wives and my children, my
silver and my gold, and I did not keep them back.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And all the responsible men and the
people said to him, Do not give attention to him or do what he says.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> So he said to the representatives of
Ben-hadad, Say to my lord the king, All the orders you sent the first
time I will do; but this thing I may not do. And the representatives
went back with this answer.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Then Ben-hadad sent to him, saying, May
the gods' punishment be on me if there is enough of the dust of Samaria
for all the people at my feet to take some in their hands.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And the king of Israel said in answer,
Say to him, The time for loud talk is not when a man is putting on his
arms, but when he is taking them off.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Now when this answer was given to
Ben-hadad, he was drinking with the kings in the tents, and he said to
his men, Take up your positions. So they put themselves in position for
attacking the town.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Then a prophet came up to Ahab, king of
Israel, and said, The Lord says, Have you seen all this great army? See,
I will give it into your hands today, and you will see that I am the
Lord.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And Ahab said, By whom? And he said,
The Lord says, By the servants of the chiefs who are over the divisions
of the land. Then he said, By whom is the fighting to be started? And he
made answer, By you.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Then he got together the servants of
all the chiefs who were over the divisions of the land, two hundred and
thirty-two of them; and after them, he got together all the people, all
the children of Israel, seven thousand.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And in the middle of the day they went
out. But Ben-hadad was drinking in the tents with the thirty-two kings
who were helping him.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And the servants of the chiefs who were
over the divisions of the land went forward first; and when Ben-hadad
sent out, they gave him the news, saying, Men have come out from
Samaria.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And he said, If they have come out for
peace, take them living, and if they have come out for war, take them
living.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> So the servants of the chiefs of the
divisions of the land went out of the town, with the army coming after
them.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And every one of them put his man to
death, and the Aramaeans went in flight with Israel after them; and
Ben-hadad, king of Aram, got away safely on a horse with his horsemen.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the king of Israel went out and
took the horses and the war-carriages, and made great destruction among
the Aramaeans.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Then the prophet came up to the king of
Israel, and said to him, Now make yourself strong, and take care what
you do, or a year from now the king of Aram will come up against you
again.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Then the king of Aram's servants said
to him, Their god is a god of the hills; that is why they were stronger
than we: but if we make an attack on them in the lowlands, we will
certainly be stronger than they.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> This is what you have to do: take away
the kings from their positions, and put captains in their places;

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And get together another army like the
one which came to destruction, horse for horse, and carriage for
carriage; and let us make war on them in the lowlands, and certainly we
will be stronger than they. And he gave ear to what they said, and did
so.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> So, a year later, Ben-hadad got the
Aramaeans together and went up to Aphek to make war on Israel.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And the children of Israel got
themselves together, and food was made ready and they went against them;
the tents of the children of Israel were like two little flocks of goats
before them, but all the country was full of the Aramaeans.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And a man of God came up and said to
the king of Israel, The Lord says, Because the Aramaeans have said, The
Lord is a god of the hills and not of the valleys; I will give all this
great army into your hands, and you will see that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Now the two armies kept their positions
facing one another for seven days. And on the seventh day the fight was
started; and the children of Israel put to the sword a hundred thousand
Aramaean footmen in one day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> But the rest went in flight to Aphek,
into the town, where a wall came down on the twenty-seven thousand who
were still living. And Ben-hadad went in flight into the town, into an
inner room.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Then his servants said to him, It is
said that the kings of Israel are full of mercy: let us then put on
haircloth, and cords on our heads, and go to the king of Israel; it may
be that he will give you your life.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> So they put on haircloth, and cords on
their heads, and came to the king of Israel and said, Your servant
Ben-hadad says, Let me now keep my life. And he said, Is he still
living? he is my brother.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> Now the men took it as a sign, and
quickly took up his words; and they said, Ben-hadad is your brother.
Then he said, Go and get him. So Ben-hadad came out to him and he made
him get up into his carriage.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And Ben-hadad said to him, The towns my
father took from your father I will give back; and you may make streets
for yourself in Damascus as my father did in Samaria. And as for me, at
the price of this agreement you will let me go. So he made an agreement
with him and let him go.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And a certain man of the sons of the
prophets said to his neighbour by the word of the Lord, Give me a wound.
But the man would not.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> Then he said to him, Because you have
not given ear to the voice of the Lord, straight away when you have gone
from me a lion will put you to death. And when he had gone, straight
away a lion came rushing at him and put him to death.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> Then he came across another man, and
said, Give me a wound. And the man gave him a blow wounding him.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> So the prophet went away, and pulling
his head-band over his eyes to keep his face covered, took his place by
the road waiting for the king.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> And when the king went by, crying out
to him he said, Your servant went out into the fight; and a man came out
to me with another man and said, Keep this man: if by any chance he gets
away, your life will be the price of his life, or you will have to give
a talent of silver in payment.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> But while your servant was turning this
way and that, he was gone. Then the king of Israel said to him, You are
responsible; you have given the decision against yourself.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> Then he quickly took the head-band from
his eyes; and the king of Israel saw that he was one of the prophets.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And he said to him, These are the words
of the Lord: Because you have let go from your hands the man whom I had
put to the curse, your life will be taken for his life, and your people
for his people.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> Then the king of Israel went back to
his house, bitter and angry, and came to Samaria.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Now Naboth the Jezreelite had a
vine-garden in Jezreel, near the house of Ahab, king of Samaria.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And Ahab said to Naboth, Give me your
vine-garden so that I may have it for a garden of sweet plants, for it
is near my house; and let me give you a better vine-garden in exchange,
or, if it seems good to you, let me give you its value in money.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> But Naboth said to Ahab, By the Lord, far
be it from me to give you the heritage of my fathers.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> So Ahab came into his house bitter and
angry because Naboth the Jezreelite had said to him, I will not give you
the heritage of my fathers. And stretching himself on the bed with his
face turned away, he would take no food.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> But Jezebel, his wife, came to him and
said, Why is your spirit so bitter that you have no desire for food?

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he said to her, Because I was talking
to Naboth the Jezreelite, and I said to him, Let me have your
vine-garden for a price, or, if it is pleasing to you, I will give you
another vine-garden for it: and he said, I will not give you my
vine-garden.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Then Jezebel, his wife, said, Are you now
the ruler of Israel? Get up, take food, and let your heart be glad; I
will give you the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> So she sent a letter in Ahab's name,
stamped with his stamp, to the responsible men and the chiefs who were
in authority with Naboth.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And in the letter she said, Let a time of
public sorrow be fixed, and put Naboth at the head of the people;

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And get two good-for-nothing persons to
come before him and give witness that he has been cursing God and the
king. Then take him out and have him stoned to death.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> So the responsible men and the chiefs
who were in authority in his town, did as Jezebel had said in the letter
she sent them.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They gave orders for a day of public
sorrow, and put Naboth at the head of the people.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And the two good-for-nothing persons
came in and took their seats before him and gave witness against Naboth,
in front of the people, saying, Naboth has been cursing God and the
king. Then they took him outside the town and had him stoned to death.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And they sent word to Jezebel, saying,
Naboth has been stoned and is dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Then Jezebel, hearing that Naboth had
been stoned and was dead, said to Ahab, Get up and take as your heritage
the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he would not give you
for money, for Naboth is no longer living but is dead.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> So Ahab, hearing that Naboth was dead,
went down to the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite to take it as his
heritage.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the word of the Lord came to Elijah
the Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Go down to Ahab, king of Israel, in
Samaria; see, he is in the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite, where
he has gone to take it as his heritage.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Say to him, The Lord says, Have you put
a man to death and taken his heritage? Then say to him, The Lord says,
In the place where dogs have been drinking the blood of Naboth, there
will your blood become the drink of dogs.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And Ahab said to Elijah, Have you come
face to face with me, O my hater? And he said, I have come to you
because you have given yourself up to do evil in the eyes of the Lord.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> See, I will send evil on you and put an
end to you completely, cutting off from Ahab every male child, him who
is shut up and him who goes free in Israel;

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And I will make your family like the
family of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, and like the family of Baasha, the
son of Ahijah, because you have made me angry, and have made Israel do
evil.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And of Jezebel the Lord said, Jezebel
will become food for dogs in the heritage of Jezreel.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Any man of the family of Ahab who comes
to his death in the town will become food for the dogs; and he who comes
to his death in the open country will be food for the birds of the air.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> (There was no one like Ahab, who gave
himself up to do evil in the eyes of the Lord, moved to it by Jezebel
his wife.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> He did a very disgusting thing in going
after false gods, doing all the things the Amorites did, whom the Lord
sent out before the children of Israel.)

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Hearing these words, Ahab, in great
grief, put haircloth on his flesh and went without food, sleeping in
haircloth, and going about quietly.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> Then the word of the Lord came to
Elijah the Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Do you see how Ahab has made himself
low before me? because he has made himself low before me, I will not
send the evil in his life-time, but in his son's time I will send the
evil on his family.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Now for three years there was no war
between Aram and Israel.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And it came about in the third year, that
Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, came down to the king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And the king of Israel said to his
servants, Do you not see that Ramoth-gilead is ours? and we are doing
nothing to get it back from the hands of the king of Aram.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And he said to Jehoshaphat, Will you go
with me to Ramoth-gilead to make war? And Jehoshaphat said to the king
of Israel, I am as you are: my people as your people, my horses as your
horses.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Then Jehoshaphat said to the king of
Israel, Let us now get directions from the Lord.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> So the king of Israel got all the
prophets together, about four hundred men, and said to them, Am I to go
to Ramoth-gilead to make war or not? And they said, Go up: for the Lord
will give it into the hands of the king.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But Jehoshaphat said, Is there no other
prophet of the Lord here from whom we may get directions?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, There is still one man by whom we may get directions from
the Lord, Micaiah, son of Imlah; but I have no love for him, for he is a
prophet of evil to me and not of good. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the
king say so.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then the king of Israel sent for one of
his unsexed servants and said, Go quickly and come back with Micaiah,
the son of Imlah.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat,
the king of Judah, were seated on their seats of authority, dressed in
their robes, by the doorway into Samaria; and all the prophets were
acting as prophets before them.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah,
made himself horns of iron and said, The Lord says, Pushing back the
Aramaeans with these, you will put an end to them completely.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And all the prophets said the same
thing, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and it will go well for you, for
the Lord will give it into the hands of the king.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Now the servant who had gone to get
Micaiah said to him, See now, all the prophets with one voice are saying
good things to the king; so let your words be like theirs and say good
things.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Micaiah said, By the living Lord,
whatever the Lord says to me I will say.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> When he came to the king, the king said
to him, Micaiah, are we to go to Ramoth-gilead to make war or not? And
in answer he said, Go up, and it will go well for you; and the Lord will
give it into the hands of the king.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Then the king said to him, Have I not,
again and again, put you on your oath to say nothing to me but what is
true in the name of the Lord?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Then he said, I saw all Israel
wandering on the mountains like sheep without a keeper; and the Lord
said, These have no master: let them go back, every man to his house in
peace.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, Did I not say that he would not be a prophet of good but of
evil?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And he said, Give ear now to the word
of the Lord: I saw the Lord seated on his seat of power, with all the
army of heaven in their places round him at his right hand and at his
left.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And the Lord said, How may Ahab be
tricked into going up to Ramoth-gilead to his death? And one said one
thing and one another.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Then a spirit came forward and took his
place before the Lord and said, I will get him to do it by a trick.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And the Lord said, How? And he said, I
will go out and be a spirit of deceit in the mouth of all his prophets.
And he said, Your trick will have its effect on him: go out and do so.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And now, see, the Lord has put a spirit
of deceit in the mouth of all these your prophets; and the Lord has said
evil against you.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah,
came near and gave Micaiah a blow on the side of the face, saying, Where
is the spirit of the Lord whose word is in you?

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And Micaiah said, Truly, you will see
on that day when you go into an inner room to keep yourself safe.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And the king of Israel said, Take
Micaiah and send him back to Amon, the ruler of the town, and to Joash,
the king's son;

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And say, It is the king's order that
this man is to be put in prison and given prison food till I come again
in peace.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And Micaiah said, If you come back at
all in peace, the Lord has not sent his word by me.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat,
the king of Judah, went up to Ramoth-gilead.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, I will make a change in my clothing, so that I do not seem
to be the king, and will go into the fight; but do you put on your
robes. So the king of Israel made a change in his dress and went into
the fight.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Now the king of Aram had given orders
to the thirty-two captains of his war-carriages, saying, Make no attack
on small or great, but only on the king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> So when the captains of the
war-carriages saw Jehoshaphat, they said, Truly, this is the king of
Israel; and turning against him, they came round him, but Jehoshaphat
gave a cry.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And when the captains of the
war-carriages saw that he was not the king of Israel, they went back
from going after him.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And a certain man sent an arrow from
his bow without thought of its direction, and gave the king of Israel a
wound where his breastplate was joined to his clothing; so he said to
the driver of his war-carriage, Go to one side and take me away out of
the army, for I am badly wounded.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> But the fight became more violent while
the day went on; and the king was supported in his war-carriage facing
the Aramaeans, and the floor of the carriage was covered with the blood
from his wound, and by evening he was dead.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> And about sundown a cry went up from
all parts of the army, saying, Let every man go back to his town and his
country, for the king is dead.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> And they came to Samaria, and put the
king's body to rest in Samaria.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> And the war-carriage was washed by the
pool of Samaria, which was the bathing-place of the loose women, and the
dogs were drinking his blood there, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and
all he did, and his ivory house, and all the towns of which he was the
builder, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings
of Israel?

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> So Ahab was put to rest with his
fathers; and Ahaziah his son became king in his place.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And Jehoshaphat, the son of Asa, became
king over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab's rule over Israel.

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old
when he became king, and he was king for twenty-five years in Jerusalem.
His mother's name was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> He did as Asa his father had done, not
turning away from it, but doing what was right in the eyes of the Lord;
but the high places were not taken away: the people went on making
offerings and burning them in the high places.

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> And Jehoshaphat made peace with the
king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> Now the rest of the acts of
Jehoshaphat, and his great power, and how he went to war, are they not
recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> He put an end to the rest of those who
were used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods, all those who
were still in the land in the time of his father Asa.

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> At that time there was no king in Edom;

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> And the representative of King
Jehoshaphat made a Tarshish-ship to go to Ophir for gold, but it did not
go, because it was broken at Ezion-geber.

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> Then Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, said to
Jehoshaphat, Let my men go with yours in the ships. But Jehoshaphat
would not let them.

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> Then Jehoshaphat went to rest with his
fathers, and his body was put into the earth in the town of David his
father; and Jehoram his son became king in his place.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, became king
over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of the rule of
Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, and he was king over Israel for two
years.

<span id="an_22:52">22:52</span> He did evil in the eyes of the Lord,
going in the ways of his father and his mother, and in the ways of
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel do evil.

<span id="an_22:53">22:53</span> He was a servant and worshipper of
Baal, moving the Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath, as his father had
done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings](kg2)
