[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mal)  [Next](mar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Matthew

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The book of the generations of Jesus
Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The son of Abraham was Isaac; and the son
of Isaac was Jacob; and the sons of Jacob were Judah and his brothers;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And the sons of Judah were Perez and Zerah
by Tamar; and the son of Perez was Hezron; and the son of Hezron was
Ram;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the son of Ram was Amminadab; and the
son of Amminadab was Nahshon; and the son of Nahshon was Salmon;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the son of Salmon by Rahab was Boaz;
and the son of Boaz by Ruth was Obed; and the son of Obed was Jesse;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And the son of Jesse was David the king;
and the son of David was Solomon by her who had been the wife of Uriah;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the son of Solomon was Rehoboam; and
the son of Rehoboam was Abijah; and the son of Abijah was Asa;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the son of Asa was Jehoshaphat; and the
son of Jehoshaphat was Joram; and the son of Joram was Uzziah;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And the son of Uzziah was Jotham; and the
son of Jotham was Ahaz; and the son of Ahaz was Hezekiah;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the son of Hezekiah was Manasseh; and
the son of Manasseh was Amon; and the son of Amon was Josiah;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And the sons of Josiah were Jechoniah and
his brothers, at the time of the taking away to Babylon.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And after the taking away to Babylon,
Jechoniah had a son Shealtiel; and Shealtiel had Zerubbabel;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Zerubbabel had Abiud; and Abiud had
Eliakim; and Eliakim had Azor;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Azor had Zadok; and Zadok had Achim;
and Achim had Eliud;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And Eliud had Eleazar; and Eleazar had
Matthan; and Matthan had Jacob;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And the son of Jacob was Joseph the
husband of Mary, who gave birth to Jesus, whose name is Christ.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> So all the generations from Abraham to
David are fourteen generations; and from David to the taking away to
Babylon, fourteen generations; and from the taking away to Babylon to
the coming of Christ, fourteen generations.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now the birth of Jesus Christ was in this
way: when his mother Mary was going to be married to Joseph, before they
came together the discovery was made that she was with child by the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And Joseph, her husband, being an upright
man, and not desiring to make her a public example, had a mind to put
her away privately.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But when he was giving thought to these
things, an angel of the Lord came to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, son
of David, have no fear of taking Mary as your wife; because that which
is in her body is of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And she will give birth to a son; and you
will give him the name Jesus; for he will give his people salvation from
their sins.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Now all this took place so that the word
of the Lord by the prophet might come true,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> See, the virgin will be with child, and
will give birth to a son, and they will give him the name Immanuel, that
is, God with us.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And Joseph did as the angel of the Lord
had said to him, and took her as his wife;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And he had no connection with her till
she had given birth to a son; and he gave him the name Jesus.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now when the birth of Jesus took place in
Beth-lehem of Judaea, in the days of Herod the king, there came wise men
from the east to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Saying, Where is the King of the Jews whose
birth has now taken place? We have seen his star in the east and have
come to give him worship.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And when it came to the ears of Herod the
king, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And he got together all the chief priests
and scribes of the people, questioning them as to where the birth-place
of the Christ would be.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they said to him, In Beth-lehem of
Judaea; for so it is said in the writings of the prophet,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> You Beth-lehem, in the land of Judah, are
not the least among the chiefs of Judah: out of you will come a ruler,
who will be the keeper of my people Israel.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then Herod sent for the wise men privately,
and put questions to them about what time the star had been seen.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he sent them to Beth-lehem and said, Go
and make certain where the young child is; and when you have seen him,
let me have news of it, so that I may come and give him worship.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And after hearing the king, they went on
their way; and the star which they saw in the east went before them,
till it came to rest over the place where the young child was.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And when they saw the star they were full
of joy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And they came into the house, and saw the
young child with Mary, his mother; and falling down on their faces they
gave him worship; and from their store they gave him offerings of gold,
perfume, and spices.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And it was made clear to them by God in a
dream that they were not to go back to Herod; so they went into their
country by another way.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And when they had gone, an angel of the
Lord came to Joseph in a dream, saying, Get up and take the young child
and his mother, and go into Egypt, and do not go from there till I give
you word; for Herod will be searching for the young child to put him to
death.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> So he took the young child and his mother
by night, and went into Egypt;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And was there till the death of Herod; so
that the word of the Lord through the prophet might come true, Out of
Egypt have I sent for my son.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then Herod, when he saw that he had been
tricked by the wise men, was very angry; and he sent out, and put to
death all the male children in Beth-lehem and in all the parts round
about it, from two years old and under, acting on the knowledge which he
had got with care from the wise men.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then the word of Jeremiah the prophet
came true,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> In Ramah there was a sound of weeping and
great sorrow, Rachel weeping for her children, and she would not be
comforted for their loss.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But when Herod was dead, an angel of the
Lord came in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Saying, Get up and take the young child
and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: because they who were
attempting to take the young child's life are dead.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And he got up, and took the young child
and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But when it came to his ears that
Archelaus was ruling over Judaea in the place of his father Herod, he
was in fear of going there; and God having given him news of the danger
in a dream, he went out of the way into the country parts of Galilee.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And he came and was living in a town
named Nazareth: so that the word of the prophets might come true, He
will be named a Nazarene.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And in those days John the Baptist came
preaching in the waste land of Judaea,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Saying, Let your hearts be turned from sin;
for the kingdom of heaven is near.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For this is he of whom Isaiah the prophet
said, The voice of one crying in the waste land, Make ready the way of
the Lord, make his roads straight.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Now John was clothed in camel's hair, with
a leather band about him; and his food was locusts and honey.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Then Jerusalem and all Judaea went out to
him, and all the people from near Jordan;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And they were given baptism by him in the
river Jordan, saying openly that they had done wrong.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But when he saw a number of the Pharisees
and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, Offspring of
snakes, at whose word are you going in flight from the wrath to come?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Let your change of heart be seen in your
works:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And say not to yourselves, We have Abraham
for our father; because I say to you that God is able from these stones
to make children for Abraham.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And even now the axe is put to the root
of the trees; every tree then which does not give good fruit is cut
down, and put into the fire.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Truly, I give baptism with water to those
of you whose hearts are changed; but he who comes after me is greater
than I, whose shoes I am not good enough to take up: he will give you
baptism with the Holy Spirit and with fire:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> In whose hand is the instrument with
which he will make clean his grain; he will put the good grain in his
store, but the waste will be burned up in the fire which will never be
put out.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then Jesus came from Galilee to John at
the Jordan, to be given baptism by him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But John would have kept him back,
saying, It is I who have need of baptism from you, and do you come to
me?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But Jesus made answer, saying to him, Let
it be so now: because so it is right for us to make righteousness
complete. Then he gave him baptism.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Jesus, having been given baptism,
straight away went up from the water; and, the heavens opening, he saw
the Spirit of God coming down on him as a dove;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And a voice came out of heaven, saying,
This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Jesus was sent by the Spirit into the
waste land to be tested by the Evil One.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And after going without food for forty days
and forty nights, he was in need of it.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the Evil One came and said to him, If
you are the Son of God, give the word for these stones to become bread.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But he made answer and said, It is in the
Writings, Bread is not man's only need, but every word which comes out
of the mouth of God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then the Evil One took him to the holy
town; and he put him on the highest point of the Temple and said to him,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> If you are the Son of God, let yourself go
down; for it is in the Writings, He will give his angels care over you;
and, In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be
crushed against a stone.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Jesus said to him, Again it is in the
Writings, You may not put the Lord your God to the test.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Again, the Evil One took him up to a very
high mountain, and let him see all the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he said to him, All these things will I
give you, if you will go down on your face and give me worship.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then said Jesus to him, Away, Satan: for
it is in the Writings, Give worship to the Lord your God and be his
servant only.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Then the Evil One went away from him, and
angels came and took care of him.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now when it came to his ears that John
had been put in prison, he went away to Galilee;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And going away from Nazareth, he came and
made his living-place in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the country
of Zebulun and Naphtali:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> So that the word of the prophet Isaiah
might come true,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> The land of Zebulun and the land of
Naphtali, by the way of the sea, the other side of Jordan, Galilee of
the Gentiles,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The people who were in the dark saw a
great light, and to those in the land of the shade of death did the dawn
come up.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> From that time Jesus went about preaching
and saying, Let your hearts be turned from sin, for the kingdom of
heaven is near.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And when he was walking by the sea of
Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon, whose other name was Peter, and
Andrew, his brother, who were putting a net into the sea; for they were
fishermen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And he said to them, Come after me, and I
will make you fishers of men.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And straight away they let go the nets
and went after him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And going on from there he saw two other
brothers, James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, in the boat
with their father, stitching up their nets; and he said, Come.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And they went straight from the boat and
their father and came after him.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Jesus went about in all Galilee,
teaching in their Synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom,
and making well those who were ill with any disease among the people.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And news of him went out through all
Syria; and they took to him all who were ill with different diseases and
pains, those having evil spirits and those who were off their heads, and
those who had no power of moving. And he made them well.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And there went after him great numbers
from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judaea and from the other
side of Jordan.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And seeing great masses of people he went
up into the mountain; and when he was seated his disciples came to him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And with these words he gave them teaching,
saying,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Happy are the poor in spirit: for the
kingdom of heaven is theirs.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Happy are those who are sad: for they will
be comforted.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Happy are the gentle: for the earth will be
their heritage.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Happy are those whose heart's desire is for
righteousness: for they will have their desire.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Happy are those who have mercy: for they
will be given mercy.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Happy are the clean in heart: for they will
see God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Happy are the peacemakers: for they will be
named sons of God.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Happy are those who are attacked on
account of righteousness: for the kingdom of heaven will be theirs.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Happy are you when men give you a bad
name, and are cruel to you, and say all evil things against you falsely,
because of me.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Be glad and full of joy; for great is
your reward in heaven: for so were the prophets attacked who were before
you.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> You are the salt of the earth; but if its
taste goes from the salt, how will you make it salt again? it is then
good for nothing but to be put out and crushed under foot by men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> You are the light of the world. A town
put on a hill may be seen by all.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And a burning light is not put under a
vessel, but on its table; so that its rays may be shining on all who are
in the house.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Even so let your light be shining before
men, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father
in heaven.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let there be no thought that I have come
to put an end to the law or the prophets. I have not come for
destruction, but to make complete.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Truly I say to you, Till heaven and earth
come to an end, not the smallest letter or part of a letter will in any
way be taken from the law, till all things are done.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Whoever then goes against the smallest of
these laws, teaching men to do the same, will be named least in the
kingdom of heaven; but he who keeps the laws, teaching others to keep
them, will be named great in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For I say to you, If your righteousness
is not greater than the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, you
will never go into the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> You have knowledge that it was said in
old times, You may not put to death; and, Whoever puts to death will be
in danger of being judged:

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But I say to you that everyone who is
angry with his brother will be in danger of being judged; and he who
says to his brother, Raca, will be in danger from the Sanhedrin; and
whoever says, You foolish one, will be in danger of the hell of fire.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> If then you are making an offering at the
altar and there it comes to your mind that your brother has something
against you,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> While your offering is still before the
altar, first go and make peace with your brother, then come and make
your offering.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Come to an agreement quickly with him who
has a cause against you at law, while you are with him on the way, for
fear that he may give you up to the judge and the judge may give you to
the police and you may be put into prison.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Truly I say to you, You will not come out
from there till you have made payment of the very last farthing.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> You have knowledge that it was said, You
may not have connection with another man's wife:

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> But I say to you that everyone whose eyes
are turned on a woman with desire has had connection with her in his
heart.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And if your right eye is a cause of
trouble to you, take it out and put it away from you; because it is
better to undergo the loss of one part, than for all your body to go
into hell.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And if your right hand is a cause of
trouble to you, let it be cut off and put it away from you; because it
is better to undergo the loss of one part, than for all your body to go
into hell.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Again, it was said, Whoever puts away his
wife has to give her a statement in writing for this purpose:

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> But I say to you that everyone who puts
away his wife for any other cause but the loss of her virtue, makes her
false to her husband; and whoever takes her as his wife after she is put
away, is no true husband to her.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Again, you have knowledge that it was
said in old times, Do not take false oaths, but give effect to your
oaths to the Lord:

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But I say to you, Take no oaths at all:
not by the heaven, because it is the seat of God;

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> Or by the earth, because it is the
resting-place for his foot; or by Jerusalem, because it is the town of
the great King.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> You may not take an oath by your head,
because you are not able to make one hair white or black.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> But let your words be simply, Yes or No:
and whatever is more than these is of the Evil One.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> You have knowledge that it was said, An
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But I say to you, Do not make use of
force against an evil man; but to him who gives you a blow on the right
side of your face let the left be turned.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And if any man goes to law with you and
takes away your coat, do not keep back your robe from him.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And whoever makes you go one mile, go
with him two.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> Give to him who comes with a request, and
keep not your property from him who would for a time make use of it.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> You have knowledge that it was said, Have
love for your neighbour, and hate for him who is against you:

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> But I say to you, Have love for those who
are against you, and make prayer for those who are cruel to you;

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> So that you may be the sons of your
Father in heaven; for his sun gives light to the evil and to the good,
and he sends rain on the upright man and on the sinner.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> For if you have love for those who have
love for you, what credit is it to you? do not the tax-farmers the same?

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> And if you say, Good day, to your
brothers only, what do you do more than others? do not even the Gentiles
the same?

<span id="an_5:48">5:48</span> Be then complete in righteousness, even
as your Father in heaven is complete.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Take care not to do your good works before
men, to be seen by them; or you will have no reward from your Father in
heaven.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> When then you give money to the poor, do
not make a noise about it, as the false-hearted men do in the Synagogues
and in the streets, so that they may have glory from men. Truly, I say
to you, They have their reward.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> But when you give money, let not your left
hand see what your right hand does:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> So that your giving may be in secret; and
your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And when you make your prayers, be not like
the false-hearted men, who take pleasure in getting up and saying their
prayers in the Synagogues and at the street turnings so that they may be
seen by men. Truly I say to you, They have their reward.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But when you make your prayer, go into your
private room, and, shutting the door, say a prayer to your Father in
secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And in your prayer do not make use of the
same words again and again, as the Gentiles do: for they have the idea
that God will give attention to them because of the number of their
words.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> So be not like them; because your Father
has knowledge of your needs even before you make your requests to him.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Let this then be your prayer: Our Father in
heaven, may your name be kept holy.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Let your kingdom come. Let your pleasure
be done, as in heaven, so on earth.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Give us this day bread for our needs.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And make us free of our debts, as we have
made those free who are in debt to us.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And let us not be put to the test, but
keep us safe from the Evil One.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For if you let men have forgiveness for
their sins, you will have forgiveness from your Father in heaven.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> But if you do not let men have
forgiveness for their sins, you will not have forgiveness from your
Father for your sins.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And when you go without food, be not
sad-faced as the false-hearted are. For they go about with changed
looks, so that men may see that they are going without food. Truly I say
to you, They have their reward.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But when you go without food, put oil on
your head and make your face clean;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> So that no one may see that you are going
without food, but your Father in secret; and your Father, who sees in
secret, will give you your reward.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Make no store of wealth for yourselves on
earth, where it may be turned to dust by worms and weather, and where
thieves may come in by force and take it away.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But make a store for yourselves in
heaven, where it will not be turned to dust and where thieves do not
come in to take it away:

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> For where your wealth is, there will your
heart be.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> The light of the body is the eye; if then
your eye is true, all your body will be full of light.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> But if your eye is evil, all your body
will be dark. If then the light which is in you is dark, how dark it
will be!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> No man is able to be a servant to two
masters: for he will have hate for the one and love for the other, or he
will keep to one and have no respect for the other. You may not be
servants of God and of wealth.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> So I say to you, Take no thought for your
life, about food or drink, or about clothing for your body. Is not life
more than food, and the body more than its clothing?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> See the birds of heaven; they do not put
seeds in the earth, they do not get in grain, or put it in store-houses;
and your Father in heaven gives them food. Are you not of much more
value than they?

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And which of you by taking thought is
able to make himself a cubit taller?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And why are you troubled about clothing?
See the flowers of the field, how they come up; they do no work, they
make no thread:

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> But I say to you that even Solomon in all
his glory was not clothed like one of these.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> But if God gives such clothing to the
grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is put into the
oven, will he not much more give you clothing, O you of little faith?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Then do not be full of care, saying, What
are we to have for food or drink? or, With what may we be clothed?

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Because the Gentiles go in search of all
these things: for your Father in heaven has knowledge that you have need
of all these things:

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> But let your first care be for his
kingdom and his righteousness; and all these other things will be given
to you in addition.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Then have no care for tomorrow: tomorrow
will take care of itself. Take the trouble of the day as it comes.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Be not judges of others, and you will not
be judged.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For as you have been judging, so you will
be judged, and with your measure will it be measured to you.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And why do you take note of the grain of
dust in your brother's eye, but take no note of the bit of wood which is
in your eye?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Or how will you say to your brother, Let me
take out the grain of dust from your eye, when you yourself have a bit
of wood in your eye?

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> You false one, first take out the bit of
wood from your eye, then will you see clearly to take out the grain of
dust from your brother's eye.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Do not give that which is holy to the dogs,
or put your jewels before pigs, for fear that they will be crushed under
foot by the pigs whose attack will then be made against you.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Make a request, and it will be answered;
what you are searching for you will get; give the sign, and the door
will be open to you:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Because to everyone who makes a request, it
will be given; and he who is searching will get his desire, and to him
who gives the sign, the door will be open.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Or which of you, if his son makes a request
for bread, will give him a stone?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Or if he makes a request for a fish, will
give him a snake?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> If you, then, being evil, are able to
give good things to your children, how much more will your Father in
heaven give good things to those who make requests to him?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> All those things, then, which you would
have men do to you, even so do you to them: because this is the law and
the prophets.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Go in by the narrow door; for wide is the
door and open is the way which goes to destruction, and great numbers go
in by it.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For narrow is the door and hard the road
to life, and only a small number make discovery of it.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Be on the watch for false prophets, who
come to you in sheep's clothing, but inside they are cruel wolves.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> By their fruits you will get knowledge of
them. Do men get grapes from thorns or figs from thistles?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Even so, every good tree gives good
fruit; but the bad tree gives evil fruit.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> It is not possible for a good tree to
give bad fruit, and a bad tree will not give good fruit.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Every tree which does not give good fruit
is cut down and put in the fire.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> So by their fruits you will get knowledge
of them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord,
will go into the kingdom of heaven; but he who does the pleasure of my
Father in heaven.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> A great number will say to me on that
day, Lord, Lord, were we not prophets in your name, and did we not by
your name send out evil spirits, and by your name do works of power?

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And then will I say to them, I never had
knowledge of you: go from me, you workers of evil.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Everyone, then, to whom my words come and
who does them, will be like a wise man who made his house on a rock;

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And the rain came down and there was a
rush of waters and the winds were driving against that house, but it was
not moved; because it was based on the rock.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And everyone to whom my words come and
who does them not, will be like a foolish man who made his house on
sand;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And the rain came down and there was a
rush of waters and the winds were driving against that house; and it
came down and great was its fall.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And it came about, when Jesus had come to
the end of these words, that the people were surprised at his teaching,

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> for he was teaching as one having
authority, and not as their scribes.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And when he had come down from the
mountain, great numbers of people came after him.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And a leper came and gave him worship,
saying, Lord, if it is your pleasure, you have power to make me clean.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he put his hand on him, saying, It is
my pleasure; be clean. And straight away he was made clean.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And Jesus said to him, See that you say
nothing about this to anyone; but go and let the priest see you and make
the offering which was ordered by Moses, for a witness to them.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And when Jesus was come into Capernaum, a
certain captain came to him with a request,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Saying, Lord, my servant is ill in bed at
the house, with no power in his body, and in great pain.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And he said to him, I will come and make
him well.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the captain in answer said, Lord, I am
not good enough for you to come under my roof; but only say the word,
and my servant will be made well.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Because I myself am a man under authority,
having under me fighting men; and I say to this one, Go, and he goes;
and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he
does it.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And when these words came to the ears of
Jesus he was surprised, and said to those who came after him, Truly I
say to you, I have not seen such great faith, no, not in Israel.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And I say to you that numbers will come
from the east and the west, and will take their seats with Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But the sons of the kingdom will be put
out into the dark, and there will be weeping and cries of pain.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Jesus said to the captain, Go in
peace; as your faith is, so let it be done to you. And the servant was
made well in that hour.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And when Jesus had come into Peter's
house, he saw his wife's mother in bed, very ill.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he put his hand on hers and the
disease went from her, and she got up and took care of his needs.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And in the evening, they took to him a
number of people who had evil spirits; and he sent the spirits out of
them with a word, and made well all who were ill;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> So that the word of Isaiah the prophet
might come true: He himself took our pains and our diseases.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now when Jesus saw a great mass of people
about him, he gave an order to go to the other side.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And there came a scribe and said to him,
Master, I will come after you wherever you go.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Jesus said to him, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of heaven have a resting-place; but the Son of man
has nowhere to put his head.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And another of the disciples said to him,
Lord, let me first go and give the last honours to my father.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> But Jesus said to him, Come after me; and
let the dead take care of their dead.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And when he had got into a boat, his
disciples went after him.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And there came up a great storm in the
sea, so that the boat was covered with the waves: but he was sleeping.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And they came to him, and, awaking him,
said, Help, Lord; destruction is near.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And he said to them, Why are you full of
fear, O you of little faith? Then he got up and gave orders to the winds
and the sea; and there was a great calm.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And the men were full of wonder, saying,
What sort of man is this, that even the winds and the sea do his orders?

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And when he had come to the other side,
to the country of the Gadarenes, there came out to him from the place of
the dead, two who had evil spirits, so violent that no man was able to
go that way.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And they gave a loud cry, saying, What
have we to do with you, you Son of God? Have you come here to give us
punishment before the time?

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Now there was, some distance away, a
great herd of pigs taking their food.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And the evil spirits made strong prayers
to him, saying, If you send us out, let us go into the herd of pigs.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he said to them, Go. And they came
out, and went into the pigs; and the herd went rushing down a sharp
slope into the sea and came to their end in the water.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And their keepers went in flight to the
town and gave an account of everything, and of the men who had the evil
spirits.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And all the town came out to Jesus; and
seeing him they made request that he would go away from their part of
the country.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he got into a boat and went across and
came to his town.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And they took to him a man stretched on a
bed who had no power of moving; and Jesus, seeing their faith, said to
the man who was ill, Son, take heart; you have forgiveness for your
sins.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And some of the scribes said among
themselves, This man has no respect for God.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Jesus, having knowledge of what was in
their minds, said, Why are your thoughts evil?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For which is the simpler, to say, You have
forgiveness for your sins; or to say, Get up and go?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But so that you may see that on earth the
Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins, (then said he to
the man who was ill,) Get up, and take up your bed, and go to your
house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he got up and went away to his house.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> But when the people saw it they were full
of fear, and gave glory to God who had given such authority to men.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And when Jesus was going from there, he saw
a man whose name was Matthew, seated at the place where taxes were
taken; and he said to him, Come after me. And he got up and went after
him.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And it came about, when he was in the
house taking food, that a number of tax-farmers and sinners came and
took their places with Jesus and his disciples.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And when the Pharisees saw it, they said
to his disciples, Why does your Master take food with tax-farmers and
sinners?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> But on hearing this he said, Those who
are well have no need of a medical man, but those who are ill.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But go and take to heart the sense of
these words, My desire is for mercy, not offerings: for I have come not
to get the upright, but sinners.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Then the disciples of John came to him,
saying, Why do we and the Pharisees frequently go without food, but your
disciples do not?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And Jesus said to them, Will the friends
of the newly-married man be sad as long as he is with them? But the days
will come when he will be taken away from them, and then will they go
without food.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And no man puts a bit of new cloth on an
old coat, for by pulling away from the old, it makes a worse hole.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And men do not put new wine into old
wine-skins; or the skins will be burst and the wine will come out, and
the skins are of no more use: but they put new wine into new wine-skins,
and so the two will be safe.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> While he was saying these things to them,
there came a ruler and gave him worship, saying, My daughter is even now
dead; but come and put your hand on her, and she will come back to life.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And Jesus got up and went after him, and
so did his disciples.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And a woman, who for twelve years had had
a flow of blood, came after him, and put her hand on the edge of his
robe:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Because, she said to herself, if I may
but put my hand on his robe, I will be made well.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Jesus, turning and seeing her, said,
Daughter, take heart; your faith has made you well. And the woman was
made well from that hour.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when Jesus came into the ruler's
house and saw the players with their instruments and the people making a
noise,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> He said, Make room; for the girl is not
dead, but sleeping. And they were laughing at him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> But when the people were sent out, he
went in and took her by the hand; and the girl got up.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And the news of it went out into all that
land.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And when Jesus went on from there, two
blind men came after him, crying out, Have mercy on us, you Son of
David.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And when he had come into the house, the
blind men came to him; and Jesus said to them, Have you faith that I am
able to do this? They said to him, Yes, Lord.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Then he put his hand on their eyes,
saying, As your faith is, let it be done to you.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And their eyes were made open. And Jesus
said to them sharply, Let no man have knowledge of it.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But they went out and gave news of him in
all that land.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And while they were going away, there
came to him a man without the power of talking, and with an evil spirit.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And when the evil spirit had been sent
out, the man had the power of talking: and they were all surprised,
saying, Such a thing has never been seen in Israel.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But the Pharisees said, By the ruler of
evil spirits, he sends evil spirits out of men.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Jesus went about all the towns and
small places, teaching in their Synagogues and preaching the good news
of the kingdom and making well all sorts of disease and pain.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> But when he saw all the people he was
moved with pity for them, because they were troubled and wandering like
sheep without a keeper.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Then he said to his disciples, There is
much grain but not enough men to get it in.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> Make prayer, then, to the Lord of the
grain-fields, that he may send out workers to get in his grain.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And he got together his twelve disciples
and gave them the power of driving out unclean spirits, and of making
well all sorts of disease and pain.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Now the names of the twelve are these:
The first, Simon, who is named Peter, and Andrew, his brother; James,
the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and
Matthew, the tax-farmer; James, the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who
was false to him.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> These twelve Jesus sent out and gave them
orders, saying, Do not go among the Gentiles, or into any town of
Samaria,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But go to the wandering sheep of the
house of Israel,

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And, on your way, say, The kingdom of
heaven is near.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Make well those who are ill, give life to
the dead, make lepers clean, send evil spirits out of men; freely it has
been given to you, freely give.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Take no gold or silver or copper in your
pockets;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Take no bag for your journey and do not
take two coats or shoes or a stick: for the workman has a right to his
food.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And into whatever town or small place
you go, make search there for someone who is respected, and make his
house your resting-place till you go away.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And when you go in, say, May peace be
on this house.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And if the house is good enough, let
your peace come on it: but if not, let your peace come back to you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And whoever will not take you in, or
give ear to your words, when you go out from that house or that town,
put off its dust from your feet.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Truly I say to you, It will be better
for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of God's judging than for
that town.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> See, I send you out as sheep among
wolves. Be then as wise as snakes, and as gentle as doves.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But be on the watch against men: for
they will give you up to the Sanhedrins, and in their Synagogues they
will give you blows;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And you will come before rulers and
kings because of me, for a witness to them and to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But when you are given up into their
hands, do not be troubled about what to say or how to say it: for in
that hour what you are to say will be given to you;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Because it is not you who say the
words, but the Spirit of your Father in you.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And brother will give up brother to
death, and the father his child: and children will go against their
fathers and mothers, and put them to death.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And you will be hated by all men
because of my name: but he who is strong to the end will have salvation.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> But when they are cruel to you in one
town, go in flight to another: for truly, I say to you, You will not
have gone through the towns of Israel before the Son of man comes.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> A disciple is not greater than his
master, or a servant than his lord.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is enough for the disciple that he
may be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have given
the name Beelzebub to the master of the house, how much more to those of
his house!

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Have, then, no fear of them: because
nothing is covered which will not come to light, or secret which will
not be made clear.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> What I say to you in the dark, say in
the light: and what comes to your ear secretly, say publicly from the
house-tops.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And have no fear of those who put to
death the body, but are not able to put to death the soul. But have fear
of him who has power to give soul and body to destruction in hell.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Are not sparrows two a farthing? and
not one of them comes to an end without your Father:

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> But the hairs of your head are all
numbered.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Then have no fear; you are of more
value than a flock of sparrows.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> To everyone, then, who gives witness to
me before men, I will give witness before my Father in heaven.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> But if anyone says before men that he
has no knowledge of me, I will say that I have no knowledge of him
before my Father in heaven.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Do not have the thought that I have
come to send peace on the earth; I came not to send peace but a sword.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> For I have come to put a man against
his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law:

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And a man will be hated by those of his
house.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> He who has more love for his father or
mother than for me is not good enough for me; he who has more love for
son or daughter than for me is not good enough for me.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And he who does not take his cross and
come after me is not good enough for me.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> He who has the desire to keep his life
will have it taken from him, and he who gives up his life because of me
will have it given back to him.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> He who gives honour to you gives honour
to me; and he who gives honour to me gives honour to him who sent me.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> He who gives honour to a prophet, in
the name of a prophet, will be given a prophet's reward; and he who
gives honour to an upright man, in the name of an upright man, will be
given an upright man's reward.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And whoever gives to one of these
little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, truly I
say to you, he will not go without his reward.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And it came about that when Jesus had
come to the end of giving these orders to his twelve disciples, he went
away from there, teaching and preaching in their towns.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now when John had news in prison of the
works of the Christ, he sent his disciples

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> To say to him, Are you he who is to come,
or are we waiting for another?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And Jesus, answering, said to them, Go
and give news to John of the things which you are seeing and hearing:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The blind see; those who were not able
to, are walking; lepers are made clean; those who were without hearing,
now have their ears open; the dead come to life again, and the poor have
the good news given to them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And a blessing will be on him who has no
doubts about me.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And when they were going away, Jesus,
talking of John, said to all the people, What went you out into the
waste land to see? a tall stem moving in the wind?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But what went you out to see? a man
delicately clothed? Those who have fair robes are in kings' houses.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But why did you go out? to see a prophet?
Yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> This is he of whom it has been said,
See, I send my servant before your face, who will make ready your way
before you.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Truly I say to you, Among the sons of
women there has not been a greater than John the Baptist: but he who is
least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And from the days of John the Baptist
till now, the kingdom of heaven is forcing its way in, and men of force
take it.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For all the prophets and the law were
in force till John.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And if you are able to see it, this is
Elijah who was to come.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He who has ears, let him give ear.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But what comparison may I make of this
generation? It is like children seated in the market-places, crying out
to one another,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> We made music for you and you did not
take part in the dance; we gave cries of sorrow and you made no signs of
grief.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> For John came, taking no food or drink,
and they say, He has an evil spirit.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> The Son of man has come feasting, and
they say, See, a lover of food and wine, a friend of tax-farmers and
sinners! And wisdom is judged to be right by her works.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then he went on to say hard things to
the towns where most of his works of power were done, because they had
not been turned from their sins.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Unhappy are you, Chorazin! Unhappy are
you, Beth-saida! For if the works of power which were done in you had
been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have been turned from their sins
in days gone by, clothing themselves in haircloth and putting dust on
their heads.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> But I say to you, It will be better for
Tyre and Sidon in the day of judging, than for you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And you, Capernaum, were you not to be
lifted up to heaven? you will go down into hell: for if the works of
power which were done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have been
here to this day.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> But I say to you that it will be better
for the land of Sodom in the day of judging, than for you.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> At that time Jesus made answer and
said, I give praise to you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because
you have kept these things secret from the wise and the men of learning,
and have made them clear to little children.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Yes, Father, for so it was pleasing in
your eyes.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> All things have been given to me by my
Father; and no one has knowledge of the Son, but the Father; and no one
has knowledge of the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
make it clear.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Come to me, all you who are troubled
and weighted down with care, and I will give you rest.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Take my yoke on you and become like me,
for I am gentle and without pride, and you will have rest for your
souls;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For my yoke is good, and the weight I
take up is not hard.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> At that time Jesus went through the
fields on the Sabbath day; and his disciples, being in need of food,
were taking the heads of grain.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said
to him, See, your disciples do that which it is not right to do on the
Sabbath.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But he said to them, Have you no
knowledge of what David did when he had need of food, and those who were
with him?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> How he went into the house of God and
took for food the holy bread which it was not right for him or for those
who were with him to take, but only for the priests?

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Or is it not said in the law, how the
Sabbath is broken by the priests in the Temple and they do no wrong?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But I say to you that a greater thing
than the Temple is here.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But if these words had been in your
minds, My desire is for mercy and not for offerings, you would not have
been judging those who have done no wrong.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For the Son of man is lord of the
Sabbath.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he went from there into their
Synagogue:

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And there was a man with a dead hand.
And they put a question to him, saying, Is it right to make a man well
on the Sabbath day? so that they might have something against him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And he said to them, Which of you,
having a sheep, if it gets into a hole on the Sabbath day, will not put
out a helping hand and get it back?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Of how much more value is a man than a
sheep! For this reason it is right to do good on the Sabbath day.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Then said he to the man, Put out your
hand. And he put it out, and it was made as well as the other.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But the Pharisees went out and made
designs against him, how they might put him to death.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And Jesus, having knowledge of this,
went away from there, and a great number went after him; and he made
them all well,

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Ordering them not to give people word
of him:

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> So that what was said by Isaiah the
prophet might come true,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> See my servant, the man of my
selection, my loved one in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my
Spirit on him, and he will make my decision clear to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> His coming will not be with fighting or
loud cries; and his voice will not be lifted up in the streets.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> The crushed stem will not be broken by
him; and the feebly burning light will he not put out, till he has made
righteousness overcome all.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And in his name will the Gentiles put
their hope.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then they took to him one with an evil
spirit, who was blind and had no power of talking: and he made him well
so that he had the power of talking and seeing.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And all the people were surprised and
said, Is not this the Son of David?

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the Pharisees, hearing of it, said,
This man only sends evil spirits out of men by Beelzebub, the ruler of
evil spirits.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And having knowledge of their thoughts
he said to them, Every kingdom having division in itself is made waste,
and every town or house having division in itself will come to
destruction.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And if Satan sends out Satan, he makes
war against himself; how then will he keep his kingdom?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And if I by Beelzebub send evil spirits
out of men, by whom do your sons send them out? So let them be your
judges.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But if I by the Spirit of God send out
evil spirits, then is the kingdom of God come on you.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Or how may one go into a strong man's
house and take his goods, if he does not first put cords round the
strong man? and then he may take his goods.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Whoever is not with me is against me;
and he who does not take part with me in getting people together, is
driving them away.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> So I say to you, Every sin and every
evil word against God will have forgiveness; but for evil words against
the Spirit there will be no forgiveness.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And whoever says a word against the Son
of man, will have forgiveness; but whoever says a word against the Holy
Spirit, will not have forgiveness in this life or in that which is to
come.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> Make the tree good, and its fruit good;
or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad; for by its fruit you will get
knowledge of the tree.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> You offspring of snakes, how are you,
being evil, able to say good things? because out of the heart's store
come the words of the mouth.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> The good man out of his good store
gives good things; and the evil man out of his evil store gives evil
things.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> And I say to you that in the day when
they are judged, men will have to give an account of every foolish word
they have said.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> For by your words will your
righteousness be seen, and by your words you will be judged.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> Then some of the scribes and Pharisees,
hearing this, said to him, Master, we are looking for a sign from you.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> But he, answering, said to them, An
evil and false generation is looking for a sign; and no sign will be
given to it but the sign of the prophet Jonah:

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> For as Jonah was three days and three
nights in the stomach of the great fish, so will the Son of man be three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> The men of Nineveh will come up in the
day of judging and give their decision against this generation: because
they were turned from their sins at the preaching of Jonah; and now a
greater than Jonah is here.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> The queen of the South will come up in
the day of judging and give her decision against this generation: for
she came from the ends of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of
Solomon; and now a greater than Solomon is here.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> But the unclean spirit, when he is gone
out of a man, goes through dry places looking for rest, and getting it
not.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Then he says, I will go back into my
house from which I came out; and when he comes, he sees that there is no
one in it, but that it has been made fair and clean.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> Then he goes and takes with him seven
other spirits worse than himself, and they go in and make it their
living-place: and the last condition of that man is worse than the
first. Even so will it be with this evil generation.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> While he was still talking to the
people, his mother and his brothers came, desiring to have talk with
him.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> And one said to him, See, your mother
and your brothers are outside, desiring to have talk with you.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> But he in answer said to him who gave
the news, Who is my mother and who are my brothers?

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> And he put out his hand to his
disciples and said, See, my mother and my brothers!

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> For whoever does the pleasure of my
Father in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> On that day Jesus went out of the house
and was seated by the seaside.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And great numbers of people came together
to him, so that he got into a boat; and the people took up their
position by the sea.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And he gave them teaching in the form of
a story, saying, A man went out to put seed in the earth;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And while he did so, some seeds were
dropped by the wayside, and the birds came and took them for food:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And some of the seed went among the
stones, where it had not much earth, and straight away it came up
because the earth was not deep:

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when the sun was high, it was burned;
and because it had no root it became dry and dead.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And some seeds went among thorns, and the
thorns came up and they had no room for growth:

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And some, falling on good earth, gave
fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, some thirty times as much.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> He who has ears, let him give ear.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And the disciples came and said to him,
Why do you say things to them in the form of stories?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And he said to them in answer, To you
is given the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Because whoever has, to him will be
given, and he will have more; but from him who has not, even what he has
will be taken away.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> For this reason I put things into the
form of stories; because they see without seeing, and give ear without
hearing, and the sense is not clear to them.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And for them the words of Isaiah have
come true, Though you give ear, you will not get knowledge; and seeing,
you will see, but the sense will not be clear to you:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For the heart of this people has become
fat and their ears are slow in hearing and their eyes are shut; for fear
that they might see with their eyes and give hearing with their ears and
become wise in their hearts and be turned again to me, so that I might
make them well.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> But a blessing be on your eyes, because
they see; and on your ears, because they are open.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For truly, I say to you that prophets
and upright men had a desire to see the things which you see, and saw
them not; and to have knowledge of the words which have come to your
ears, and they had it not.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Give ear, then, to the story of the man
who put the seed in the earth.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> When the word of the kingdom comes to
anyone, and the sense of it is not clear to him, then the Evil One
comes, and quickly takes away that which was put in his heart. He is the
seed dropped by the wayside.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And that which went on the stones, this
is he who, hearing the word, straight away takes it with joy;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But having no root in himself, he goes
on for a time; and when trouble comes or pain, because of the word, he
quickly becomes full of doubts.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And that which was dropped among the
thorns, this is he who has the word; and the cares of this life, and the
deceits of wealth, put a stop to the growth of the word and it gives no
fruit.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And the seed which was put in good
earth, this is he who gives ear to the word, and gets the sense of it;
who gives fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, some thirty times as much.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And he gave them another story, saying,
The kingdom of heaven is like a man who put good seed in his field:

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> But while men were sleeping, one who
had hate for him came and put evil seeds among the grain, and went away.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> But when the green stem came up and
gave fruit, the evil plants were seen at the same time.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And the servants of the master of the
house came and said to him, Sir, did you not put good seed in your
field? how then has it evil plants?

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he said, Someone has done this in
hate. And the servants say to him, Is it your pleasure that we go and
take them up?

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> But he says, No, for fear that by
chance while you take up the evil plants, you may be rooting up the
grain with them.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Let them come up together till the
getting in of the grain; and then I will say to the workers, Take up
first the evil plants, and put them together for burning: but put the
grain into my store-house.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> He put another story before them,
saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed which a
man took and put in his field:

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> Which is smaller than all seeds; but
when it has come up it is greater than the plants, and becomes a tree,
so that the birds of heaven come and make their resting-places in its
branches.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Another story he gave to them: The
kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took, and put in three
measures of meal, till it was all leavened.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> All these things Jesus said to the
people in the form of stories; and without a story he said nothing to
them:

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> That it might come true which was said
by the prophet, Opening my mouth, I will give out stories; I will give
knowledge of things kept secret from before all time.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Then he went away from the people, and
went into the house; and his disciples came to him, saying, Make clear
to us the story of the evil plants in the field.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> And he made answer and said, He who
puts the good seed in the earth is the Son of man;

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> And the field is the world; and the
good seed is the sons of the kingdom; and the evil seeds are the sons of
the Evil One;

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> And he who put them in the earth is
Satan; and the getting in of the grain is the end of the world; and
those who get it in are the angels.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> As then the evil plants are got
together and burned with fire, so will it be in the end of the world.

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> The Son of man will send out his
angels, and they will take out of his kingdom everything which is a
cause of error, and all those who do wrong,

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And will put them into the fire; there
will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Then will the upright be shining as the
sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears, let him give ear.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> The kingdom of heaven is like a secret
store of wealth in a field, which a man came across and put back again;
and in his joy he goes and gives all he has, to get that field.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a
trader searching for beautiful jewels.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> And having come across one jewel of
great price, he went and gave all he had in exchange for it.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a
net, which was put into the sea and took in every sort of fish:

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> When it was full, they took it up on
the sands; and seated there they put the good into vessels, but the bad
they put away.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> So will it be in the end of the world:
the angels will come and take out the bad from the good,

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> And will put them into the fire: there
will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> Are all these things now clear to you?
They say to him, Yes.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And he said to them, For this reason
every scribe who has become a disciple of the kingdom of heaven is like
the owner of a house, who gives out from his store things new and old.

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> And when Jesus had come to the end of
these stories he went away from there.

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> And coming into his country, he gave
them teaching in their Synagogue, so that they were greatly surprised
and said, Where did this man get this wisdom and these works of power?

<span id="an_13:55">13:55</span> Is not this the woodworker's son? is
not his mother named Mary? and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon
and Judas?

<span id="an_13:56">13:56</span> And his sisters, are they not all with
us? from where, then, has he all these things?

<span id="an_13:57">13:57</span> And they were bitter against him. But
Jesus said to them, A prophet is nowhere without honour but in his
country and among his family.

<span id="an_13:58">13:58</span> And the works of power which he did
there were small in number because they had no faith.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time news of Jesus came to Herod
the king;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And he said to his servants, This is John
the Baptist; he has come back from the dead, and so these powers are
working in him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Herod had taken John and put him in
prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Because John had said to him, It is not
right for you to have her.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And he would have put him to death, but
for his fear of the people, because in their eyes John was a prophet.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But when Herod's birthday came, the
daughter of Herodias was dancing before them, and Herod was pleased with
her.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> So he gave her his word with an oath to
let her have whatever she might make request for.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And she, at her mother's suggestion,
said, Give me here on a plate the head of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the king was sad; but because of his
oaths and because of his guests, he gave the order for it to be given to
her;

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And he sent and had John's head cut off
in the prison.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And his head was put on a plate and
given to the girl; and she took it to her mother.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And his disciples came, and took up his
body and put it in the earth; and they went and gave Jesus news of what
had taken place.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Now when it came to the ears of Jesus,
he went away from there in a boat, to a waste place by himself: and the
people hearing of it, went after him on foot from the towns.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And he came out and saw a great number
of people and he had pity on them, and made well those of them who were
ill.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And when evening had come, the
disciples came to him, saying, This place is waste land, and the time is
now past; send the people away so that they may go into the towns and
get themselves food.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But Jesus said to them, There is no
need for them to go away; give them food yourselves.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And they say to him, We have here but
five cakes of bread and two fishes.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And he said, Give them to me.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And he gave orders for the people to be
seated on the grass; and he took the five cakes of bread and the two
fishes and, looking up to heaven, he said words of blessing, and made
division of the food, and gave it to the disciples, and the disciples
gave it to the people.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And they all took of the food and had
enough: and they took up twelve baskets full of broken bits which were
not used.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And those who had food were about five
thousand men, in addition to women and children.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And straight away he made the disciples
get into the boat and go before him to the other side, till he had sent
the people away.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And after he had sent the people away,
he went up into the mountain by himself for prayer: and when evening was
come, he was there by himself.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But the boat was now in the middle of
the sea, and was troubled by the waves: for the wind was against them.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And in the fourth watch of the night he
came to them, walking on the sea.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And when they saw him walking on the
sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they gave cries of
fear.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> But straight away Jesus said to them,
Take heart; it is I, have no fear.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And Peter, answering, said to him,
Lord, if it is you, give me the order to come to you on the water.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And he said, Come. And Peter got out of
the boat, and walking on the water, went to Jesus.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> But when he saw the wind he was in fear
and, starting to go down, he gave a cry, saying, Help, Lord.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And straight away Jesus put out his
hand and took a grip of him, and said to him, O man of little faith, why
were you in doubt?

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And when they had got into the boat,
the wind went down.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And those who were in the boat gave him
worship, saying, Truly you are the Son of God.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And when they had gone across, they
came to land at Gennesaret.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And when the men of that place had news
of him, they sent into all the country round about, and took to him all
who were ill,

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> With the request that they might only
put their hands on the edge of his robe: and all those who did so were
made well.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then there came to Jesus from Jerusalem
Pharisees and scribes, saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Why do your disciples go against the
teaching of the fathers? for they take food with unwashed hands.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And in answer he said to them, Why do
you, yourselves, go against the word of God on account of the teaching
which has been handed down to you?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For God said, Give honour to your father
and mother: and, He who says evil of father or mother will be put to
death.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But you say, If a man says to his father
or his mother, That by which you might have had profit from me is given
to God;

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> There is no need for him to give honour
to his father. And you have made the word of God without effect because
of your teaching.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> You false ones, well did Isaiah say of
you,

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> These people give me honour with their
lips, but their heart is far from me.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> But their worship is to no purpose, while
they give as their teaching the rules of men.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And he got the people together and said
to them, Give ear, and let my words be clear to you:

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Not that which goes into the mouth
makes a man unclean, but that which comes out of the mouth.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then the disciples came and said to
him, Did you see that the Pharisees were troubled when these words came
to their ears?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But he said in answer, Every plant
which my Father in heaven has not put in the earth, will be taken up by
the roots.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Let them be: they are blind guides. And
if a blind man is guiding a blind man, the two will go falling into a
hole together.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Then Peter said to him, Make the story
clear to us.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And he said, Are you, like them, still
without wisdom?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Do you not see that whatever goes into
the mouth goes on into the stomach, and is sent out as waste?

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> But the things which come out of the
mouth come from the heart; and they make a man unclean.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For out of the heart come evil
thoughts, the taking of life, broken faith between the married, unclean
desires of the flesh, taking of property, false witness, bitter words:

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> These are the things which make a man
unclean; but to take food with unwashed hands does not make a man
unclean.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Jesus went away from there into the
country of Tyre and Sidon.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And a woman of Canaan came out from
those parts, crying and saying, Have pity on me, O Lord, Son of David;
my daughter is greatly troubled with an unclean spirit.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But he gave her no answer. And his
disciples came and said to him, Send her away, for she is crying after
us.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> But he made answer and said, I was sent
only to the wandering sheep of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But she came and gave him worship,
saying, Help, Lord.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And he made answer and said, It is not
right to take the children's bread and give it to the dogs.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> But she said, Yes, Lord: but even the
dogs take the bits from under their masters' table.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Then Jesus, answering, said to her, O
woman, great is your faith: let your desire be done. And her daughter
was made well from that hour.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And Jesus went from there and came to
the sea of Galilee; and he went up into the mountain, and took his seat
there.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And there came to him great numbers of
people having with them those who were broken in body, or blind, or
without voice, or wounded, or ill in any way, and a number of others;
they put them down at his feet and he made them well:

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> So that the people were full of wonder
when they saw that those who had no voice were talking, the feeble were
made strong, those whose bodies were broken had the power of walking,
and the blind were able to see: and they gave glory to the God of
Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Jesus got his disciples together
and said, I have pity for the people, because they have now been with me
three days and have no food: and I will not send them away without food,
or they will have no strength for the journey.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And the disciples say to him, How may
we get enough bread in a waste place, to give food to such a number of
people?

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And Jesus says to them, How much bread
have you? And they said, Seven cakes, and some small fishes.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Then he gave an order to the people to
be seated on the earth,

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And he took the seven cakes of bread
and the fishes; and having given praise, he gave the broken bread to the
disciples, and the disciples gave it to the people.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And they all took food, and had enough;
and they took up of the broken bits, seven baskets full.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And there were four thousand men who
took food, together with women and children.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And when he had sent the people away,
he got into the boat, and came into the country of Magadan.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the Pharisees and Sadducees came and,
testing him, made a request to him to give them a sign from heaven.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> But in answer he said to them, At
nightfall you say, The weather will be good, for the sky is red.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And in the morning, The weather will be
bad today, for the sky is red and angry. You are able to see the face of
heaven, but not the signs of the times.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> An evil and false generation is searching
after a sign; and no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah. And
he went away from them.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And when the disciples came to the other
side they had not taken thought to get bread.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Jesus said to them, Take care to have
nothing to do with the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And they were reasoning among themselves,
saying, We took no bread.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Jesus, seeing it, said, O you of
little faith, why are you reasoning among yourselves, because you have
no bread?

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Do you still not see, or keep in mind the
five cakes of bread of the five thousand, and the number of baskets you
took up?

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Or the seven cakes of bread of the four
thousand, and the number of baskets you took up?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> How is it that you do not see that I
was not talking to you about bread, but about keeping away from the
leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Then they saw that it was not the
leaven of bread which he had in mind, but the teaching of the Pharisees
and Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Now when Jesus had come into the parts
of Caesarea Philippi, he said, questioning his disciples, Who do men say
that the Son of man is?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And they said, Some say, John the
Baptist; some, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> He says to them, But who do you say
that I am?

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And Simon Peter made answer and said,
You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Jesus made answer and said to him,
A blessing on you, Simon Bar-jonah: because this knowledge has not come
to you from flesh and blood, but from my Father in heaven.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And I say to you that you are Peter,
and on this rock will my church be based, and the doors of hell will not
overcome it.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> I will give to you the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatever is fixed by you on earth will be fixed
in heaven: and whatever you make free on earth will be made free in
heaven.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then he gave orders to the disciples to
give no man word that he was the Christ.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> From that time Jesus went on to make
clear to his disciples how he would have to go up to Jerusalem, and
undergo much at the hands of those in authority and the chief priests
and scribes, and be put to death, and the third day come again from the
dead.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And Peter, protesting, said to him, Be
it far from you, Lord; it is impossible that this will come about.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> But he, turning to Peter, said, Get out
of my way, Satan: you are a danger to me because your mind is not on the
things of God, but on the things of men.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Then Jesus said to his disciples, If
any man would come after me, let him give up all, and take up his cross,
and come after me.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Because whoever has a desire to keep
his life safe will have it taken from him; but whoever gives up his life
because of me, will have it given back to him.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> For what profit has a man, if he gets
all the world with the loss of his life? or what will a man give in
exchange for his life?

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> For the Son of man will come in the
glory of his Father with his angels; and then he will give to every man
the reward of his works.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Truly I say to you, There are some of
those here who will not have a taste of death, till they see the Son of
man coming in his kingdom.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And after six days Jesus takes with him
Peter, and James, and John, his brother, and makes them go up with him
into a high mountain by themselves.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And he was changed in form before them;
and his face was shining like the sun, and his clothing became white as
light.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And Moses and Elijah came before their
eyes, talking with him.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Peter made answer and said to Jesus,
Lord, it is good for us to be here: if you will let me, I will make here
three tents, one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> While he was still talking, a bright
cloud came over them: and a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my
dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased; give ear to him.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And at these words the disciples went
down on their faces in great fear.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And Jesus came and put his hand on them
and said, Get up and have no fear.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And lifting up their eyes, they saw no
one, but Jesus only.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And when they were coming down from the
mountain, Jesus gave them orders, saying, Let no man have word of what
you have seen, till the Son of man has come again from the dead.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And his disciples, questioning him,
said, Why then do the scribes say that Elijah has to come first?

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And in answer he said, Elijah truly has
to come and put all things right:

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But I say to you that Elijah has come,
and they had no knowledge of him, but did to him whatever they were
pleased to do; the same will the Son of man undergo at their hands.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Then the disciples saw that he was
talking to them of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And when they came to the people, a man
went down on his knees to him, saying,

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Lord have mercy on my son: for he is
off his head, and is in great pain; and frequently he goes falling into
the fire, and frequently into the water.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And I took him to your disciples, and
they were not able to make him well.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And Jesus, answering, said, O false and
foolish generation, how long will I be with you? how long will I put up
with you? let him come here to me.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And Jesus gave orders to the unclean
spirit, and it went out of him: and the boy was made well from that
hour.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Then the disciples came to Jesus
privately, and said, Why were we not able to send it out?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And he says to them, Because of your
little faith: for truly I say to you, If you have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, Be moved from this place to
that; and it will be moved; and nothing will be impossible to you.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> \[\]

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And while they were going about in
Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man will be given up into the
hands of men;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And they will put him to death, and the
third day he will come again from the dead. And they were very sad.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And when they had come to Capernaum,
those who took the Temple tax came to Peter and said, Does not your
master make payment of the Temple tax?

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> He says, Yes. And when he came into the
house, Jesus said to him, What is your opinion, Simon? from whom do the
kings of the earth get payment or tax? from their sons or from other
people?

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And when he said, From other people,
Jesus said to him, Then are the sons free.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> But, so that we may not be a cause of
trouble to them, go to the sea, and let down a hook, and take the first
fish which comes up; and in his mouth you will see a bit of money: take
that, and give it to them for me and you.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> In that hour the disciples came to Jesus,
saying, Who is greatest in the kingdom of heaven?

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And he took a little child, and put him
in the middle of them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And said, Truly, I say to you, If you do
not have a change of heart and become like little children, you will not
go into the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Whoever, then, will make himself as low
as this little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And whoever gives honour to one such
little child in my name, gives honour to me:

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But whoever is a cause of trouble to one
of these little ones who have faith in me, it would be better for him to
have a great stone fixed to his neck, and to come to his end in the deep
sea.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> A curse is on the earth because of
trouble! for it is necessary for trouble to come; but unhappy is that
man through whom the trouble comes.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And if your hand or your foot is a cause
of trouble, let it be cut off and put it away from you: it is better for
you to go into life with the loss of a hand or a foot than, having two
hands or two feet, to go into the eternal fire.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And if your eye is a cause of trouble to
you, take it out, and put it away from you: it is better for you to go
into life with one eye than, having two eyes, to go into the hell of
fire.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Let it not seem to you that one of
these little ones is of no value; for I say to you that in heaven their
angels see at all times the face of my Father in heaven.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> \[\]

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> What would you say now? if a man has a
hundred sheep, and one of them has gone wandering away, will he not let
the ninety-nine be, and go to the mountains in search of the wandering
one?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And if he comes across it, truly I say
to you, he has more joy over it than over the ninety-nine which have not
gone out of the way.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Even so it is not the pleasure of your
Father in heaven for one of these little ones to come to destruction.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And if your brother does wrong to you,
go, make clear to him his error between you and him in private: if he
gives ear to you, you have got your brother back again.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But if he will not give ear to you,
take with you one or two more, that by the lips of two or three
witnesses every word may be made certain.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And if he will not give ear to them,
let it come to the hearing of the church: and if he will not give ear to
the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax-farmer.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Truly I say to you, Whatever things are
fixed by you on earth will be fixed in heaven: and whatever you make
free on earth will be made free in heaven.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Again, I say to you, that if two of you
are in agreement on earth about anything for which they will make a
request, it will be done for them by my Father in heaven.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> For where two or three are come
together in my name, there am I among them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then Peter came and said to him, Lord,
what number of times may my brother do wrong against me, and I give him
forgiveness? till seven times?

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Jesus says to him, I say not to you,
Till seven times; but, Till seventy times seven.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> For this reason the kingdom of heaven
is like a king, who went over his accounts with his servants.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And at the start, one came to him who
was in his debt for ten thousand talents.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And because he was not able to make
payment, his lord gave orders for him, and his wife, and his sons and
daughters, and all he had, to be given for money, and payment to be
made.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> So the servant went down on his face
and gave him worship, saying, Lord, give me time to make payment and I
will give you all.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And the lord of that servant, being
moved with pity, let him go, and made him free of the debt.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> But that servant went out, and meeting
one of the other servants, who was in debt to him for one hundred pence,
he took him by the throat, saying, Make payment of your debt.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> So that servant went down on his face,
requesting him and saying, Give me time and I will make payment to you.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And he would not: but went and put him
into prison till he had made payment of the debt.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> So when the other servants saw what was
done they were very sad, and came and gave word to their lord of what
had been done.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> Then his lord sent for him and said,
You evil servant; I made you free of all that debt, because of your
request to me:

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Was it not right for you to have mercy
on the other servant, even as I had mercy on you?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And his lord was very angry, and put
him in the hands of those who would give him punishment till he made
payment of all the debt.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> So will my Father in heaven do to you,
if you do not everyone, from your hearts, give forgiveness to his
brother.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came about that after saying these
words, Jesus went away from Galilee, and came into the parts of Judaea
on the other side of Jordan.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And a great number went after him; and he
made them well there.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And certain Pharisees came to him,
testing him, and saying, Is it right for a man to put away his wife for
every cause?

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And he said in answer, Have you not seen
in the Writings, that he who made them at the first made them male and
female, and said,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> For this cause will a man go away from
his father and mother, and be joined to his wife; and the two will
become one flesh?

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> So that they are no longer two, but one
flesh. Then let not that which has been joined by God be parted by man.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> They say to him, Why then did Moses give
orders that a husband might give her a statement in writing and be free
from her?

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He says to them, Moses, because of your
hard hearts, let you put away your wives: but it has not been so from
the first.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And I say to you, Whoever puts away his
wife for any other cause than the loss of her virtue, and takes another,
is a false husband: and he who takes her as his wife when she is put
away, is no true husband to her.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> The disciples say to him, If this is
the position of a man in relation to his wife, it is better not to be
married.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But he said to them, Not all men are
able to take in this saying, but only those to whom it is given.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> For there are men who, from birth, were
without sex: and there are some who were made so by men: and there are
others who have made themselves so for the kingdom of heaven. He who is
able to take it, let him take it.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Then some people took little children
to him, so that he might put his hands on them in blessing: and the
disciples said sharp words to them.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> But Jesus said, Let the little ones
come to me, and do not keep them away: for of such is the kingdom of
heaven.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And he put his hands on them, and went
away.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And one came to him and said, Master,
what good thing have I to do, so that I may have eternal life?

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And he said to him, Why are you
questioning me about what is good? One there is who is good: but if you
have a desire to go into life, keep the rules of the law.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> He says to him, Which? And Jesus said,
Do not put anyone to death, Do not be untrue in married life, Do not
take what is not yours, Do not give false witness,

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Give honour to your father and your
mother: and, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> The young man says to him, All these
things have I done: what more is there?

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Jesus said to him, If you have a desire
to be complete, go, get money for your property, and give it to the
poor, and you will have wealth in heaven: and come after me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> But hearing these words the young man
went away sorrowing: for he had much property.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And Jesus said to his disciples, Truly
I say to you, It is hard for a man with much money to go into the
kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And again I say to you, It is simpler
for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a man with much money
to go into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And the disciples, hearing this, were
greatly surprised, saying, Who then may have salvation?

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And Jesus, looking at them, said, With
men this is not possible; but with God all things are possible.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then Peter said to him, See, we have
given up everything and have come after you; what then will we have?

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And Jesus said to them, Truly I say to
you that in the time when all things are made new, and the Son of man is
seated in his glory, you who have come after me will be seated on twelve
seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And everyone who has given up houses,
or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or child, or land, for my
name, will be given a hundred times as much, and have eternal life.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> But a great number who are first will
be last, and some who are last will be first.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> For the kingdom of heaven is like the
master of a house, who went out early in the morning to get workers into
his vine-garden.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And when he had made an agreement with
the workmen for a penny a day, he sent them into his vine-garden.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And he went out about the third hour, and
saw others in the market-place doing nothing;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And he said to them, Go into the
vine-garden with the others, and whatever is right I will give you. And
they went to work.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Again he went out about the sixth and the
ninth hour, and did the same.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And about the eleventh hour he went out
and saw others doing nothing; and he says to them, Why are you here all
the day doing nothing?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> They say to him, Because no man has given
us work. He says to them, Go in with the rest, into the vine-garden.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And when evening came, the lord of the
vine-garden said to his manager, Let the workers come, and give them
their payment, from the last to the first.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And when those men came who had gone to
work at the eleventh hour, they were given every man a penny.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Then those who came first had the idea
that they would get more; and they, like the rest, were given a penny.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And when they got it, they made a
protest against the master of the house,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Saying, These last have done only one
hour's work, and you have made them equal to us, who have undergone the
hard work of the day and the burning heat.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But he in answer said to one of them,
Friend, I do you no wrong: did you not make an agreement with me for a
penny?

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Take what is yours, and go away; it is
my pleasure to give to this last, even as to you.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Have I not the right to do as seems
good to me in my house? or is your eye evil, because I am good?

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> So the last will be first, and the
first last.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And when Jesus was going up to
Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples on one side, and said to them,

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> See, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son
of man will be given into the hands of the chief priests and scribes;
and they will give orders for him to be put to death,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And will give him up to the Gentiles to
be made sport of and to be whipped and to be put to death on the cross:
and the third day he will come back again from the dead.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee
came to him with her sons, giving him worship and making a request of
him.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And he said to her, What is your
desire? She says to him, Let my two sons be seated, the one at your
right hand, and the other at your left, in your kingdom.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> But Jesus made answer and said, You
have no idea what you are requesting. Are you able to take of the cup
which I am about to take?

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> They say to him, We are able. He says
to them, Truly, you will take of my cup: but to be seated at my right
hand and at my left is not for me to give, but it is for those for whom
my Father has made it ready.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And when it came to the ears of the
ten, they were angry with the two brothers.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> But Jesus said to them, You see that
the rulers of the Gentiles are lords over them, and their great ones
have authority over them.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Let it not be so among you: but if
anyone has a desire to become great among you, let him be your servant;

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And whoever has a desire to be first
among you, let him take the lowest place:

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Even as the Son of man did not come to
have servants, but to be a servant, and to give his life for the
salvation of men.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And when they were going out from
Jericho, a great number went after him.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And two blind men seated by the
wayside, when they had the news that Jesus was going by, gave a loud
cry, saying, Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And the people gave them orders to be
quiet; but they went on crying even louder, Lord, Son of David, have
mercy on us.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And Jesus, stopping, sent for them, and
said, What would you have me do to you?

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> They say to him, Lord, that our eyes
may be open.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And Jesus, being moved with pity, put
his fingers on their eyes: and straight away they were able to see, and
went after him.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And when they were near Jerusalem, and
had come to Beth-phage, to the Mountain of Olives, Jesus sent two
disciples,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Saying to them, Go into the little town
in front of you, and straight away you will see an ass with a cord round
her neck, and a young one with her; let them loose and come with them to
me.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And if anyone says anything to you, you
will say, The Lord has need of them; and straight away he will send
them.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Now this took place so that these words
of the prophet might come true,

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Say to the daughter of Zion, See, your
King comes to you, gentle and seated on an ass, and on a young ass.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the disciples went and did as Jesus
had given them orders,

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And got the ass and the young one, and
put their clothing on them, and he took his seat on it.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And all the people put their clothing
down in the way; and others got branches from the trees, and put them
down in the way.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And those who went before him, and those
who came after, gave loud cries, saying, Glory to the Son of David: A
blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord: Glory in the highest.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And when he came into Jerusalem, all
the town was moved, saying, Who is this?

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And the people said, This is the
prophet Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And Jesus went into the Temple and sent
out all who were trading there, overturning the tables of the
money-changers and the seats of those trading in doves.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And he said to them, It is in the
Writings, My house is to be named a house of prayer, but you are making
it a hole of thieves.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And the blind and the broken in body
came to him in the Temple, and he made them well.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> But when the chief priests and the
scribes saw the works of power which he did, and the children crying out
in the Temple, Glory to the son of David, they were angry and said to
him,

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Have you any idea what these are
saying? And Jesus said to them, Yes: have you not seen in the Writings,
From the lips of children and babies at the breast you have made your
praise complete?

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And he went away from them, and went
out of the town to Bethany, and was there for the night.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Now in the morning when he was coming
back to the town, he had a desire for food.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And seeing a fig-tree by the wayside,
he came to it, and saw nothing on it but leaves only; and he said to it,
Let there be no fruit from you from this time forward for ever. And
straight away the fig-tree became dry and dead.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And when the disciples saw it they were
surprised, saying, How did the fig-tree become dry in so short a time?

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And Jesus in answer said to them, Truly
I say to you, If you have faith, without doubting, not only may you do
what has been done to the fig-tree, but even if you say to this
mountain, Be taken up and put into the sea, it will be done.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And all things, whatever you make
request for in prayer, having faith, you will get.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And when he had come into the Temple,
the chief priests and those in authority over the people came to him
while he was teaching, and said, By what authority do you do these
things? and who gave you this authority?

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Jesus said to them in answer, I
will put one question to you, and if you give me the answer, I will say
by what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The baptism of John, where did it come
from? from heaven or from men? And they were reasoning among themselves,
saying, If we say, From heaven; he will say to us, Why then did you not
have faith in him?

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> But if we say, From men; we are in fear
of the people, because all take John to be a prophet.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And they made answer and said, We have
no idea. Then he said to them, And I will not say to you by what
authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> But how does it seem to you? A man had
two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go and do work today
in the vine-garden.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And he said in answer, I will not: but
later, changing his decision, he went.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And he came to the second and said the
same. And he made answer and said, I go, sir: and went not.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Which of the two did his father's
pleasure? They say, The first. Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you,
that tax-farmers and loose women are going into the kingdom of God
before you.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> For John came to you in the way of
righteousness, and you had no faith in him, but the tax-farmers and the
loose women had faith in him: and you, when you saw it, did not even
have regret for your sins, so as to have faith in him.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Give ear to another story. A master of
a house made a vine garden, and put a wall round it, and made a place
for crushing out the wine, and made a tower, and let it out to
field-workers, and went into another country.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And when the time for the fruit came
near, he sent his servants to the workmen, to get the fruit.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And the workmen made an attack on his
servants, giving blows to one, putting another to death, and stoning
another.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Again, he sent other servants more in
number than the first: and they did the same to them.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> But after that he sent his son to them,
saying, They will have respect for my son.

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> But when the workmen saw the son, they
said among themselves, This is he who will one day be the owner of the
property; come, let us put him to death and take his heritage.

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> And they took him and, driving him out
of the vine-garden, put him to death.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> When, then, the lord of the vine-garden
comes, what will he do to those workmen?

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> They say to him, He will put those
cruel men to a cruel death, and will let out the vine-garden to other
workmen, who will give him the fruit when it is ready.

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> Jesus says to them, Did you never see
in the Writings, The stone which the builders put on one side, the same
has been made the chief stone of the building: this was the Lord's
doing, and it is a wonder in our eyes?

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> For this reason I say to you, The
kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a
nation producing the fruits of it.

<span id="an_21:44">21:44</span> Any man falling on this stone will be
broken, but he on whom it comes down will be crushed to dust.

<span id="an_21:45">21:45</span> And when his stories came to the ears
of the chief priests and the Pharisees, they saw that he was talking of
them.

<span id="an_21:46">21:46</span> And though they had a desire to take
him, they were in fear of the people, because in their eyes he was a
prophet.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And Jesus, talking to them again in
stories, said:

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The kingdom of heaven is like a certain
king, who made a feast when his son was married,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And sent out his servants to get in the
guests to the feast: and they would not come.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Again he sent out other servants, with
orders to say to the guests, See, I have made ready my feast: my oxen
and my fat beasts have been put to death, and all things are ready: come
to the feast.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> But they gave no attention, and went
about their business, one to his farm, another to his trade:

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And the rest put violent hands on his
servants, and did evil to them, and put them to death.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But the king was angry; and he sent his
armies, and those who had put his servants to death he gave to
destruction, burning down their town with fire.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Then he said to his servants, The feast
is ready but the guests were not good enough.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Go then to the cross-roads, and get all
those whom you see to come to the bride-feast.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And those servants went out into the
streets, and got together all those whom they came across, bad and good:
and the feast was full of guests.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> But when the king came in to see the
guests, he saw there a man who had not on a guest's robe;

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he says to him, Friend, how came
you in here not having a guest's robe? And he had nothing to say.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Then the king said to the servants, Put
cords round his hands and feet and put him out into the dark; there will
be weeping and cries of sorrow.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> For out of all to whom the good news
has come, only a small number will get salvation.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then the Pharisees went and had a
meeting to see how they might make use of his words to take him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And they sent to him their disciples,
with the Herodians, saying, Master, we see that you are true, and that
you are teaching the true way of God, and have no fear of anyone,
because you have no respect for a man's position.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Give us, then, your opinion of this: Is
it right to give tax to Caesar, or not?

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> But Jesus saw their trick and said, Oh
false ones, why are you attempting to put me in the wrong?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Let me see the tax money. And they gave
him a penny.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And he said to them, Whose is this
image and name on it?

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> They say to him, Caesar's. Then he said
to them, Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the
things which are God's.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And hearing it, they were full of
wonder, and went away from him.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> On the same day there came to him the
Sadducees, who say that there is no coming back from the dead: and they
put a question to him, saying,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Master, Moses said, If a man, at the
time of his death, has no children, let his brother take his wife, and
get a family for his brother;

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Now there were among us seven brothers;
and the first was married and at his death, having no seed, gave his
wife to his brother;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> In the same way the second and the
third, up to the seventh.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And last of all the woman came to her
end.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> When they come back from the dead,
then, whose wife will she be of the seven? because they all had her.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> But Jesus said to them in answer, You
are in error, not having knowledge of the Writings, or of the power of
God.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> For when they come back from the dead
there are no husbands and wives, but they are as the angels in heaven.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> But about the dead coming back to life,
have you no knowledge of what was said to you by God in the Writings:

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead but of the
living.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And the people hearing it were
surprised at his teaching.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> But the Pharisees, hearing how the
mouths of the Sadducees had been stopped, came together;

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> And one of them, a teacher of the law,
put a question to him, testing him, and saying,

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> Master, which is the chief rule in the
law?

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> And he said to him, Have love for the
Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all
your mind.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> This is the first and greatest rule.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And a second like it is this, Have love
for your neighbour as for yourself.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> On these two rules all the law and the
prophets are based.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> Now while the Pharisees were together,
Jesus put a question to them, saying,

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> What is your opinion of the Christ?
whose son is he? They say to him, The Son of David.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> He says to them, How then does David in
the Spirit give him the name of Lord, saying,

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at
my right hand, till I put under your feet all those who are against you?

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> If David then gives him the name of
Lord, how is he his son?

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> And no one was able to give him an
answer, and so great was their fear of him, that from that day no one
put any more questions to him.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then Jesus said to the people and to his
disciples:

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> The scribes and the Pharisees have the
authority of Moses;

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> All things, then, which they give you
orders to do, these do and keep: but do not take their works as your
example, for they say and do not.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> They make hard laws and put great weights
on men's backs; but they themselves will not put a finger to them.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> But all their works they do so as to be
seen by men: for they make wide their phylacteries, and the edges of
their robes,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And the things desired by them are the
first places at feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues,

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And words of respect in the
market-places, and to be named by men, Teacher.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But you may not be named Teacher: for one
is your teacher, and you are all brothers.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And give no man the name of father on
earth: because one is your Father, who is in heaven.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And you may not be named guides:
because one is your Guide, even Christ.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But let the greatest among you be your
servant.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And whoever makes himself high will be
made low, and whoever makes himself low will be made high.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> But a curse is on you, scribes and
Pharisees, false ones! because you are shutting the kingdom of heaven
against men: for you do not go in yourselves, and those who are going
in, you keep back.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> \[\]

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> A curse is on you, scribes and
Pharisees, false ones! for you go about land and sea to get one disciple
and, having him, you make him twice as much a son of hell as yourselves.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> A curse is on you, blind guides, who
say, Whoever takes an oath by the Temple, it is nothing; but whoever
takes an oath by the gold of the Temple, he is responsible.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> You foolish ones and blind: which is
greater, the gold, or the Temple which makes the gold holy?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And, Whoever takes an oath by the
altar, it is nothing; but whoever takes an oath by the offering which is
on it, he is responsible.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> You blind ones: which is greater, the
offering, or the altar which makes the offering holy?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> He, then, who takes an oath by the
altar, takes it by the altar and by all things on it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And he who takes an oath by the Temple,
takes it by the Temple and by him whose house it is.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> And he who takes an oath by heaven,
takes it by the seat of God, and by him who is seated on it.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> A curse is on you, scribes and
Pharisees, false ones! for you make men give a tenth of all sorts of
sweet-smelling plants, but you give no thought to the more important
things of the law, righteousness, and mercy, and faith; but it is right
for you to do these, and not to let the others be undone.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> You blind guides, who take out a fly
from your drink, but make no trouble over a camel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> A curse is on you, scribes and
Pharisees, false ones! for you make clean the outside of the cup and of
the plate, but inside they are full of violent behaviour and
uncontrolled desire.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> You blind Pharisee, first make clean
the inside of the cup and of the plate, so that the outside may become
equally clean.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> A curse is on you, scribes and
Pharisees, false ones! for you are like the resting-places of the dead,
which are made white, and seem beautiful on the outside, but inside are
full of dead men's bones and of all unclean things.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Even so you seem to men to be full of
righteousness, but inside you are all false and full of wrongdoing.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> A curse is on you, scribes and
Pharisees, false ones! because you put up buildings for housing the dead
bodies of the prophets, and make fair the last resting-places of good
men, and say,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> If we had been living in the days of
our fathers, we would not have taken part with them in the blood of the
prophets.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> So that you are witnesses against
yourselves that you are the sons of those who put the prophets to death.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Make full, then, the measure of your
fathers.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> You snakes, offspring of snakes, how
will you be kept from the punishment of hell?

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> For this reason, I send you prophets,
and wise men, and scribes: some of them you will put to death and put on
the cross, and to some of them you will give blows in your Synagogues,
driving them from town to town;

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> So that on you may come all the blood
of the upright on the earth, from the blood of upright Abel to the blood
of Zachariah, son of Barachiah, whom you put to death between the Temple
and the altar.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Truly I say to you, All these things
will come on this generation.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, putting to
death the prophets, and stoning those who are sent to her! Again and
again would I have taken your children to myself as a bird takes her
young ones under her wings, and you would not!

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> See, your house is made waste.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For I say to you, You will not see me
from this time till you say, A blessing on him who comes in the name of
the Lord.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And Jesus went out of the Temple, and on
the way his disciples came to him, pointing out the buildings of the
Temple.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> But he, answering, said to them, See you
not all these things? truly I say to you that here there will not be one
stone resting on another, which will not be pulled down.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And while he was seated on the Mountain
of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, Make clear to
us, when will these things be? and what will be the sign of your coming
and of the end of the world?

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Jesus said to them in answer, Take
care that you are not tricked.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For people will come in my name, saying,
I am the Christ; and a number will be turned from the true way through
them.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And news will come to you of wars and
talk of wars: do not be troubled, for these things have to be; but it is
still not the end.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For nation will be moved against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom, and men will be without food, and the earth
will be shaking in different places;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> But all these things are the first of the
troubles.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then they will be cruel to you, and will
put you to death: and you will be hated by all nations because of my
name.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And numbers of people will be turned
from the right way, and will give one another up and have hate for one
another.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And a number of false prophets will
come, causing error.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And because wrongdoing will be
increased, the love of most people will become cold.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> But he who goes through to the end will
get salvation.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And this good news of the kingdom will
be given through all the world for a witness to all nations; and then
the end will come.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> When, then, you see in the holy place
the unclean thing which makes destruction, of which word was given by
Daniel the prophet (let this be clear to the reader),

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Then let those who are in Judaea go in
flight to the mountains:

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Let not him who is on the house-top go
down to take anything out of his house:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And let not him who is in the field go
back to get his coat.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> But it will be hard for women who are
with child and for those with babies at the breast in those days.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And say a prayer that your flight may
not be in the winter, or on a Sabbath.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Because in those days there will be
great sorrow, such as there has not been from the start of the world
till now, or ever will be.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And if those days had not been made
short there would have been no salvation for any, but because of the
saints those days will be made short.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Then if any man says to you, See, here
is the Christ, or, Here; do not put faith in him;

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For there will come up false Christs,
and false prophets, who will do great signs and wonders; so that if
possible even the saints might be tricked.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> See, I have made it clear to you before
it comes about.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> If, then, they say to you, See, he is
in the waste land; go not out: See, he is in the inner rooms; put no
faith in it.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Because as in a thunderstorm the bright
light coming from the east is seen even in the west; so will be the
coming of the Son of man.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Wherever the dead body is, there will
the eagles come together.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> But straight away, after the trouble of
those days, the sun will be made dark and the moon will not give her
light and the stars will come down from heaven and the powers of heaven
will be moved:

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And then the sign of the Son of man
will be seen in heaven: and then all the nations of the earth will have
sorrow, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven
with power and great glory.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And he will send out his angels with a
great sound of a horn, and they will get his saints together from the
four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Now take an example from the fig-tree:
when her branch has become soft and puts out its leaves, you are certain
that the summer is near;

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> Even so, when you see all these things,
you may be certain that he is near, even at the doors.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> Truly I say to you, This generation
will not come to an end till all these things are complete.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> Heaven and earth will come to an end,
but my words will not come to an end.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> But of that day and hour no one has
knowledge, not even the angels in heaven, or the Son, but the Father
only.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> And as were the days of Noah, so will
be the coming of the Son of man.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> Because as in those days before the
overflowing of the waters, they were feasting and taking wives and
getting married, till the day when Noah went into the ark,

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> And they had no care till the waters
came and took them all away; so will be the coming of the Son of man.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> Then two men will be in the field; one
is taken, and one let go;

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> Two women will be crushing grain; one
is taken, and one let go.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> Be watching, then! for you have no
knowledge on what day your Lord will come.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> But be certain of this, that if the
master of the house had had knowledge of the time when the thief was
coming, he would have been watching, and would not have let his house be
broken into.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> Be ready then; for at a time which you
have no thought of the Son of man will come.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> Who is the true and wise servant, whom
his lord has put over those in his house, to give them their food at the
right time?

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> A blessing on that servant, who will be
doing so when his lord comes.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> Truly, I say to you, he will put him
over all he has.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> But if that evil servant says in his
heart, My lord is a long time in coming;

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> And is cruel to the other servants,
taking his pleasure with those who are overcome with wine;

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> The lord of that servant will come in a
day when he is not looking for him, and in an hour of which he has no
knowledge,

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> And will have him cut in two, and will
give him a part in the fate of the false ones: there will be weeping and
cries of sorrow.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Then the kingdom of heaven will be like
ten virgins, the friends of the bride, who took their lights, and went
out with the purpose of meeting the husband.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And five of them were foolish, and five
were wise.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> For the foolish, when they took their
lights, took no oil with them.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But the wise took oil in their vessels
with their lights.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Now the husband was a long time in
coming, and they all went to sleep.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> But in the middle of the night there is a
cry, The husband comes! Go out to him.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Then all those virgins got up, and made
ready their lights.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And the foolish said to the wise, Give us
of your oil; for our lights are going out.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But the wise made answer, saying, There
may not be enough for us and you; it would be better for you to go to
the traders and get oil for yourselves.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And while they went to get oil, the
master came; and those who were ready went in with him to the feast: and
the door was shut.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> After that the other virgins came,
saying, Lord, Lord, let us in.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> But he made answer and said, Truly I
say to you, I have no knowledge of you.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Keep watch, then, because you are not
certain of the day or of the hour.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> For it is as when a man, about to take
a journey, got his servants together, and gave them his property.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> And to one he gave five talents, to
another two, to another one; to everyone as he was able; and he went on
his journey.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Straight away he who had been given the
five talents went and did trade with them, and made five more.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> In the same way he who had been given
the two got two more.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> But he who was given the one went away
and put it in a hole in the earth, and kept his lord's money in a secret
place.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Now after a long time the lord of those
servants comes, and makes up his account with them.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And he who had the five talents came
with his other five talents, saying, Lord, you gave into my care five
talents: see, I have got five more.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> His lord said to him, Well done, good
and true servant: you have been true in a small thing, I will give you
control over great things: take your part in the joy of your lord.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And he who had the two talents came and
said, Lord, you gave into my care two talents: see, I have got two more.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> His lord said to him, Well done, good
and true servant: you have been true in a small thing, I will give you
control over great things: take your part in the joy of your lord.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And he who had had the one talent came
and said, Lord, I had knowledge that you are a hard man, getting in
grain where you have not put seed, and making profits for which you have
done no work:

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And I was in fear, and went away, and
put your talent in the earth: here is what is yours.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> But his lord in answer said to him, You
are a bad and unready servant; if you had knowledge that I get in grain
where I did not put seed, and make profits for which I have done no
work,

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Why, then, did you not put my money in
the bank, and at my coming I would have got back what is mine with
interest?

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Take away, then, his talent and give it
to him who has the ten talents.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For to everyone who has will be given,
and he will have more: but from him who has not, even what he has will
be taken away.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And put out the servant who is of no
profit into the outer dark: there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> But when the Son of man comes in his
glory, and all the angels with him, then will he be seated in his glory:

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And before him all the nations will
come together; and they will be parted one from another, as the sheep
are parted from the goats by the keeper.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And he will put the sheep on his right,
but the goats on the left.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Then will the King say to those on his
right, Come, you who have the blessing of my Father, into the kingdom
made ready for you before the world was:

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> For I was in need of food, and you gave
it to me: I was in need of drink, and you gave it to me: I was
wandering, and you took me in;

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> I had no clothing, and you gave it to
me: when I was ill, or in prison, you came to me.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> Then will the upright make answer to
him, saying, Lord, when did we see you in need of food, and give it to
you? or in need of drink, and give it to you?

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> And when did we see you wandering, and
take you in? or without clothing, and give it to you?

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> And when did we see you ill, or in
prison, and come to you?

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And the King will make answer and say
to them, Truly I say to you, Because you did it to the least of these my
brothers, you did it to me.

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> Then will he say to those on the left,
Go from me, you cursed ones, into the eternal fire which is ready for
the Evil One and his angels:

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> For I was in need of food, and you gave
it not to me; I was in need of drink, and you gave it not to me:

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> I was wandering, and you took me not
in; without clothing, and you gave me no clothing; ill, and in prison,
and you came not to me.

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> Then will they make answer, saying,
Lord, when did we see you in need of food or drink, or wandering, or
without clothing, or ill, or in prison, and did not take care of you?

<span id="an_25:45">25:45</span> Then will he make answer to them,
saying, Truly I say to you, Because you did it not to the least of
these, you did it not to me.

<span id="an_25:46">25:46</span> And these will go away into eternal
punishment; but the upright into eternal life.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And when Jesus had come to the end of all
these words, he said to his disciples,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> After two days is the Passover, and the
Son of man will be given up to the death of the cross.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Then the chief priests and the rulers of
the people came together in the house of the high priest, who was named
Caiaphas.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And they made designs together to take
Jesus by some trick, and put him to death.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> But they said, Not while the feast is
going on, for fear of trouble among the people.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Now when Jesus was in Bethany in the
house of Simon the leper,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> There came to him a woman having a bottle
of perfume of great price, and she put the perfume on his head when he
was seated at table.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> But when the disciples saw it they were
angry, saying, To what purpose is this waste?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> For we might have got much money for this
and given it to the poor.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> But Jesus, seeing it, said to them, Why
are you troubling the woman? she has done a kind act to me.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> For the poor you have ever with you,
but me you have not for ever.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> For in putting this perfume on my body,
she did it to make me ready for my last resting-place.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Truly I say to you, Wherever this good
news goes out in all the world, what this woman has done will be talked
of in memory of her.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Then one of the twelve, who was named
Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests and said,

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> What will you give me, if I give him up
to you? And the price was fixed at thirty bits of silver.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And from that time he was watching for
a chance to give him into their hands.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Now on the first day of unleavened
bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where are we to make ready
for you to take the Passover meal?

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And he said to them, Go into the town
to such a man, and say to him, The Master says, My time is near: I will
keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And the disciples did as Jesus had said
to them; and they made ready the Passover.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Now when evening was come, he was
seated at table with the twelve disciples;

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And while they were taking food, he
said, Truly I say to you that one of you will be false to me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And they were very said, and said to
him, one by one, Is it I, Lord?

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And he made answer and said, He who
puts his hand into the plate with me, the same will be false to me.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> The Son of man goes, even as the
Writings say of him: but a curse is on that man through whom the Son of
man is given up; it would have been well for that man if he had never
come into the world.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And Judas, who was false to him, made
answer and said, Is it I, Master? He says to him, Yes.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And when they were taking food, Jesus
took bread and, after blessing it, he gave the broken bread to the
disciples and said, Take it; this is my body.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And he took a cup and, having given
praise, he gave it to them, saying,

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> Take of it, all of you, for this is my
blood of the testament, which is given for men for the forgiveness of
sins.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> But I say to you that from now I will
not take of this fruit of the vine, till that day when I take it new
with you in my Father's kingdom.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And after a song of praise to God, they
went out to the Mountain of Olives.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> Then said Jesus to them, All of you
will be turned away from me this night: for it is said in the Writings,
I will put to death the keeper of the sheep, and the sheep of the flock
will be put to flight.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> But after I am come back from the dead,
I will go before you into Galilee.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> But Peter made answer and said to him,
Though all may be turned away from you, I will never be turned away.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> Jesus said to him, Truly I say to you
that this night, before the hour of the cock's cry, you will say three
times that you have no knowledge of me.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> Peter says to him, Even if I am put to
death with you, I will not be false to you. So said all the disciples.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> Then comes Jesus with them to a place
named Gethsemane, and says to his disciples, Be seated here, while I go
over there for prayer.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And he took with him Peter and the two
sons of Zebedee, and became sad and very troubled.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> Then says he to them, My soul is very
sad, even to death: keep watch with me here.

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> And he went forward a little, and
falling down on his face in prayer, he said, O my Father, if it is
possible, let this cup go from me; but let not my pleasure, but yours be
done.

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> And he comes to the disciples, and sees
that they are sleeping, and says to Peter, What, were you not able to
keep watch with me one hour?

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> Keep watch with prayer, so that you may
not be put to the test: the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is
feeble.

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> Again, a second time he went away, and
said in prayer, O my Father, if this may not go from me without my
taking it, let your pleasure be done.

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> And he came again and saw them
sleeping, for their eyes were tired.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> And he went away from them again, and a
third time said the same prayer.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Then he comes to the disciples; and
says to them, Go on sleeping now, and take your rest: for the hour is
come, and the Son of man is given into the hands of evil men.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> Up, let us be going: see, he who gives
me up is near.

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> And while he was still talking, Judas,
one of the twelve, came, and with him a band armed with swords and
sticks, from the chief priests and those in authority over the people.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> Now the false one had given them a sign
saying, The one to whom I give a kiss, that is he: take him.

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> And straight away he came to Jesus and
said, Master! and gave him a kiss.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> And Jesus said to him, Friend, do that
for which you have come. Then they came and put hands on Jesus, and took
him.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> And one of those who were with Jesus
put out his hand, and took out his sword and gave the servant of the
high priest a blow, cutting off his ear.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> Then says Jesus to him, Put up your
sword again into its place: for all those who take the sword will come
to death by the sword.

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> Does it not seem possible to you that
if I make request to my Father he will even now send me an army of
angels?

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> But how then would the Writings come
true, which say that so it has to be?

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> In that hour Jesus said to the people,
Have you come out as against a thief with swords and sticks to take me?
I was teaching every day in the Temple and you took me not.

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> But all this has taken place so that
the writings of the prophets might come true. Then all his disciples
went from him in flight.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> And those who had made Jesus prisoner
took him away to the house of Caiaphas, the high priest, where the
scribes and those in authority over the people had come together.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> But Peter went after him at a distance,
to the house of the high priest, and went in and took his seat with the
servants, to see the end.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> Now the chief priests and all the
Sanhedrin were looking for false witness against Jesus, so that they
might put him to death;

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> And they were not able to get it,
though a number of false witnesses came.

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> But later there came two who said, This
man said, I am able to give the Temple of God to destruction, and to put
it up again in three days.

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> And the high priest got up and said to
him, Have you no answer? what is it which these say against you?

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> But Jesus said not a word. And the high
priest said to him, I put you on oath, by the living God, that you will
say to us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> Jesus says to him, You say so: but I
say to you, From now you will see the Son of man seated at the right
hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> Then the high priest, violently parting
his robes, said, He has said evil against God: what more need have we of
witnesses? for now his words against God have come to your ears:

<span id="an_26:66">26:66</span> What is your opinion? They made answer
and said, It is right for him to be put to death.

<span id="an_26:67">26:67</span> Then they put shame on him, and were
cruel to him: and some gave him blows, saying,

<span id="an_26:68">26:68</span> Be a prophet, O Christ, and say who
gave you a blow!

<span id="an_26:69">26:69</span> Now Peter was seated in the open square
outside the house: and a servant-girl came to him, saying, You were with
Jesus the Galilaean.

<span id="an_26:70">26:70</span> But he said before them all that it was
false, saying, I have no knowledge of what you say.

<span id="an_26:71">26:71</span> And when he had gone out into the
doorway, another saw him and says to those who were there, This man was
with Jesus the Nazarene.

<span id="an_26:72">26:72</span> And again he said with an oath, I have
no knowledge of the man.

<span id="an_26:73">26:73</span> And after a little time those who were
near came and said to Peter, Truly you are one of them; because your
talk is witness against you.

<span id="an_26:74">26:74</span> Then with curses and oaths he said, I
have no knowledge of the man. And straight away there came the cry of a
cock.

<span id="an_26:75">26:75</span> And the word of Jesus came back to
Peter, when he said, Before the hour of the cock's cry, you will say
three times that you have no knowledge of me. And he went out, weeping
bitterly.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Now when it was morning, all the chief
priests and those in authority took thought together with the purpose of
putting Jesus to death.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And they put cords on him and took him
away, and gave him up to Pilate, the ruler.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Then Judas, who was false to him, seeing
that he was to be put to death, in his regret took back the thirty bits
of silver to the chief priests and those in authority,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Saying, I have done wrong in giving into
your hands an upright man. But they said, What is that to us? it is your
business.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And he put down the silver in the Temple
and went out, and put himself to death by hanging.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And the chief priests took the silver and
said, It is not right to put it in the Temple store for it is the price
of blood.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And they made a decision to get with the
silver the potter's field, as a place for the dead of other countries.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> For this cause that field was named, The
field of blood, to this day.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Then came true that which was said by
Jeremiah the prophet, And they took the thirty bits of silver, the price
of him who was valued by the children of Israel;

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And they gave them for the potter's
field, as I had word from the Lord.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Jesus was before the ruler, who put
a question to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And Jesus said to him,
You say so.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> But when the chief priests and those in
authority made statements against him, he gave no answer.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Then says Pilate to him, Do you give no
attention to what their witnesses say against you?

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And he gave him no answer, not even a
word: so that the ruler was greatly surprised.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Now at the feast it was the way for the
ruler to let free to the people one prisoner, at their selection.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And they had then an important
prisoner, whose name was Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> So when they came together, Pilate said
to them, Whom will you have? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is named Christ?

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> For he saw that for envy they had given
him up.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And while he was on the judge's seat,
his wife sent to him, saying, Have nothing to do with that upright man,
for I have had much trouble this day in a dream because of him.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Now the chief priests and those in
authority got the people to make request for Barabbas, and for Jesus to
be put to death.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> But the ruler made answer and said to
them, Which of the two is it your pleasure that I let go free? And they
said, Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Pilate says to them, What, then, am I
to do with Jesus, who is named Christ? They all say, Let him be put to
death on the cross.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> And he said, Why, what evil has he
done? But they gave loud cries, saying, To the cross with him!

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> So when Pilate saw that he was able to
do nothing, but that trouble was working up, he took water and, washing
his hands before the people, said, The blood of this upright man is not
on my hands: you are responsible.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> And all the people made answer and
said, Let his blood be on us, and on our children.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Then he let Barabbas go free: but after
having Jesus whipped, he gave him up to be put to death on the cross.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Then the ruler's armed men took Jesus
into the open square, and got all their band together.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> And they took off his clothing, and put
on him a red robe.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And they made a crown of thorns and put
it on his head, and put a rod in his right hand, and they went down on
their knees before him, and made sport of him, saying, Long life to the
King of the Jews.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And they put shame on him, and gave him
blows on the head with the rod.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And when they had made sport of him,
they took the robe off him, and put his clothing on him, and took him
away to put him on the cross.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And while they were coming out, they
saw a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they made him go with them, so
that he might take up his cross.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And when they came to the place named
Golgotha, that is to say, Dead Man's Head,

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> They gave him wine mixed with bitter
drink: and after tasting it, he took no more.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And when they had put him on the cross,
they made division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> And they were seated there watching
him.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And they put up over his head the
statement of his crime in writing, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> Then two thieves were put on crosses
with him, one on the right and one on the left.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And those who went by said bitter words
to him, shaking their heads and saying,

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> You who would give the Temple to
destruction and put it up again in three days, get yourself free: if you
are the Son of God, come down from the cross.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> In the same way, the chief priests,
making sport of him, with the scribes and those in authority, said,

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> A saviour of others, he has no
salvation for himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him now come
down from the cross, and we will have faith in him.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> He put his faith in God; let God be his
saviour now, if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God.

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And the thieves who were on the crosses
said evil words to him.

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> Now from the sixth hour it was dark
over all the land till the ninth hour.

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> And about the ninth hour Jesus gave a
loud cry, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is, My God, my God,
why are you turned away from me?

<span id="an_27:47">27:47</span> And some of those who were near by,
hearing it, said, This man is crying to Elijah.

<span id="an_27:48">27:48</span> And straight away one of them went
quickly, and took a sponge, and made it full of bitter wine, and put it
on a rod and gave him drink.

<span id="an_27:49">27:49</span> And the rest said, Let him be; let us
see if Elijah will come to his help.

<span id="an_27:50">27:50</span> And Jesus gave another loud cry, and
gave up his spirit.

<span id="an_27:51">27:51</span> And the curtain of the Temple was
parted in two from end to end; and there was an earth-shock; and the
rocks were broken;

<span id="an_27:52">27:52</span> And the resting-places of the dead came
open; and the bodies of a number of sleeping saints came to life;

<span id="an_27:53">27:53</span> And coming out of their resting-places,
after he had come again from the dead, they went into the holy town and
were seen by a number of people.

<span id="an_27:54">27:54</span> Now the captain and those who were with
him watching Jesus, when they saw the earth-shock and the things which
were done, were in great fear and said, Truly this was a son of God.

<span id="an_27:55">27:55</span> And a number of women were there,
watching from a distance, who had come with Jesus from Galilee, waiting
on his needs.

<span id="an_27:56">27:56</span> Among whom was Mary Magdalene, and
Mary, the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of
Zebedee.

<span id="an_27:57">27:57</span> And in the evening, there came a man of
wealth from Arimathaea, Joseph by name, who was a disciple of Jesus:

<span id="an_27:58">27:58</span> This man went in to Pilate, and made a
request for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate gave orders for it to be
given to him.

<span id="an_27:59">27:59</span> And Joseph took the body, folding it in
clean linen,

<span id="an_27:60">27:60</span> And put it in the resting-place which
had been cut out of the rock for himself; and after rolling a great
stone to the door of it he went away.

<span id="an_27:61">27:61</span> And Mary Magdalene was there, and the
other Mary, seated by the place of the dead.

<span id="an_27:62">27:62</span> Now on the day after the getting ready
of the Passover, the chief priests and Pharisees came together to
Pilate,

<span id="an_27:63">27:63</span> Saying, Sir, we have in mind how that
false man said, while he was still living, After three days I will come
again from the dead.

<span id="an_27:64">27:64</span> Give orders, then, that the place where
his body is may be made safe till the third day, for fear that his
disciples come and take him away secretly and say to the people, He has
come back from the dead: and the last error will be worse than the
first.

<span id="an_27:65">27:65</span> Pilate said to them, You have watchmen;
go and make it as safe as you are able.

<span id="an_27:66">27:66</span> So they went, and made safe the place
where his body was, putting a stamp on the stone, and the watchmen were
with them.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Now late on the Sabbath, when the dawn of
the first day of the week was near, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary
came to see the place where his body was.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And there was a great earth-shock; for an
angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, rolling back the stone,
took his seat on it.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> His form was shining like the light, and
his clothing was white as snow:

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And for fear of him the watchmen were
shaking, and became as dead men.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And the angel said to the women, Have no
fear: for I see that you are searching for Jesus, who was put to death
on the cross.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> He is not here, for he has come to life
again, even as he said. Come, see the Lord's resting-place.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And go quickly and give his disciples the
news that he has come back from the dead, and is going before you into
Galilee; there you will see him, as I have said to you.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And they went away quickly, with fear and
great joy, to give his disciples the news.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And on the way, Jesus came to them,
saying, Be glad. And they came and put their hands on his feet, and gave
him worship.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then said Jesus to them, Have no fear:
go and give word to my brothers to go into Galilee, and there they will
see me.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Now, while they were going, some of the
watchmen came into the town and gave news to the chief priests of all
the things which had taken place.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And when they had come together with
those in authority, and had made their decision, they gave much money to
the watchmen, saying,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Say, His disciples came by night and
took him away secretly while we were sleeping.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And if this comes to the ruler's ears,
we will see that he does not make you responsible.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> So they took the money, and did as they
had been ordered: and this account has been current among the Jews till
the present time.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> But the eleven disciples went into
Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had given them orders to go.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And when they saw him they gave him
worship: but some were in doubt.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And Jesus came to them and said, All
authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Go then, and make disciples of all the
nations, giving them baptism in the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Spirit:

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Teaching them to keep all the rules
which I have given you: and see, I am ever with you, even to the end of
the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark](mar)
