[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jon)  [Next](nah.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Micah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the Lord which came to Micah
the Morashtite, in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of
Judah: his vision about Samaria and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Give ear, you peoples, all of you; give
attention, O earth and everything in it: let the Lord God be witness
against you, the Lord from his holy Temple.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For see, the Lord is coming out from his
place, and will come down, stepping on the high places of the earth.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the mountains will be turned to water
under him, and the deep valleys will be broken open, like wax before the
fire, like waters flowing down a slope.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> All this is because of the wrongdoing of
Jacob and the sins of the children of Israel. What is the wrongdoing of
Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are
they not Jerusalem?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> So I will make Samaria into a field and the
plantings of a vine-garden: I will send its stones falling down into the
valley, uncovering its bases.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And all her pictured images will be
hammered into bits, and all the payments for her loose ways will be
burned with fire, and all the images of her gods I will make waste: for
with the price of a loose woman she got them together, and as the price
of a loose woman will they be given back.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For this I will be full of sorrow and give
cries of grief; I will go uncovered and unclothed: I will give cries of
grief like the jackals and will be in sorrow like the ostriches.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For her wounds may not be made well: for it
has come even to Judah, stretching up to the doorway of my people, even
to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Give no word of it in Gath, let there be
no weeping at all: at Beth-le-aphrah be rolling in the dust.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Be uncovered and go away, you who are
living in Shaphir: the one living in Zaanan has not come out of her
town; Beth-ezel is taken away from its base, even from its
resting-place.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For the one living in Maroth is waiting
for good: for evil has come down from the Lord to the doorways of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Let the war-carriage be yoked to the
quick-running horse, you who are living in Lachish: she was the first
cause of sin to the daughter of Zion; for the wrongdoings of Israel were
seen in you.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> For this cause give a parting offering to
Moresheth-gath: the daughter of Achzib will be a deceit to the king of
Israel.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Even now will the taker of your heritage
come to you, you who are living in Mareshah: the glory of Israel will
come to destruction for ever.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Let your head be uncovered and your hair
cut off in sorrow for the children of your delight: let the hair be
pulled from your head like an eagle's; for they have been taken away
from you as prisoners.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> A curse on the designers of evil, working
on their beds! in the morning light they do it, because it is in their
power.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> They have a desire for fields and take them
by force; and for houses and take them away: they are cruel to a man and
his family, even to a man and his heritage.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For this cause the Lord has said, See,
against this family I am purposing an evil from which you will not be
able to take your necks away, and you will be weighted down by it; for
it is an evil time.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> In that day this saying will be said about
you, and this song of grief will be made: The heritage of my people is
measured out, and there is no one to give it back; those who have made
us prisoners have taken our fields from us, and complete destruction has
come to us.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For this cause you will have no one to make
the decision by the measuring line in the meeting of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Let not words like these be dropped, they
say: Shame and the curse will not come to the family of Jacob!

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Is the Lord quickly made angry? are these
his doings? do not his words do good to his people Israel?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> As for you, you have become haters of those
who were at peace with you: you take the clothing of those who go by
without fear, and make them prisoners of war.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The women of my people you have been
driving away from their dearly loved children; from their young ones you
are taking my glory for ever.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Up! and go; for this is not your rest:
because it has been made unclean, the destruction ordered will come on
you.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> If a man came with a false spirit of
deceit, saying, I will be a prophet to you of wine and strong drink: he
would be the sort of prophet for this people.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I will certainly make all of you, O
Jacob, come together; I will get together the rest of Israel; I will put
them together like the sheep in their circle: like a flock in their
green field; they will be full of the noise of men.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The opener of the way will go up before
them: forcing their way out they will go on to the doorway and out
through it: their king will go on before them, and the Lord at their
head.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And I said, Give ear, now, you heads of
Jacob and rulers of the people of Israel: is it not for you to have
knowledge of what is right?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> You who are haters of good and lovers of
evil, pulling off their skin from them and their flesh from their bones;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Like meat they take the flesh of my people
for their food, skinning them and crushing their bones, yes, cutting
them up as if for the pot, like flesh inside the cooking-pot.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then they will be crying to the Lord for
help, but he will not give them an answer: yes, he will keep his face
veiled from them at that time, because their acts have been evil.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> This is what the Lord has said about the
prophets by whom my people have been turned from the right way; who,
biting with their teeth, say, Peace; and if anyone puts nothing in their
mouths they make ready for war against him.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For this cause it will be night for you,
without a vision; and it will be dark for you, without knowledge of the
future; the sun will go down over the prophets, and the day will be
black over them.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the seers will be shamed, and the
readers of the future will be at a loss, all of them covering their
lips; for there is no answer from God.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But I truly am full of the spirit of the
Lord, with power of judging and with strength to make clear to Jacob his
wrongdoing and to Israel his sin.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Then give ear to this, you heads of the
children of Jacob, you rulers of the children of Israel, hating what is
right, twisting what is straight.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> They are building up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with evil-doing.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Its heads take rewards for judging, and
the priests take payment for teaching, and the prophets get silver for
reading the future: but still, supporting themselves on the Lord, they
say, Is not the Lord among us? no evil will overtake us.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For this reason, Zion will be ploughed
like a field because of you, and Jerusalem will become a mass of broken
walls, and the mountain of the house like a high place in the woods.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But in the last days it will come about
that the mountain of the Lord's house will be placed on the top of the
mountains, and be lifted up over the hills; and peoples will be flowing
to it.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And a number of nations will go and say,
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of
the God of Jacob; and he will give us knowledge of his ways and we will
be guided by his word: for from Zion the law will go out, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he will be judge between great peoples,
and strong nations far away will be ruled by his decisions; their swords
will be hammered into plough-blades and their spears into vine-knives:
nations will no longer be lifting up their swords against one another,
and knowledge of war will have gone for ever.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But every man will be seated under his vine
and under his fig-tree, and no one will be a cause of fear to them: for
the mouth of the Lord of armies has said it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For all the peoples will be walking, every
one in the name of his god, and we will be walking in the name of the
Lord our God for ever and ever.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In that day, says the Lord, I will get
together her who goes with uncertain steps, I will get together her who
has been sent away, and her on whom I have sent evil;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I will make her whose steps were
uncertain a small band, and her who was feeble a strong nation: and the
Lord will be their King in Mount Zion from now and for ever.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And you, O tower of the flock, Ophel of the
daughter of Zion, to you it will come, even the earlier authority, the
kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now why are you crying so loudly? is there
no king in you? has destruction come on your wise helper? so that pains
have taken you like the pains of a woman in childbirth:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Be in pain, make sounds of grief, O
daughter of Zion, like a woman in childbirth: for now you will go out of
the town, living in the open country, and will come even to Babylon;
there you will have salvation; there the Lord will make you free from
the hands of your haters.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And now a number of nations have come
together against you, and they say, Let her be made unclean and let our
eyes see the fate of Zion.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But they have no knowledge of the
thoughts of the Lord, their minds are not able to see his purpose: for
he has got them together like stems of grain to the crushing-floor.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Up! and let the grain be crushed, O
daughter of Zion, for I will make your horn iron and your feet brass,
and a number of peoples will be broken by you, and you will give up
their increase to the Lord and their wealth to the Lord of all the
earth.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now you will give yourselves deep wounds
for grief; they will put up a wall round us: they will give the judge of
Israel a blow on the face with a rod.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And you, Beth-lehem Ephrathah, the least
among the families of Judah, out of you one will come to me who is to be
ruler in Israel; whose going out has been purposed from time past, from
the eternal days.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For this cause he will give them up till
the time when she who is with child has given birth: then the rest of
his brothers will come back to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And he will take his place and give food to
his flock in the strength of the Lord, in the glory of the name of the
Lord his God; and their resting-place will be safe: for now he will be
great to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And this will be our peace: when the
Assyrian comes into our country and his feet are in our land, then we
will put up against him seven keepers of the flocks and eight chiefs
among men.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And they will make waste the land of
Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod with the edge of the
sword: he will give us salvation from the Assyrian when he comes into
our country, when his feet come inside the limit of our land.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And the rest of Jacob will be among the
mass of peoples like dew from the Lord, like showers on the grass, which
may not be kept back by man, or be waiting for the sons of men.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And the rest of Jacob will be among the
nations, in the middle of the mass of peoples, like a lion among the
beasts of the woods, like a young lion among the flocks of sheep: if he
goes through, they will be crushed under foot and pulled to bits, and
there will be no saviour.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Your hand is lifted up against those who
are against you, and all your haters will be cut off.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And it will come about in that day, says
the Lord, that I will take away your horses from you, and will give your
war-carriages to destruction:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> I will have the towns of your land cut
off and all your strong places pulled down:

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> I will put an end to your use of secret
arts, and you will have no more readers of signs:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And I will have your images and your
pillars cut off from you; and you will no longer give worship to the
work of your hands.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I will have your Asherahs pulled up from
among you: and I will send destruction on your images.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And my punishment will be effected on the
nations with such burning wrath as they have not had word of.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Give ear now to the words of the Lord: Up!
put forward your cause before the mountains, let your voice be sounding
among the hills.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Give ear, O you mountains, to the Lord's
cause, and take note, you bases of the earth: for the Lord has a cause
against his people, and he will take it up with Israel.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> O my people, what have I done to you? how
have I been a weariness to you? give answer against me.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For I took you up out of the land of Egypt
and made you free from the prison-house; I sent before you Moses, Aaron,
and Miriam.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> O my people, keep in mind now what was
designed by Balak, king of Moab, and the answer which Balaam, son of
Beor, gave him; the events, from Shittim to Gilgal, so that you may be
certain of the upright acts of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> With what am I to come before the Lord and
go with bent head before the high God? am I to come before him with
burned offerings, with young oxen a year old?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of
sheep or with ten thousand rivers of oil? am I to give my first child
for my wrongdoing, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> He has made clear to you, O man, what is
good; and what is desired from you by the Lord; only doing what is
right, and loving mercy, and walking without pride before your God.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> The voice of the Lord is crying out to the
town: Give ear, you tribes and the meeting of the town.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Am I to let the stores of the evil-doer
go out of my memory, and the short measure, which is cursed?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Is it possible for me to let wrong scales
and the bag of false weights go without punishment?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For its men of wealth are cruel, and its
people have said what is not true, and their tongue is false in their
mouth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> So I have made a start with your
punishment; I have made you waste because of your sins.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> You will have food, but not enough; your
shame will be ever with you: you will get your goods moved, but you will
not take them away safely; and what you do take away I will give to the
sword.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> You will put in seed, but you will not
get in the grain; you will be crushing olives, but your bodies will not
be rubbed with the oil; and you will get in the grapes, but you will
have no wine.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For you have kept the laws of Omri and
all the works of the family of Ahab, and you have been guided by their
designs: so that I might make you a cause of wonder and your people a
cause of hisses; and the shame of my people will be on you.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Sorrow is mine! for I am as when they have
got in the summer fruits, like the last of the grapes: there is nothing
for food, not even an early fig for my desire.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The good man is gone from the earth, there
is no one upright among men: they are all waiting secretly for blood,
every man is going after his brother with a net.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Their hands are made ready to do evil; the
ruler makes requests for money, and the judge is looking for a reward;
and the great man gives decisions at his pleasure, and the right is
twisted.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The best of them is like a waste plant, and
their upright ones are like a wall of thorns. Sorrow! the day of their
fate has come; now will trouble come on them.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Put no faith in a friend, do not let your
hope be placed in a relation: keep watch on the doors of your mouth
against her who is resting on your breast.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For the son puts shame on his father, the
daughter goes against her mother and the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law; and a man's haters are those of his family.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But as for me, I am looking to the Lord; I
am waiting for the God of my salvation: the ears of my God will be open
to me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Do not be glad because of my sorrow, O my
hater: after my fall I will be lifted up; when I am seated in the dark,
the Lord will be a light to me.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I will undergo the wrath of the Lord,
because of my sin against him; till he takes up my cause and does what
is right for me: when he makes me come out into the light, I will see
his righteousness;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And my hater will see it and be covered
with shame; she who said to me, Where is the Lord your God? my eyes will
see their desire effected on her, now she will be crushed under foot
like the dust of the streets.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> A day for building your walls! in that
day will your limits be stretched far and wide.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> In that day they will come to you from
Assyria and the towns of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the River, and
from sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> But the land will become a waste because
of its people, as the fruit of their works.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Keep your people safe with your rod, the
flock of your heritage, living by themselves in the woods in the middle
of Carmel: let them get their food in Bashan and Gilead as in the past.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> As in the days when you came out from the
land of Egypt, let us see things of wonder.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> The nations will see and be shamed
because of all their strength; they will put their hands on their
mouths, their ears will be stopped.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> They will take dust as their food like a
snake, like the things which go flat on the earth; they will come
shaking with fear out of their secret places: they will come with fear
to the Lord our God, full of fear because of you.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Who is a God like you, offering
forgiveness for evil-doing and overlooking the sins of the rest of his
heritage? he does not keep his wrath for ever, because his delight is in
mercy.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He will again have pity on us; he will
put our sins under his feet: and you will send all our sins down into
the heart of the sea.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> You will make clear your good faith to
Jacob and your mercy to Abraham, as you gave your oath to our fathers
from times long past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum](nah.md)
