[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mic)  [Next](hab) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Nahum

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word about Nineveh. The book of the
vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The Lord is a God who takes care of his
honour and gives punishment for wrong; the Lord gives punishment and is
angry; the Lord sends punishment on those who are against him, being
angry with his haters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The Lord is slow to get angry and great in
power, and will not let the sinner go without punishment: the way of the
Lord is in the wind and the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his
feet.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> He says sharp words to the sea and makes it
dry, drying up all the rivers: Bashan is feeble, and Carmel, and the
flower of Lebanon is without strength.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The mountains are shaking because of him,
and the hills flowing away; the earth is falling to bits before him, the
world and all who are in it.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Who may keep his place before his wrath?
and who may undergo the heat of his passion? his wrath is let loose like
fire and the rocks are broken open by him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The Lord is good, a strong place in the day
of trouble; and he has knowledge of those who take him for their safe
cover.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But like water overflowing he will take
them away; he will put an end to those who come up against him, driving
his haters into the dark.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What are you designing against the Lord? he
will put an end to it: his haters will not come up again a second time.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For though they are like twisted thorns,
and are overcome as with drink, they will come to destruction like stems
of grass fully dry.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> One has gone out from you who is
designing evil against the Lord, whose purposes are of no value.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> This is what the Lord has said: The days
of my cause against you are ended; they are cut off and past. Though I
have sent trouble on you, you will no longer be troubled.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And now I will let his yoke be broken off
you, and your chains be parted.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The Lord has given an order about you,
that no more of your name are to be planted: from the house of your gods
I will have the pictured and metal images cut off; I will make your last
resting-place a place of shame; for you are completely evil.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> See on the mountains the feet of him who
comes with good news, giving word of peace! Keep your feasts, O Judah,
give effect to your oaths: for the good-for-nothing man will never again
go through you; he is completely cut off.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> A crusher has come up before your face:
keep a good look-out, let the way be watched, make yourself strong, let
your power be greatly increased.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For the Lord will make good the vine of
Jacob, as well as the vine of Israel: for the wasters have made them
waste and sent destruction on the branches of their vine.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The body-covers of his fighting men have
been made red, the men of war are clothed in bright red: the
war-carriages are like flames of fire in the day when he gets ready, the
horses are shaking.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The war-carriages are rushing through the
streets, pushing against one another in the wide ways, looking like
burning lights, running like thunder-flames.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> He takes the record of his great men: they
go falling on their way; they go quickly to the wall, the cover is made
ready.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The river doorways are forced open, and the
king's house is flowing away.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the queen is uncovered, she is taken
away and her servant-girls are weeping like the sound of doves,
hammering on their breasts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But Nineveh is like a pool of water whose
waters are flowing away; Keep your place, they say; but no one is
turning back.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Take silver, take gold; for there is no end
to the store; take for yourselves a weight of things to be desired.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Everything has been taken from her, all
is gone, she has nothing more: the heart is turned to water, the knees
are shaking, all are twisted in pain, and colour has gone from all
faces.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Where is the lions' hole, the place where
the young lions got their food, where the lion and the she-lion were
walking with their young, without cause for fear?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Food enough for his young and for his
she-lions was pulled down by the lion; his hole was full of flesh and
his resting-place stored with meat.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> See, I am against you, says the Lord of
armies, and I will have your war-carriages burned in the smoke, and your
young lions will be food for the sword: you will no longer get your food
by force on the earth, and the voice of your she-lions will be stopped
for ever.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> A curse is on the town of blood; it is full
of deceit and violent acts; and there is no end to the taking of life.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The noise of the whip, and the noise of
thundering wheels; horses rushing and war-carriages jumping,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Horsemen driving forward, and the shining
sword and the bright spear: and a great number of wounded, and masses of
dead bodies; they are falling over the bodies of the dead:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Because of all the false ways of the loose
woman, expert in attraction and wise in secret arts, who takes nations
in the net of her false ways, and families through her secret arts.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> See, I am against you, says the Lord of
armies, and I will have your skirts pulled over your face, and let the
nations see you unclothed, and the kingdoms your shame.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I will make you completely disgusting and
full of shame, and will put you up to be looked at by all.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And it will come about that all who see you
will go in flight from you and say, Nineveh is made waste: who will be
weeping for her? where am I to get comforters for her?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Are you better than No-amon, seated on the
Nile streams, with waters all round her; whose wall was the sea and her
earthwork the waters?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Ethiopia was her strength and Egyptians
without number; Put and Lubim were her helpers.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But even she has been taken away, she has
gone away as a prisoner: even her young children are smashed to bits at
the top of all the streets: the fate of her honoured men is put to the
decision of chance, and all her great men are put in chains.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And you will be overcome with wine, you
will become feeble; you will be looking for a safe place from those who
are fighting against you.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All your walled places will be like
fig-trees and your people like the first figs, falling at a shake into
the mouth which is open for them.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> See, the people who are in you are women;
the doorways of your land are wide open to your attackers: the locks of
your doors have been burned away in the fire.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Get water for the time when you are shut
in, make strong your towns: go into the potter's earth, stamping it down
with your feet, make strong the brickworks.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> There the fire will make you waste; you
will be cut off by the sword: make yourself as great in number as the
worms, as great in number as the locusts.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Let your traders be increased more than
the stars of heaven:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Your crowned ones are like the locusts,
and your scribes like the clouds of insects which take cover in the
walls on a cold day, but when the sun comes up they go in flight, and
are seen no longer in their place.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Sorrow! how are the keepers of your flock
sleeping, O king of Assyria! your strong men are at rest; your people
are wandering on the mountains, and there is no one to get them
together.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Your pain may not be made better; you are
wounded to death: all those hearing the news about you will be waving
their hands in joy over you: for who has not undergone the weight of
your evil-doing again and again?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk](hab)
