[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lev)  [Next](deu) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Numbers

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses in the waste
land of Sinai, in the Tent of meeting, on the first day of the second
month, in the second year after they came out of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Take the full number of the children of
Israel, by their families, and by their fathers' houses, every male by
name;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> All those of twenty years old and over, who
are able to go to war in Israel, are to be numbered by you and Aaron.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And to give you help, take one man from
every tribe, the head of his father's house.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> These are the names of those who are to be
your helpers: from Reuben, Elizur, the son of Shedeur;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From Simeon, Shelumiel, the son of
Zurishaddai;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> From Judah, Nahshon, the son of Amminadab;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> From Issachar, Nethanel, the son of Zuar;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> From Zebulun, Eliab, the son of Helon;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Of the children of Joseph: from Ephraim,
Elishama, the son of Ammihud; from Manasseh, Gamaliel, the son of
Pedahzur,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> From Benjamin, Abidan, the son of
Gideoni;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> From Dan, Ahiezer, the son of
Ammi-shaddai;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> From Asher, Pagiel, the son of Ochran;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> From Gad, Eliasaph, the son of Reuel;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> From Naphtali, Ahira, the son of Enan.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These are the men named out of all the
people, chiefs of their fathers' houses, heads of the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Moses and Aaron took these men,
marked out by name;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And they got together all the people on
the first day of the second month; and everyone made clear his family
and his father's house, by the number of the names, from twenty years
old and over.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> As the Lord had given orders to Moses, so
they were numbered by him in the waste place of Sinai.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> The generations of the sons of Reuben,
the oldest son of Israel, were numbered by their families and their
fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over, who was able
to go to war;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Forty-six thousand, five hundred of the
tribe of Reuben were numbered.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> The generations of the sons of Simeon
were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over, who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Fifty-nine thousand, three hundred of the
tribe of Simeon were numbered.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> The generations of the sons of Gad were
numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Forty-five thousand, six hundred and
fifty of the tribe of Gad were numbered.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> The generations of the sons of Judah were
numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Seventy-four thousand, six hundred of the
tribe of Judah were numbered.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> The generations of the sons of Issachar
were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Fifty-four thousand, four hundred of the
tribe of Issachar were numbered.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> The generations of the sons of Zebulun
were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Fifty-seven thousand, four hundred of the
tribe of Zebulun were numbered.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> The generations of the sons of Joseph
were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Forty thousand, five hundred of the tribe
of Ephraim were numbered.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> The generations of the sons of Manasseh
were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Thirty-two thousand, two hundred of the
tribe of Manasseh were numbered.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> The generations of the sons of Benjamin
were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Thirty-five thousand, four hundred of the
tribe of Benjamin were numbered.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> The generations of the sons of Dan were
numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> Sixty-two thousand, seven hundred of the
tribe of Dan were numbered.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> The generations of the sons of Asher were
numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Forty-one thousand, five hundred of the
tribe of Asher were numbered.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> The generations of the sons of Naphtali
were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of
twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> Fifty-three thousand, four hundred of the
tribe of Naphtali were numbered.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> These are they who were numbered by Moses
and Aaron and by the twelve chiefs of Israel, one from every tribe.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> So all those who were numbered of the
children of Israel, by their families, all those of twenty years old and
over who were able to go to war,

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> Were six hundred and three thousand, five
hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> But the Levites, of the tribe of their
fathers, were not numbered among them.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> For the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Only the tribe of Levi is not to be
numbered among the children of Israel,

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> But to them you are to give the care of
the Tent of meeting with its vessels and everything in it: they are to
take up the Tent, and be responsible for everything to do with it, and
put up their tents round it.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> And when the Tent of meeting goes
forward, the Levites are to take it down; and when it is to be put up,
they are to do it: any strange person who comes near it is to be put to
death.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> The children of Israel are to put up
their tents, every man in his tent-circle round his flag.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> But the tents of the Levites are to be
round the Tent of meeting, so that wrath may not come on the children of
Israel: the Tent of meeting is to be in the care of the Levites.

<span id="an_1:54">1:54</span> So the children of Israel did as the Lord
had given orders to Moses.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The children of Israel are to put up their
tents in the order of their families, by the flags of their fathers'
houses, facing the Tent of meeting on every side.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Those whose tents are on the east side,
looking to the dawn, will be round the flag of the children of Judah,
with Nahshon, the son of Amminadab, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The number of his army was seventy-four
thousand, six hundred.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And nearest to him will be the tribe of
Issachar, with Nethanel, the son of Zuar, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The number of his army was fifty-four
thousand, four hundred.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> After him, the tribe of Zebulun, with
Eliab, the son of Helon, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The number of his army was fifty-seven
thousand, four hundred.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The number of all the armies of Judah was a
hundred and eighty-six thousand, four hundred. They go forward first.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> On the south side is the flag of the
children of Reuben, in the order of their armies, with Elizur, the son
of Shedeur, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The number of his army was forty-six
thousand, five hundred.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And nearest to him, the tribe of Simeon,
with Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The number of his army was fifty-nine
thousand, three hundred.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then the tribe of Gad, with Eliasaph, son
of Reuel, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> The number of his army was forty-five
thousand, six hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> The number of all the armies of Reuben
together came to a hundred and fifty-one thousand, four hundred and
fifty. They go forward second.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then the Tent of meeting is to go
forward, with the tents of the Levites, in the middle of the armies; in
the same order as their tents are placed, they are to go forward, every
man under his flag.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> On the west side will be the flag of the
children of Ephraim, with Elishama, the son of Ammihud, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> The number of his army was forty
thousand, five hundred.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And by him the tribe of Manasseh with
Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> The number of his army was thirty-two
thousand, two hundred.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Then the tribe of Benjamin, with Abidan,
the son of Gideoni, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> The number of his army was thirty-five
thousand, four hundred.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> The number of all the armies of Ephraim
was a hundred and eight thousand, one hundred. They go forward third.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> On the north side will be the flag of the
children of Dan, with Ahiezer, the son of Ammishaddai, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The number of his army was sixty-two
thousand, seven hundred.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Nearest to him will be the tribe of
Asher, with Pagiel, the son of Ochran, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> The number of his army was forty-one
thousand, five hundred;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Then the tribe of Naphtali, with Ahira,
the son of Enan, as their chief.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> The number of his army was fifty-three
thousand, four hundred.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The number of all the armies in the tents
of Dan was a hundred and fifty-seven thousand, six hundred. They will go
forward last, by their flags.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> These are all who were numbered of the
children of Israel, in the order of their fathers' families: all the
armies in their tents together came to six hundred and three thousand,
five hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> But the Levites were not numbered among
the children of Israel, as the Lord said to Moses.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> So the children of Israel did as the Lord
said to Moses, so they put up their tents by their flags, and they went
forward in the same order, by their families, and by their fathers'
houses.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now these are the generations of Aaron and
Moses, in the day when the word of the Lord came to Moses on Mount
Sinai.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> These are the names of the sons of Aaron:
Nadab the oldest, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> These are the names of the sons of Aaron,
the priests, on whom the holy oil was put, who were marked out as
priests.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Nadab and Abihu were put to death
before the Lord when they made an offering of strange fire before the
Lord, in the waste land of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar
and Ithamar did the work of priests before Aaron their father.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Make the tribe of Levi come near, and put
them before Aaron the priest, to be his helpers,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> In order that they may be responsible to
him and to all Israel for the care of the Tent of meeting, and to do the
work of the House;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And they will have the care of all the
vessels of the Tent of meeting, and will do for the children of Israel
all the necessary work of the House.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Give the Levites to Aaron and his sons; so
that they may be his without question from among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And give orders that Aaron and his sons
are to keep their place as priests; any strange person who comes near is
to be put to death.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> See, I have taken the Levites out of the
children of Israel to be mine in place of the first sons of the children
of Israel;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For all the first sons are mine; on the
day when I put to death all the first sons in the land of Egypt, I took
for myself every first male birth of man and beast. They are mine; I am
the Lord.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the Lord said to Moses in the waste
land of Sinai,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Let all the children of Levi be numbered
by their families and their fathers' houses; let every male of a month
old and over be numbered.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> So Moses did as the Lord said, numbering
them as he had been ordered.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> These were the sons of Levi by name:
Gershon and Kohath and Merari.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Gershon, by their families: Libni and Shimei.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And the sons of Kohath, by their
families: Amram and Izhar and Hebron and Uzziel.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And the sons of Merari by their families:
Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites in the order of
their fathers' houses.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> From Gershon come the Libnites and the
Shimeites; these are the families of the Gershonites.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Those who were numbered of them, the
males from one month old and over, were seven thousand, five hundred.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> The tents of the Gershonites are to be
placed at the back of the House, to the west.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> The chief of the Gershonites is Eliasaph,
the son of Lael.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> In the Tent of meeting, the Gershonites
are to have the care of the House, and the Tent with its cover, and the
veil for the door of the Tent of meeting,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And the hangings for the open space round
the House and the altar, and the curtain for its doorway, and all the
cords needed for its use.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> From Kohath come the Amramites and the
Izharites and the Hebronites and the Uzzielites; these are the families
of the Kohathites.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Those who were numbered of them, the
males from one month old and over, were eight thousand, six hundred, who
were responsible for the care of the holy place.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> The tents of the Kohathites are to be
placed on the south side of the House.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Their chief is Elizaphan, the son of
Uzziel.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> In their care are the ark, and the table,
and the lights, and the altars, and all the vessels used in the holy
place, and the veil, and all they are used for.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,
will be head over all the Levites and overseer of those responsible for
the care of the holy place.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> From Merari come the Mahlites and the
Mushites; these are the families of Merari.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Those who were numbered of them, the
males of a month old and over, were six thousand, two hundred.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The chief of the families of Merari was
Zuriel, the son of Abihail: their tents are to be placed on the north
side of the House.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> And in their care are to be all the
boards of the Tent, with their rods and pillars and bases, and all the
instruments, and all they are used for,

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> And the pillars of the open space round
it, with their bases and nails and cords.

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> And those whose tents are to be placed on
the east side of the House in front of the Tent of meeting, looking to
the dawn, are Moses and Aaron and his sons, who will do the work of the
holy place for the children of Israel; and any strange person who comes
near will be put to death.

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> All the Levites numbered by Moses and
Aaron at the order of the Lord, all the males of one month old and over
numbered in the order of their families, were twenty-two thousand.

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Let all the
first male children be numbered, and take the number of their names.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> And give to me the Levites (I am the
Lord) in place of the first sons of the children of Israel; and the
cattle of the Levites in place of the first births among the cattle of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> So Moses had all the first sons among the
children of Israel numbered, as the Lord said to him.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> Every first son from a month old and over
was numbered by name, and the number came to twenty-two thousand, two
hundred and seventy-three.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> Take the Levites in place of all the
first sons of the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites in
place of their cattle; the Levites are to be mine; I am the Lord.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> And the price you have to give for the
two hundred and seventy-three first sons of the children of Israel which
are in addition to the number of the Levites,

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> Will be five shekels for every one, by
the scale of the holy place (the shekel is twenty gerahs);

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> And this money, the price of those over
the number of the Levites, is to be given to Aaron and his sons.

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> So Moses took the money, the price of
those whose place had not been taken by the Levites;

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> From the first sons of Israel he took it,
a thousand, three hundred and sixty-five shekels, by the scale of the
holy place;

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> And he gave the money to Aaron and his
sons, as the Lord had said.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Let the sons of Kohath, from among the sons
of Levi, be numbered by their families, in the order of their fathers'
houses;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> All those from thirty to fifty years old
who are able to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And this is to be the work of the sons of
Kohath in connection with the most holy things.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> When all the people go forward, Aaron is to
go in with his sons, and take down the veil of the curtain, covering the
ark of witness with it;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And putting over it the leather cover and
over that a blue cloth; and putting its rods in place.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And on the table of the holy bread they are
to put a blue cloth, and on it all the vessels, the spoons and the
basins and the cups; and the holy bread with them;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And over them they are to put a red cloth,
covering it with a leather cover, and putting its rods in their places.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And they are to take a blue cloth, covering
with it the light-support with its lights and its instruments and its
trays and all the oil vessels which are used for it:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> All these they are to put in a leather
cover, and put it on the frame.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> On the gold altar they are to put a blue
cloth, covering it with a leather cover; and they are to put its rods in
their places.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> All the vessels which are used in the
holy place they are to put in a blue cloth, covering them with a leather
cover, and put them on the frame.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And they are to take away the burned
waste from the altar, and put a purple cloth on it;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Placing on the cloth all its vessels, the
fire-baskets, the meat-hooks, the spades, and the basins; all the
vessels of the altar; they are to put a leather cover over all these,
and put its rods in their places.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And after the holy place and all its
vessels have been covered up by Aaron and his sons, when the tents of
the people go forward, the sons of Kohath are to come and take it up;
but the holy things may not be touched by them for fear of death.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,
is to be responsible for the oil for the light, and the sweet perfumes
for burning, and the regular meal offering, and the holy oil; the House
and the holy place and everything in it will be in his care.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Do not let the family of the Kohathites
be cut off from among the Levites;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But do this to them, so that life and not
death may be theirs when they come near the most holy things; let Aaron
and his sons go in and give to every one his work and that which he is
to take up;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But they themselves are not to go in to
see the holy place, even for a minute, for fear of death.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Let the sons of Gershon be numbered by
families, in the order of their fathers' houses;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> All those from thirty to fifty years old
who are able to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> This is to be the work of the
Gershonites, the things they are to do and take up.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> They are to take up the curtains of the
House, and the Tent of meeting with its cover and the leather cover over
it, and the hangings for the door of the Tent of meeting;

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And the hangings for the open space round
the House and the altar, and the curtain for its doorway, with the cords
and all the things used for them; whatever is necessary for these, they
are to do.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> From the mouth of Aaron and his sons the
Gershonites will have word about all the things they are to do and take
up; you are to give them their orders.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> This is the work of the family of the
Gershonites in the Tent of meeting, and they will be under the direction
of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> The sons of Merari are to be numbered by
families, in the order of their fathers' houses;

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> Every one from thirty to fifty years old
who is able to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And this is their part in the work of the
Tent of meeting: the transport of the boards and the rods of the Tent,
with the pillars and their bases;

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And the pillars of the open space outside
it, with their bases and their nails and cords and all the instruments
used, and everything which has to be done there; all the instruments for
which they are responsible are to be numbered by name.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> This is the work which the sons of Merari
are to do in connection with the Tent of meeting, under the direction of
Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> So Moses and Aaron and the chiefs of the
people took in hand the numbering of the sons of the Kohathites, by
families, in the order of their fathers' houses;

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Numbering all those from thirty to fifty
years old who were able to do the work in the Tent of meeting;

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And the number of all these was two
thousand, seven hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> This is the number of those of the
Kohathites who did the work in the Tent of meeting, as they were
numbered by Moses and Aaron at the order of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And those of the sons of Gershon who were
numbered by families,

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> All those from thirty to fifty years old
who were able to do the work in the Tent of meeting,

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> Who were numbered by families in the
order of their fathers' houses, were two thousand, six hundred and
thirty.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> This is the number of the sons of Gershon
who did the work in the Tent of meeting, as they were numbered by Moses
and Aaron at the order of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And those of the sons of Merari who were
numbered by families, in the order of their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> All those from thirty to fifty years old
who did the work in the Tent of meeting,

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> Who were numbered by families, were three
thousand, two hundred.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> This is the number of the sons of Merari,
numbered by Moses and Aaron at the order of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> And all the Levites who were numbered by
Moses and Aaron and the chiefs of the people, by families, in the order
of their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> Those from thirty to fifty years old who
were able to do the work of the Tent of meeting and of its transport,

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> Came to eight thousand, five hundred and
eighty.

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> At the order of the Lord they were
numbered by Moses, every one in relation to his work and to his part in
the transport; so they were numbered by Moses at the order of the Lord.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Give orders to the children of Israel to
put outside the tent-circle every leper, and anyone who has any sort of
flow from his body, and anyone who is unclean from the touch of the
dead;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Male or female they are to be put outside
the tent-circle, so that they may not make unclean my resting-place
among them.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> So the children of Israel did as the Lord
had said to Moses, and put them outside the tent-circle.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Say to the children of Israel, If a man or
a woman does any of the sins of men, going against the word of the Lord,
and is in the wrong;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Let them say openly what they have done;
and make payment for the wrong done, with the addition of a fifth part,
and give it to him to whom the wrong was done.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But if the man has no relation to whom the
payment may be made, then the payment for sin made to the Lord will be
the priest's, in addition to the sheep offered to take away his sin.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And every offering lifted up of all the
holy things which the children of Israel give to the priest, will be
his.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And every man's holy things will be his:
whatever a man gives to the priest will be his.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Say to the children of Israel, If any
man's wife does wrong, sinning against him

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> By taking as her lover another man, and
keeps it secret so that her husband has no knowledge of it, and there is
no witness against her, and she is not taken in the act;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> If the spirit of doubt comes into her
husband's heart, and he has doubts of his wife, with good cause; or if
he has doubts of her without cause:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Then let him take her to the priest,
offering for her the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal, without oil
or perfume; for it is a meal offering of a bitter spirit, a meal
offering keeping wrongdoing in mind.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And the priest will make her come near
and put her before the Lord;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And the priest will take holy water in a
pot and put in it dust from the floor of the House;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And he will make the woman come before
the Lord with her hair loose, and will put the meal offering, the
offering of a bitter spirit, in her hands; and the priest will take in
his hand the bitter water causing the curse;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And he will make her take an oath, and
say to her, If no man has been your lover and you have not been with
another in place of your husband, you are free from this bitter water
causing the curse;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> But if you have been with another in
place of your husband and have made yourself unclean with a lover:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Then the priest will put the oath of the
curse on the woman, and say to her, May the Lord make you a curse and an
oath among your people, sending on you wasting of the legs and disease
of the stomach;

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And this water of the curse will go into
your body, causing disease of your stomach and wasting of your legs: and
the woman will say, So be it.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And the priest will put these curses in a
book, washing out the writing with the bitter water;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And he will give to the woman the bitter
water for drink; and the bitter water causing the curse will go into
her.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And the priest will take from her hand
the meal offering of doubt, waving it before the Lord, and will take it
to the altar;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he will take some of it in his hand,
burning it on the altar as a sign, and then he will give the woman the
bitter water.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And it will be that if the woman has
become unclean, sinning against her husband, when she has taken the
bitter water it will go into her body, causing disease of the stomach
and wasting of the legs, and she will be a curse among her people.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> But if she is clean she will be free and
will have offspring.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> This is the law for testing a wife who
goes with another in place of her husband and becomes unclean;

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Or for a husband who, in a bitter spirit,
has doubts in his heart about his wife; let him take her to the priest,
who will put in force this law.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Then the man will be free from all wrong,
and the woman's sin will be on her.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Say to the children of Israel, If a man or
a woman takes an oath to keep himself separate and give himself to the
Lord;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> He is to keep himself from wine and strong
drink, and take no mixed wine or strong drink or any drink made from
grapes, or any grapes, green or dry.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> All the time he is separate he may take
nothing made from the grape-vine, from its seeds to its skin.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> All the time he is under his oath let no
blade come near his head; till the days while he is separate are ended
he is holy and his hair may not be cut.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> All the time he is separate he may not come
near any dead body.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> He may not make himself unclean for his
father or his mother, his sister or his brother, if death comes to them;
because he is under an oath to keep himself separate for God.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> All the time he is separate he is holy to
the Lord.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> If death comes suddenly to a man at his
side, so that he becomes unclean, let his hair be cut off on the day
when he is made clean, on the seventh day.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And on the eighth day let him take to the
priest, at the door of the Tent of meeting, two doves or two young
pigeons;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the priest will give one for a
sin-offering and the other for a burned offering to take away the sin
which came on him on account of the dead, and he will make his head holy
that same day.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And he will give to the Lord his days of
being separate, offering a he-lamb of the first year as an offering for
error: but the earlier days will be a loss, because he became unclean.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And this is the law for him who is
separate, when the necessary days are ended: he is to come to the door
of the Tent of meeting,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And make his offering to the Lord; one
he-lamb of the first year, without a mark, for a burned offering, and
one female lamb of the first year, without a mark, for a sin-offering,
and one male sheep, without a mark, for peace-offerings,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes
of the best meal mixed with oil, and thin unleavened cakes covered with
oil, with their meal offering and drink offerings.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the priest will take them before the
Lord, and make his sin-offering and his burned offering;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Giving the sheep of the peace-offerings,
with the basket of unleavened bread; and at the same time, the priest
will make his meal offering and his drink offering.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Then let his long hair, the sign of his
oath, be cut off at the door of the Tent of meeting, and let him put it
on the fire on which the peace-offerings are burning.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the priest will take the cooked leg
of the sheep and one unleavened cake and one thin cake out of the
basket, and put them on the hands of the separate one after his hair has
been cut,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Waving them for a wave offering before
the Lord; this is holy for the priest, together with the waved breast
and the leg which is lifted up; after that, the man may take wine.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> This is the law for him who takes an oath
to keep himself separate, and for his offering to the Lord on that
account, in addition to what he may be able to get; this is the law of
his oath, which he will have to keep.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Say to Aaron and his sons, These are the
words of blessing which are to be used by you in blessing the children
of Israel; say to them,

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> May the Lord send his blessing on you and
keep you:

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> May the light of the Lord's face be
shining on you in grace:

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> May the Lord's approval be resting on you
and may he give you peace.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> So they will put my name on the children
of Israel, and I will give them my blessing.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And when Moses had put up the House
completely, and had put oil on it and made it holy, with all the things
in it, and had made the altar and all its vessels holy with oil;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Then the chiefs of Israel, the heads of
their fathers' houses, made offerings; these were the chiefs of the
tribes, who were over those who were numbered.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And they came with their offerings before
the Lord, six covered carts and twelve oxen; a cart for every two of the
chiefs, and for every one an ox.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Take the things from them, to be used for
the work of the Tent of meeting; and give them to the Levites, to every
man what is needed for his work.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> So Moses took the carts and the oxen and
gave them to the Levites.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Two carts and four oxen he gave to the sons
of Gershon for their work;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And four carts and eight oxen he gave to
the sons of Merari for their work, under the direction of Ithamar, the
son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> But to the sons of Kohath he gave nothing;
because they had the care of the holy place, taking it about on their
backs.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the chiefs gave an offering for the
altar on the day when the holy oil was put on it; they made their
offering before the altar.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Let every
chief on his day give his offering to make the altar holy.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And he who made his offering on the first
day was Nahshon, the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And his offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice for burning;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Nahshon, the son of Amminadab.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> On the second day Nethanel, the son of
Zuar, chief of Issachar, made his offering:

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He gave one silver plate, a hundred and
thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the
scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed
with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Nethanel, the son of Zuar.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> On the third day Eliab, the son of Helon,
chief of the children of Zebulun:

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Eliab, the son of Helon.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> On the fourth day Elizur, the son of
Shedeur, chief of the children of Reuben:

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Elizur, the son of Shedeur.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> On the fifth day Shelumiel, the son of
Zurishaddai, chief of the children of Simeon:

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> On the sixth day Eliasaph, the son of
Reuel, chief of the children of Gad:

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Eliasaph, the son of Reuel

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> On the seventh day Elishama, the son of
Ammihud, chief of the children of Ephraim:

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Elishama, the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> On the eighth day Gamaliel, the son of
Pedahzur, chief of the children of Manasseh:

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> On the ninth day Abidan, the son of
Gideoni, chief of the children of Benjamin:

<span id="an_7:61">7:61</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:62">7:62</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:63">7:63</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:64">7:64</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:65">7:65</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Abidan, the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_7:66">7:66</span> On the tenth day Ahiezer; the son of
Ammishaddai, chief of the children of Dan:

<span id="an_7:67">7:67</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:68">7:68</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:69">7:69</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:70">7:70</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:71">7:71</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Ahiezer, the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="an_7:72">7:72</span> On the eleventh day Pagiel, the son of
Ochran, chief of the children of Asher:

<span id="an_7:73">7:73</span> His offering was one silver plate; a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:74">7:74</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:75">7:75</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:76">7:76</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:77">7:77</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Pagiel, the son of Ochran.

<span id="an_7:78">7:78</span> On the twelfth day Ahira, the son of
Enan, chief of the children of Naphtali:

<span id="an_7:79">7:79</span> His offering was one silver plate, a
hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy
shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the
best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:80">7:80</span> One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of
spice;

<span id="an_7:81">7:81</span> One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb
of the first year, for a burned offering;

<span id="an_7:82">7:82</span> One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:83">7:83</span> And for the peace-offerings, two oxen,
five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of Ahira, the son of Enan.

<span id="an_7:84">7:84</span> These were the offerings given for the
altar by the chiefs of Israel, when the holy oil was put on it: twelve
silver plates, twelve silver basins, twelve gold spoons;

<span id="an_7:85">7:85</span> The weight of every silver plate was a
hundred and thirty shekels, and of every basin seventy; the weight of
all the silver of the vessels was two thousand and four hundred shekels,
by the scale of the holy place;

<span id="an_7:86">7:86</span> The weight of the twelve gold spoons of
spice for burning was ten shekels for every one, by the scale of the
holy place; all the gold of the spoons was a hundred and twenty shekels;

<span id="an_7:87">7:87</span> All the oxen, for the burned offering
were twelve, the male sheep twelve, the he-lambs of the first year
twelve, with their meal offering; and the males of the goats for
sin-offering twelve;

<span id="an_7:88">7:88</span> And all the oxen for the peace-offerings,
twenty-four oxen, the male sheep sixty, and the he-goats sixty, the
he-lambs of the first year sixty. This was given for the altar after the
holy oil was put on it.

<span id="an_7:89">7:89</span> And when Moses went into the Tent of
meeting to have talk with him, then the Voice came to his ears from over
the cover which was on the ark of witness, from between the two winged
ones. And he had talk with him.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Say to Aaron, When you put the lights in
their places, the seven lights will give light in front of the support.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And Aaron did so; he put the lights in
their places so that they gave light in front of the support, as the
Lord gave orders to Moses.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> The support for the lights was of hammered
gold work, from its base to its flowers it was of hammered work; from
the design which the Lord had given to Moses, he made the support for
the lights.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Take the Levites out from among the
children of Israel and make them clean.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And this is how you are to make them clean:
let the holy water which takes away sin be put on them, and let the hair
all over their bodies be cut off with a sharp blade, and let their
clothing be washed and their bodies made clean.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then let them take a young ox and its meal
offering, crushed grain mixed with oil, and take another ox for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And make the Levites come forward in front
of the Tent of meeting, and let all the children of Israel come
together:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And you are to take the Levites before
the Lord: and the children of Israel are to put their hands on them:

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And Aaron is to give the Levites to the
Lord as a wave offering from the children of Israel, so that they may do
the Lord's work.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And the Levites are to put their hands on
the heads of the oxen, and one of the oxen is to be offered for a
sin-offering and the other for a burned offering to the Lord to take
away the sin of the Levites.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then the Levites are to be put before
Aaron and his sons, to be offered as a wave offering to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> So you are to make the Levites separate
from the children of Israel, and the Levites will be mine.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> After that, the Levites will go in to do
whatever has to be done in the Tent of meeting; you are to make them
clean and give them as a wave offering.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> For they have been given to me from among
the children of Israel; in place of every mother's first son, the first
to come to birth in Israel, I have taken them for myself.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For every mother's first son among the
children of Israel is mine, the first male birth of man or beast: on the
day when I sent death on all the first sons in the land of Egypt, I made
them mine.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And in place of the first sons among the
children of Israel, I have taken the Levites.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And I have given them to Aaron and to his
sons, from among the children of Israel, to undertake for them all the
work of the Tent of meeting, and to take away sin from the children of
Israel so that no evil may come on them when they come near the holy
place.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> All these things Moses and Aaron and the
children of Israel did to the Levites; as the Lord gave orders to Moses
about the Levites, so the children of Israel did.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the Levites were made clean from sin,
and their clothing was washed, and Aaron gave them for a wave offering
before the Lord; and Aaron took away their sin and made them clean.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And then the Levites went in to do their
work in the Tent of meeting before Aaron and his sons: all the orders
which the Lord had given Moses about the Levites were put into effect.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> This is the rule for the Levites: those
of twenty-five years old and over are to go in and do the work of the
Tent of meeting;

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> But after they are fifty years old, they
are to give up their work and do no more;

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> But be with their brothers in the Tent of
meeting, taking care of it but doing no work. This is what you are to do
in connection with the Levites and their work.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses, in the waste
land of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they had come
out of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Let the children of Israel keep the
Passover at its regular time.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> In the fourteenth day of this month, at
evening, you are to keep it at the regular time, and in the way ordered
in the law.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Moses gave orders to the children of
Israel to keep the Passover.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> So they kept the Passover in the first
month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at evening, in the waste land
of Sinai: as the Lord gave orders to Moses, so the children of Israel
did.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And there were certain men who were unclean
because of a dead body, so that they were not able to keep the Passover
on that day; and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And these men said to him, We have been
made unclean by the dead body of a man; why may we not make the offering
of the Lord at the regular time among the children of Israel?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Moses said to them, Do nothing till the
Lord gives me directions about you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Say to the children of Israel, If any one
of you or of your families is unclean because of a dead body, or is on a
journey far away, still he is to keep the Passover to the Lord:

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> In the second month, on the fourteenth
day, in the evening, they are to keep it, taking it with unleavened
bread and bitter-tasting plants;

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Nothing of it is to be kept till the
morning, and no bone of it is to be broken: they are to keep it by the
rules of the Passover.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But the man who, not being unclean or on
a journey, does not keep the Passover, will be cut off from his people:
because he did not make the offering of the Lord at the regular time,
his sin will be on him.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And if a man from another country is
among you and has a desire to keep the Passover to the Lord, let him do
as is ordered in the law of the Passover: there is to be the same rule
for the man from another nation and for him who had his birth in the
land.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And on the day when the House was put up,
the cloud came down on it, on the Tent of witness; and in the evening
there was a light like fire over the House till the morning.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And so it was at all times: it was
covered by the cloud, and by a light as of fire by night.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And whenever the cloud was taken up from
over the House, then the children of Israel went journeying on; and in
the place where the cloud came to rest, there the children of Israel put
up their tents.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> At the order of the Lord the children of
Israel went forward, and at the order of the Lord they put up their
tents: as long as the cloud was resting on the House, they did not go
away from that place.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> When the cloud was resting on the House
for a long time the children of Israel, waiting for the order of the
Lord, did not go on.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Sometimes the cloud was resting on the
House for two or three days; then, by the order of the Lord, they kept
their tents in that place, and when the Lord gave the order they went
on.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And sometimes the cloud was there only
from evening to morning; and when the cloud was taken up in the morning
they went on their journey again: or if it was resting there by day and
by night, whenever the cloud was taken up they went forward.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Or if the cloud came to rest on the House
for two days or a month or a year without moving, the children of Israel
went on waiting there and did not go on; but whenever it was taken up
they went forward on their journey.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> At the word of the Lord they put up their
tents, and at the word of the Lord they went forward on their journey:
they kept the orders of the Lord as he gave them by Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Make two silver horns of hammered work,
to be used for getting the people together and to give the sign for the
moving of the tents.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> When they are sounded, all the people are
to come together to you at the door of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> If only one of them is sounded, then the
chiefs, the heads of the thousands of Israel, are to come to you.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> When a loud note is sounded, the tents
placed on the east side are to go forward.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> At the sound of a second loud note, the
tents on the south side are to go forward: the loud note will be the
sign to go forward.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But when all the people are to come
together, the horn is to be sounded but not loudly.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The horns are to be sounded by the sons
of Aaron, the priests; this is to be a law for you for ever, from
generation to generation.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And if you go to war in your land against
any who do you wrong, then let the loud note of the horn be sounded; and
the Lord your God will keep you in mind and give you salvation from
those who are against you.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And on days of joy and on your regular
feasts and on the first day of every month, let the horns be sounded
over your burned offerings and your peace-offerings; and they will put
the Lord in mind of you: I am the Lord your God.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Now in the second year, on the
twentieth day of the second month, the cloud was taken up from over the
Tent of witness.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the children of Israel went on
their journey out of the waste land of Sinai; and the cloud came to rest
in the waste land of Paran.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> They went forward for the first time on
their journey as the Lord had given orders by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> First the flag of the children of Judah
went forward with their armies: and at the head of his army was Nahshon,
the son of Amminadab.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And at the head of the army of the
children of Issachar was Nethanel, the son of Zuar.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And at the head of the army of the
children of Zebulun was Eliab, the son of Helon.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Then the House was taken down; and the
sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who were responsible for moving
the House, went forward.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then the flag of the children of Reuben
went forward with their armies: and at the head of his army was Elizur,
the son of Shedeur.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And at the head of the army of the
children of Simeon was Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> At the head of the army of the children
of Gad was Eliasaph, the son of Reuel.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Then the Kohathites went forward with
the holy place; the others put up the House ready for their coming.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Then the flag of the children of
Ephraim went forward with their armies: and at the head of his army was
Elishama, the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> At the head of the army of the children
of Manasseh was Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> At the head of the army of the children
of Benjamin was Abidan, the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And the flag of the children of Dan,
whose tents were moved last of all, went forward with their armies: and
at the head of his army was Ahiezer, the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> At the head of the army of the children
of Asher was Pagiel, the son of Ochran.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And at the head of the army of the
children of Naphtali was Ahira, the son of Enan.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> This was the order in which the
children of Israel were journeying by armies; so they went forward.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Then Moses said to Hobab, the son of
his father-in-law Reuel the Midianite, We are journeying to that place
of which the Lord has said, I will give it to you: so come with us, and
it will be for your profit: for the Lord has good things in store for
Israel.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> But he said, I will not go with you, I
will go back to the land of my birth and to my relations.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And he said, Do not go from us; for you
will be eyes for us, guiding us to the right places in the waste land to
put up our tents.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And if you come with us, we will give
you a part in whatever good the Lord does for us.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> So they went forward three days'
journey from the mountain of the Lord; and the ark of the Lord's
agreement went three days' journey before them, looking for a
resting-place for them;

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And by day the cloud of the Lord went
over them, when they went forward from the place where they had put up
their tents.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And when the ark went forward Moses
said, Come up, O Lord, and let the armies of those who are against you
be broken, and let your haters go in flight before you.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And when it came to rest, he said, Take
rest, O Lord, and give a blessing to the families of Israel.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now the people were saying evil against
the Lord; and the Lord, hearing it, was angry and sent fire on them,
burning the outer parts of the tent-circle.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And the people made an outcry to Moses,
and Moses made prayer to the Lord, and the fire was stopped.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> So that place was named Taberah, because
of the fire of the Lord which had been burning among them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And the mixed band of people who went
with them were overcome by desire: and the children of Israel, weeping
again, said, Who will give us flesh for our food?

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Sweet is the memory of the fish we had in
Egypt for nothing, and the fruit and green plants of every sort, sharp
and pleasing to the taste:

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But now our soul is wasted away; there is
nothing at all: we have nothing but this manna before our eyes.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Now the manna was like a seed of grain,
like small clear drops.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The people went about taking it up from
the earth, crushing it between stones or hammering it to powder, and
boiling it in pots, and they made cakes of it: its taste was like the
taste of cakes cooked with oil.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> When the dew came down on the tents at
night, the manna came down with it.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And at the sound of the people weeping,
every man at his tent-door, the wrath of the Lord was great, and Moses
was very angry.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And Moses said to the Lord, Why have
you done me this evil? and why have I not grace in your eyes, that you
have put on me the care of all this people?

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Am I the father of all this people?
have I given them birth, that you say to me, Take them in your arms,
like a child at the breast, to the land which you gave by an oath to
their fathers?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Where am I to get flesh to give to all
this people? For they are weeping to me and saying, Give us flesh for
our food.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> I am not able by myself to take the
weight of all this people, for it is more than my strength.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> If this is to be my fate, put me to
death now in answer to my prayer, if I have grace in your eyes; and let
me not see my shame.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Send for
seventy of the responsible men of Israel, who are in your opinion men of
weight and authority over the people; make them come to the Tent of
meeting and be there with you.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And I will come down and have talk with
you there: and I will take some of the spirit which is on you and put it
on them, and they will take part of the weight of the people off you, so
that you do not have to take it by yourself.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And say to the people, Make yourselves
clean before tomorrow and you will have flesh for your food: for in the
ears of the Lord you have been weeping and saying, Who will give us
flesh for food? for we were well off in Egypt: and so the Lord will give
you flesh, and it will be your food;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Not for one day only, or even for five
or ten or twenty days;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But every day for a month, till you are
tired of it, turning from it in disgust: because you have gone against
the Lord who is with you, and have been weeping before him saying, Why
did we come out of Egypt?

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Then Moses said, The people, among whom
I am, are six hundred thousand men on foot; and you have said, I will
give them flesh to be their food for a month.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Are flocks and herds to be put to death
for them? or are all the fish in the sea to be got together so that they
may be full?

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Has the
Lord's hand become short? Now you will see if my word comes true for you
or not.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And Moses went out and gave the people
the words of the Lord: and he took seventy of the responsible men of the
people, placing them round the Tent.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then the Lord came down in the cloud
and had talk with him, and put on the seventy men some of the spirit
which was on him: now when the spirit came to rest on them, they were
like prophets, but only at that time.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> But two men were still in the
tent-circle one of them named Eldad and the other Medad: and the spirit
came to rest on them; they were among those who had been sent for, but
they had not gone out to the Tent: and the prophet's power came on them
in the tent-circle.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And a young man went running to Moses
and said, Eldad and Medad are acting as prophets in the tent-circle.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Then Joshua, the son of Nun, who had
been Moses' servant from the time when he was a child, said, My lord
Moses, let them be stopped.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Moses said to him, Are you moved by
envy on my account? If only all the Lord's people were prophets, and the
Lord might put his spirit on them!

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Then Moses, with the responsible men of
Israel, went back to the tent-circle.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Then the Lord sent a wind, driving
little birds from the sea, so that they came down on the tents, and all
round the tent-circle, about a day's journey on this side and on that,
in masses about two cubits high over the face of the earth.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And all that day and all night and the
day after, the people were taking up the birds; the smallest amount
which anyone got was ten homers: and they put them out all round the
tents.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> But while the meat was still between
their teeth, before it was tasted, the wrath of the Lord was moved
against the people and he sent a great outburst of disease on them.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> So that place was named
Kibroth-hattaavah; because there they put in the earth the bodies of the
people who had given way to their desires.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> From Kibroth-hattaavah the people went
on to Hazeroth; and there they put up their tents.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now Miriam and Aaron said evil against
Moses, because of the Cushite woman to whom he was married, for he had
taken a Cushite woman as his wife.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And they said, Have the words of the Lord
been given to Moses only? have they not come to us? And the Lord took
note of it.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Now the man Moses was more gentle than
any other man on earth.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And suddenly the Lord said to Moses and
Aaron and Miriam, Come out, you three, to the Tent of meeting. And the
three of them went out.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And the Lord came down in a pillar of
cloud, taking his place at the door of the Tent, and made Aaron and
Miriam come before him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And he said, Now give ear to my words: if
there is a prophet among you I will give him knowledge of myself in a
vision and will let my words come to him in a dream.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> My servant Moses is not so; he is true to
me in all my house:

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> With him I will have talk mouth to mouth,
openly and not in dark sayings; and with his eyes he will see the form
of the Lord: why then had you no fear of saying evil against my servant
Moses?

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And burning with wrath against them, the
Lord went away.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And the cloud was moved from over the
Tent; and straight away Miriam became a leper, as white as snow: and
Aaron, looking at Miriam, saw that she was a leper.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Then Aaron said to Moses, O my lord,
let not our sin be on our heads, for we have done foolishly and are
sinners.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Let her not be as one dead, whose flesh
is half wasted when he comes out from the body of his mother.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And Moses, crying to the Lord, said,
Let my prayer come before you, O God, and make her well.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And the Lord said to Moses, If her
father had put a mark of shame on her, would she not be shamed for seven
days? Let her be shut up outside the tent-circle for seven days, and
after that she may come in again.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> So Miriam was shut up outside the
tent-circle for seven days: and the people did not go forward on their
journey till Miriam had come in again.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> After that, the people went on from
Hazeroth and put up their tents in the waste land of Paran.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Send men to get knowledge about the land
of Canaan, which I am giving to the children of Israel; from every tribe
of their fathers you are to send a man, every one a chief among them.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Moses sent them from the waste land
of Paran as the Lord gave orders, all of them men who were heads of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And these were their names: of the tribe
of Reuben, Shammua, the son of Zaccur.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat, the son
of Hori.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb, the son of
Jephunneh.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal, the son
of Joseph.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Of the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea, the son
of Nun.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti, the son
of Raphu.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel, the
son of Sodi.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Of the tribe of Joseph, that is of the
family of Manasseh, Gaddi, the son of Susi.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel, the son of
Gemalli.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur, the son
of Michael

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi, the
son of Vophsi.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Of the tribe of Gad, Gevel, the son of
Machi.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> These are the names of the men whom
Moses sent to get knowledge about the land. And Moses gave to Hoshea,
the son of Nun, the name of Joshua.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> So Moses sent them to have a look at
the land of Canaan, and said to them, Go up into the South and into the
hill-country;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And see what the land is like; and if
the people living in it are strong or feeble, small or great in number;

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And what sort of land they are living
in, if it is good or bad; and what their living-places are, tent-circles
or walled towns;

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And if the land is fertile or poor, and
if there is wood in it or not. And be of good heart, and come back with
some of the produce of the land. Now it was the time when the first
grapes were ready.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> So they went up and got a view of the
land, from the waste land of Zin to Rehob, on the way to Hamath.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> They went up into the South and came to
Hebron; and Ahiman and Sheshai and Talmai, the children of Anak, were
living there. (Now the building of Hebron took place seven years before
that of Zoan in Egypt.)

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And they came to the valley of Eshcol,
and cutting down a vine-branch with its grapes, two of them took it on a
rod between them; and they took some pomegranates and figs.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> That place was named the valley of
Eshcol because of the grapes which the children of Israel took from
there.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> At the end of forty days they came back
from viewing the land.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And they came back to Moses and Aaron
and all the children of Israel, to Kadesh in the waste land of Paran;
and gave an account to them and to all the people and let them see the
produce of the land.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And they said, We came to the land
where you sent us, and truly it is flowing with milk and honey: and here
is some of the produce of it.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> But the people living in the land are
strong, and the towns are walled and very great; further, we saw the
children of Anak there.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And the Amalekites are in the South;
and the Hittites and the Jebusites and the Amorites are living in the
hill-country; and the Canaanites by the sea and by the side of Jordan.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Then Caleb made signs to the people to
keep quiet, and said to Moses, Let us go up straight away and take this
land; for we are well able to overcome it.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> But the men who had gone up with him
said, We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger
than we.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And they gave the children of Israel a
bad account of the land they had been to see, saying, This land through
which we went is a land causing destruction to those living in it; and
all the people we saw there are men of more than common size.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> There we saw those great men, the sons
of Anak, offspring of the Nephilim: and we seemed to ourselves no more
than insects, and so we seemed to them.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then all the people gave load cries of
grief, and all that night they gave themselves up to weeping.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And all the children of Israel, crying
out against Moses and Aaron, said, If only we had come to our death in
the land of Egypt, or even in this waste land!

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Why is the Lord taking us into this land
to come to our death by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will
get into strange hands: would it not be better for us to go back to
Egypt?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And they said to one another, Let us make
a captain over us, and go back to Egypt.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Then Moses and Aaron went down on their
faces before the meeting of the people.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And Joshua, the son of Nun, and Caleb,
the son of Jephunneh, two of those who had been to see the land, giving
signs of grief,

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Said to all the children of Israel, This
land which we went through to see is a very good land.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And if the Lord has delight in us, he
will take us into this land and give it to us, a land flowing with milk
and honey.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Only, do not go against the Lord or go in
fear of the people of the land, for they will be our food; their
strength has been taken from them and the Lord is with us: have no fear
of them.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But all the people said they were to be
stoned. Then the glory of the Lord was seen in the Tent of meeting,
before the eyes of all the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And the Lord said to Moses, How long
will this people have no respect for me? how long will they be without
faith, in the face of all the signs I have done among them?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> I will send disease on them for their
destruction, and take away their heritage, and I will make of you a
nation greater and stronger than they.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Moses said to the Lord, Then it
will come to the ears of the Egyptians; for by your power you took this
people out from among them;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And they will give the news to the
people of this land: they have had word that you, Lord, are present with
this people, letting yourself be seen face to face, and that your cloud
is resting over them, and that you go before them in a pillar of cloud
by day and in a pillar of fire by night.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Now if you put to death all this people
as one man, then the nations who have had word of your glory will say,

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Because the Lord was not able to take
this people into the land which he made an oath to give them, he sent
destruction on them in the waste land.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> So now, may my prayer come before you,
and let the power of the Lord be great, as you said:

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> The Lord is slow to wrath and great in
mercy, overlooking wrongdoing and evil, and will not let wrongdoers go
free; sending punishment on children for the sins of their fathers, to
the third and fourth generation.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> May the sin of this people have
forgiveness, in the measure of your great mercy, as you have had mercy
on them from Egypt up till now.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And the Lord said, I have had mercy, as
you say:

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> But truly, as I am living, and as all
the earth will be full of the glory of the Lord;

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Because all these men, having seen my
glory and the signs which I have done in Egypt and in the waste land,
still have put me to the test ten times, and have not given ear to my
voice;

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> They will not see the land about which
I made an oath to their fathers; not one of these by whom I have not
been honoured will see it.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But my servant Caleb, because he had a
different spirit in him, and has been true to me with all his heart, him
I will take into that land into which he went, and his seed will have it
for their heritage.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites
are in the valley; tomorrow, turning round, go into the waste land by
the way to the Red Sea.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> How long am I to put up with this evil
people and their outcries against me? The words which they say against
me have come to my ears.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Say to them, By my life, says the Lord,
as certainly as your words have come to my ears, so certainly will I do
this to you:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Your dead bodies will be stretched out
in this waste land; and of all your number, all those of twenty years
old and over who have been crying out against me,

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> Not one will come into the land which I
gave my word you would have for your resting-place, but only Caleb, the
son of Jephunneh, and Joshua, the son of Nun.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And your little ones, whom you said
would come into strange hands, I will take in, and they will see the
land which you would not have.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> But as for you, your dead bodies will
be stretched in this waste land.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And your children will be wanderers in
the waste land for forty years, undergoing punishment for your false
ways, till your bodies become dust in the waste land.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And as you went through the land
viewing it for forty days, so for forty years, a year for every day, you
will undergo punishment for your wrongdoing, and you will see that I am
against you.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> I the Lord have said it, and this I
will certainly do to all this evil people who have come together against
me: in this waste land destruction will come on them, and death will be
their fate.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And the men whom Moses sent to see the
land, and who, by the bad account they gave of the land, were the cause
of the outcry the people made against Moses,

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> Those same men who said evil of the
land, came to their death by disease before the Lord.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> But Joshua, the son of Nun, and Caleb,
the son of Jephunneh, of those who went to see the land, were not
touched by disease.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> And when Moses put these words before
the children of Israel, the people were full of grief.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> And early in the morning they got up
and went to the top of the mountain, saying, We are here and we will go
up to the place which the Lord said he would give us: for we have done
wrong.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And Moses said, Why are you now acting
against the Lord's order, seeing that no good will come of it?

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Go not up, for the Lord is not with
you, and you will be overcome by those who are fighting against you.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> For the Amalekites and the Canaanites
are there before you, and you will be put to death by their swords:
because you have gone back from the way of the Lord, the Lord will not
be with you.

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> But they gave no attention to his words
and went to the top of the mountain, though Moses and the ark of the
Lord's agreement did not go out of the tent-circle.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> Then the Amalekites came down, and the
Canaanites who were living in the hill-country, and overcame them
completely, driving them back as far as Hormah.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Say to the children of Israel, When you
have come into the land which I am giving to you for your resting-place,

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And are going to make an offering by fire
to the Lord, a burned offering or an offering in connection with an
oath, or an offering freely given, or at your regular feasts, an
offering for a sweet smell to the Lord, from the herd or the flock:

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Then let him who is making his offering,
give to the Lord a meal offering of a tenth part of a measure of the
best meal mixed with a fourth part of a hin of oil:

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And for the drink offering, you are to
give with the burned offering or other offering, the fourth part of a
hin of wine for every lamb.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Or for a male sheep, give as a meal
offering two tenth parts of a measure of the best meal mixed with a
third part of a hin of oil:

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And for the drink offering give a third
part of a hin of wine, for a sweet smell to the Lord.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And when you make ready a young ox for a
burned or other offering, or for the effecting of an oath, or for
peace-offerings to the Lord:

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Then with the ox give a meal offering of
three tenth parts of a measure of the best meal mixed with half a hin of
oil.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And for the drink offering: give half a
hin of wine, for an offering made by fire for a sweet smell to the Lord.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> This is to be done for every young ox
and for every male sheep or he-lamb or young goat.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Whatever number you make ready, so you
are to do for every one.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> All those who are Israelites by birth
are to do these things in this way, when giving an offering made by fire
of a sweet smell to the Lord.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And if a man from another country or
any other person living among you, through all your generations, has the
desire to give an offering made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord,
let him do as you do.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> There is to be one law for you and for
the man of another country living with you, one law for ever from
generation to generation; as you are, so is he to be before the Lord.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> The law and the rule are to be the same
for you and for those from other lands living with you.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Say to the children of Israel, When you
come into the land where I am guiding you,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Then, when you take for your food the
produce of the land, you are to give an offering lifted up before the
Lord.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Of the first of your rough meal you are
to give a cake for a lifted offering, lifting it up before the Lord as
the offering of the grain-floor is lifted up.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> From generation to generation you are
to give to the Lord a lifted offering from the first of your rough meal.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And if in error you go against any of
these laws which the Lord has given to Moses,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> All the laws which the Lord has given
you by the hand of Moses, from the day when the Lord gave them, and ever
after from generation to generation;

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Then, if the wrong is done in error,
without the knowledge of the meeting of the people, let all the meeting
give a young ox as a burned offering, a sweet smell to the Lord, with
its meal offering and its drink offering, as is ordered in the law,
together with a he-goat for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> So the priest will make the people free
from sin, and they will have forgiveness; for it was an error, and they
have given their offering made by fire to the Lord, and their
sin-offering before the Lord, on account of their error:

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And all the meeting of the children of
Israel, as well as those from other lands living among them, will have
forgiveness; for it was an error on the part of the people.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And if one person does wrong, without
being conscious of it, then let him give a she-goat of the first year
for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And the priest will take away the sin
of the person who has done wrong, if the wrong was done unconsciously,
and he will have forgiveness.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> The law in connection with wrong done
unconsciously is to be the same for him who is an Israelite by birth and
for the man from another country who is living among them.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> But the person who does wrong in the
pride of his heart, if he is one of you or of another nation by birth,
is acting without respect for the Lord, and will be cut off from his
people.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Because he had no respect for the word
of the Lord, and did not keep his law, that man will be cut off without
mercy and his sin will be on him.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Now while the children of Israel were
in the waste land, they saw a man who was getting sticks on the Sabbath
day.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And those who saw him getting sticks
took him before Moses and Aaron and all the people.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And they had him shut up, because they
had no directions about what was to be done with him.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Then the Lord said to Moses, Certainly
the man is to be put to death: let him be stoned by all the people
outside the tent-circle.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> So all the people took him outside the
tent-circle and he was stoned to death there, as the Lord gave orders to
Moses.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> Say to the children of Israel that
through all their generations they are to put on the edges of their
robes an ornament of twisted threads, and in every ornament a blue cord;

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> So that, looking on these ornaments,
you may keep in mind the orders of the Lord and do them; and not be
guided by the desires of your hearts and eyes, through which you have
been untrue to me:

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And that you may keep in mind all my
orders and do them and be holy to your God.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> I am the Lord your God, who took you
out of the land of Egypt, so that I might be your God: I am the Lord
your God.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of
Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and
On, the son of Pallu, the son of Reuben, made themselves ready,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And came before Moses, with certain of
the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty chiefs of the people, men
of good name who had a place in the meeting of the people.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> They came together against Moses and
against Aaron, and said to them, You take overmuch on yourselves, seeing
that all the people are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among
them; why then have you put yourselves in authority over the people of
the Lord?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And Moses, hearing this, went down on his
face;

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And he said to Korah and his band, In the
morning the Lord will make clear who are his, and who is holy, and who
may come near him: the man of his selection will be caused to come near
him.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> So do this: let Korah and all his band
take vessels for burning perfumes;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And put spices on the fire in them before
the Lord tomorrow; then the man marked out by the Lord will be holy: you
take overmuch on yourselves, you sons of Levi.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Moses said to Korah, Give ear now,
you sons of Levi:

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Does it seem only a small thing to you
that the God of Israel has made you separate from the rest of Israel,
letting you come near himself to do the work of the House of the Lord,
and to take your place before the people to do what has to be done for
them;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Letting you, and all your brothers the
sons of Levi, come near to him? and would you now be priests?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> So you and all your band have come
together against the Lord; and Aaron, who is he, that you are crying out
against him?

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Then Moses sent for Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab: and they said, We will not come up:

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Is it not enough that you have taken us
from a land flowing with milk and honey, to put us to death in the waste
land, but now you are desiring to make yourself a chief over us?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And more than this, you have not taken
us into a land flowing with milk and honey, or given us a heritage of
fields and vine-gardens: will you put out the eyes of these men? We will
not come up.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Then Moses was very angry, and said to
the Lord, Give no attention to their offering: not one of their asses
have I taken, or done wrong to any of them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And Moses said to Korah, You and all
your band are to come before the Lord tomorrow, you and they and Aaron:

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And let every man take a vessel for
burning perfumes, and put sweet spices in them; let every man take his
vessel before the Lord, two hundred and fifty vessels; you and Aaron and
everyone with his vessel.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> So every man took his vessel and they
put fire in them, with spices, and came to the door of the Tent of
meeting with Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Korah made all the people come
together against them to the door of the Tent of meeting: and the glory
of the Lord was seen by all the people.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Come out from among this people, so
that I may send sudden destruction on them.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Then falling down on their faces they
said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, because of one man's
sin will your wrath be moved against all the people?

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Say to the people, Come away from the
tent of Korah Dathan, and Abiram.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> So Moses got up and went to Dathan and
Abiram, and the responsible men of Israel went with him.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And he said to the people, Come away
now from the tents of these evil men, without touching anything of
theirs, or you may be taken in the punishment of their sins.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> So on every side they went away from
the tent of Korah Dathan, and Abiram: and Dathan and Abiram came out to
the door of their tents, with their wives and their sons and their
little ones.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And Moses said, Now you will see that
the Lord has sent me to do all these works, and I have not done them of
myself.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> If these men have the common death of
men, or if the natural fate of all men overtakes them, then the Lord has
not sent me.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> But if the Lord does something new,
opening the earth to take them in, with everything which is theirs, and
they go down living into the underworld, then it will be clear to you
that the Lord has not been honoured by these men.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And while these words were on his lips,
the earth under them was parted in two;

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And the earth, opening her mouth, took
them in, with their families, and all the men who were joined to Korah,
and their goods.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> So they and all theirs went down living
into the underworld, and the earth was shut over them, and they were cut
off from among the meeting of the people.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And all Israel round about them went in
flight at their cry, For fear, said they, that we go down into the heart
of the earth.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> Then fire came out from the Lord,
burning up the two hundred and fifty men who were offering the perfume.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> Say to Eleazar, the son of Aaron the
priest, that he is to take out of the flames the vessels with the
perfumes in them, turning the fire out of them, for they are holy;

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And let the vessels of those men, who
with their lives have made payment for their sin, be hammered out into
plates as a cover for the altar; for they have been offered before the
Lord and are holy; so that they may be a sign to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> So Eleazar the priest took the brass
vessels which had been offered by those who were burned up, and they
were hammered out to make a cover for the altar:

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> To be a sign, kept in memory for ever
by the children of Israel, that no man who is not of the seed of Aaron
has the right of burning spices before the Lord, so that he may not be
like Korah and his band: as the Lord said to him by the mouth of Moses.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> But on the day after, all the children
of Israel made an outcry against Moses and against Aaron, saying, You
have put to death the Lord's people.

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> Now when the people had come together
against Moses and Aaron, looking in the direction of the Tent of
meeting, they saw the cloud covering it, and the glory of the Lord came
before their eyes.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> Then Moses and Aaron came to the front
of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> Come out from among this people, so
that I may send sudden destruction on them. And they went down on their
faces.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> And Moses said to Aaron, Take your
vessel and put in it fire from the altar, and sweet spices, and take it
quickly into the meeting of the people, and make them free from sin: for
wrath has gone out from the Lord, and the disease is starting.

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> And at the words of Moses, Aaron took
his vessel, and went running among the people; and even then the disease
had made a start among them; and he put spices in his vessel to take
away the sin of the people.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> And he took his place between the dead
and the living: and the disease was stopped.

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Now fourteen thousand, seven hundred
deaths were caused by that disease, in addition to those who came to
their end because of what Korah had done.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> Then Aaron went back to Moses to the
door of the Tent of meeting: and the disease came to a stop.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Say to the children of Israel that they
are to give you rods, one for every family, for every chief, the head of
his father's house, making twelve rods; let every man's name be placed
on his rod.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And let Aaron's name be placed on the rod
of Levi: for there is to be one rod for the head of every family.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And let them be stored up in the Tent of
meeting, in front of the ark of witness where I come to you.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the rod of that man who is marked out
by me for myself will have buds on it; so I will put a stop to the
outcries which the children of Israel make to me against you.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> So Moses gave these orders to the
children of Israel, and all their chiefs gave him rods, one for the head
of every family, making twelve rods: and Aaron's rod was among them.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And Moses put the rods before the Lord in
the Tent of witness.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Now on the day after, Moses went into the
Tent of witness; and he saw that Aaron's rod, the rod of the house of
Levi, had put out buds, and was covered with buds and flowers and fruit.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Then Moses took out all the rods from
before the Lord, and gave them back to the children of Israel: and they
saw them, and every man took his rod.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Put Aaron's
rod back in front of the ark of witness, to be kept for a sign against
this false-hearted people, so that you may put a stop to their outcries
against me, and death may not overtake them.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> This Moses did: as the Lord gave
orders, so he did.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the children of Israel said to
Moses, Truly, destruction has come on us; an evil fate has overtaken us
all.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Death will overtake everyone who comes
near, who comes near the House of the Lord: are we all to come to
destruction?

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And the Lord said to Aaron, You and your
sons and your father's family are to be responsible for all wrongdoing
in relation to the holy place: and you and your sons are to be
responsible for the errors which come about in your work as priests.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Let your brothers, the family of Levi,
come near with you, so that they may be joined with you and be your
servants: but you and your sons with you are to go in before the ark of
witness.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> They are to do your orders and be
responsible for the work of the Tent; but they may not come near the
vessels of the holy place or the altar, so that death may not overtake
them or you.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> They are to be joined with you in the
care of the Tent of meeting, doing whatever is needed for the Tent: and
no one of any other family may come near you.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> You are to be responsible for the holy
place and the altar, so that wrath may never again come on the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> Now, see, I have taken your brothers the
Levites from among the children of Israel: they are given to you and to
the Lord, to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And you and your sons with you are to be
responsible as priests for the altar and everything on it, and
everything inside the veil; you are to do the work of priests; I have
given you your position as priests; and any other man who comes near
will be put to death.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And the Lord said to Aaron, See, I have
given into your care my lifted offerings; even all the holy things of
the children of Israel I have given to you and to your sons as your
right for ever, because you have been marked with the holy oil.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> This is to be yours of the most holy
things, out of the fire offerings; every offering of theirs, every meal
offering and sin-offering, and every offering which they make on account
of error, is to be most holy for you and your sons.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> As most holy things they are to be your
food: let every male have them for food; it is to be holy to you.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And this is yours: the lifted offering
which they give and all the wave offerings of the children of Israel I
have given to you and to your sons and to your daughters as your right
for ever: everyone in your house who is clean may have them for food.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> All the best of the oil and the wine
and the grain, the first-fruits of them which they give to the Lord, to
you have I given them.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> The earliest produce from their land
which they take to the Lord is to be yours; everyone in your house who
is clean may have it for his food.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Everything given by oath to the Lord in
Israel is to be yours.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The first birth of every living thing
which is offered to the Lord, of man or beast, is to be yours; but for
the first sons of man payment is to be made, and for the first young of
unclean beasts.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Payment is to be made for these when
they are a month old, at the value fixed by you, a price of five shekels
by the scale of the holy place, that is, twenty gerahs to the shekel.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> But no such payment may be made for the
first birth of an ox or a sheep or a goat; these are holy: their blood
is to be dropped on the altar, and their fat burned for an offering made
by fire, a sweet smell to the Lord.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Their flesh is to be yours; like the
breast of the wave offering and the right leg, it is to be yours.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> All the lifted offerings of the holy
things which the children of Israel give to the Lord, I have given to
you and to your sons and to your daughters as a right for ever. This is
an agreement made with salt before the Lord, to you and to your seed for
ever.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And the Lord said to Aaron, You will
have no heritage in their land, or any part among them; I am your part
and your heritage among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And to the children of Levi I have
given as their heritage all the tenths offered in Israel, as payment for
the work they do, the work of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> In future the children of Israel are
not to come near the Tent of meeting, so that death may not come to them
because of sin.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> But the Levites are to do the work of
the Tent of meeting, and be responsible for errors in connection with
it: this is a law for ever through all your generations; and among the
children of Israel they will have no heritage.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> For the tenths which the children of
Israel give as a lifted offering to the Lord I have given to the Levites
as their heritage. and so I have said to them, Among the children of
Israel they will have no heritage.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> Say to the Levites, When you take from
the children of Israel the tenth which I have given to you from them as
your heritage, a tenth part of that tenth is to be offered as an
offering lifted up before the Lord.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And this lifted offering is to be put
to your credit as if it was grain from the grain-floor and wine from the
vines.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> So you are to make an offering lifted
up to the Lord from all the tenths which you get from the children of
Israel, giving out of it the Lord's lifted offering to Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> From everything given to you, let the
best of it, the holy part of it, be offered as a lifted offering to the
Lord.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Say to them, then, When the best of it
is lifted up on high, it is to be put to the account of the Levites as
the increase of the grain-floor and of the place where the grapes are
crushed.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> It is to be your food, for you and your
families in every place: it is your reward for your work in the Tent of
meeting.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> And no sin will be yours on account of
it, when the best of it has been lifted up on high; you are not to make
a wrong use of the holy things of the children of Israel, so that death
may not overtake you.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> This is the rule of the law which the
Lord has made, saying, Give orders to the children of Israel to give you
a red cow without any mark on her, and on which the yoke has never been
put:

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Give her to Eleazar the priest and let
him take her outside the tent-circle and have her put to death before
him.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Then let Eleazar the priest take some of
her blood on his finger, shaking the blood seven times in the direction
of the front of the Tent of meeting:

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And the cow is to be burned before him,
her skin and her flesh and her blood and her waste are to be burned:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Then let the priest take cedar-wood and
hyssop and red thread, and put them into the fire where the cow is
burning.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And the priest, after washing his
clothing and bathing his body in water, may come back to the
tent-circle, and will be unclean till evening.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And he who does the burning is to have
his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till
evening.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> Then let a man who is clean take the dust
of the burned cow and put it outside the tent-circle in a clean place,
where it is to be kept for the children of Israel and used in making the
water which takes away what is unclean: it is a sin-offering.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And he who takes up the dust of the
burned cow is to have his clothing washed with water and be unclean till
evening: this is to be a law for ever, for the children of Israel as
well as for the man from another country who is living among them.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Anyone touching a dead body will be
unclean for seven days:

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> On the third day and on the seventh day
he is to make himself clean with the water, and so he will be clean: but
if he does not do this on the third day and on the seventh day, he will
not be clean.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Anyone touching the body of a dead man
without making himself clean in this way, makes the House of the Lord
unclean; and that man will be cut off from Israel: because the water was
not put on him, he will be unclean; his unclean condition is unchanged.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> This is the law when death comes to a
man in his tent: everyone who comes into the tent, and everyone who is
in the tent, will be unclean for seven days.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And every open vessel without a cover
fixed on it will be unclean.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And anyone touching one who has been
put to death with the sword in the open country, or the body of one who
has come to his end by a natural death, or a man's bone, or the
resting-place of a dead body, will be unclean for seven days.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And for the unclean, they are to take
the dust of the burning of the sin-offering, and put flowing water on it
in a vessel:

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And a clean person is to take hyssop
and put it in the water, shaking it over the tent, and all the vessels,
and the people who were there, and over him by whom the bone, or the
body of one who has been put to death with the sword, or the body of one
who has come to his end by a natural death, or the resting-place was
touched.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Let the clean person do this to the
unclean on the third day and on the seventh day: and on the seventh day
he is to make him clean; and after washing his clothing and bathing
himself in water, he will be clean in the evening.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> But the man who, being unclean, does
not make himself clean in this way, will be cut off from the meeting of
the people, because he has made the holy place of the Lord unclean: the
water has not been put on him, he is unclean.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> This is to be a law for them for ever:
he who puts the water on the unclean person is to have his clothing
washed; and anyone touching the water will be unclean till evening.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Anything touched by the unclean person
will be unclean; and any person touching it will be unclean till
evening.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> In the first month all the children of
Israel came into the waste land of Zin, and put up their tents in
Kadesh; there death came to Miriam, and they put her body to rest in the
earth.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And there was no water for the people:
and they came together against Moses and against Aaron.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And the people were angry with Moses and
said, If only death had overtaken us when our brothers came to their
death before the Lord!

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Why have you taken the Lord's people into
this waste, for death to come to us and to our cattle there?

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Why have you made us come out of Egypt
into this evil place? This is no place of seed or figs or vines or other
fruits, and there is no water for drinking.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Then Moses and Aaron went away from the
people to the door of the Tent of meeting; and, falling on their faces
there, they saw the glory of the Lord.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Take the rod, you and Aaron, your
brother, and make all the people come together, and before their eyes
give orders to the rock to give out its water; and so make water come
out of the rock for them, and give the people and their cattle drink.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And Moses took the rod from before the
Lord as he gave him orders.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Then Moses and Aaron made the people
come together in front of the rock, and he said to them, Give ear now,
you people whose hearts are turned from the Lord; are we to get water
for you out of the rock?

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And lifting up his hand, Moses gave the
rock two blows with his rod: and water came streaming out, and the
people and their cattle had drink enough.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,
Because you had not enough faith in me to keep my name holy before the
children of Israel, you will not take this people into the land which I
have given them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> These are the waters of Meribah;
because the children of Israel went against the Lord, and they saw that
he was holy among them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Then Moses sent men from Kadesh to the
king of Edom to say to him, Your brother Israel says, You have knowledge
of all the things we have been through;

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> How our fathers went down into Egypt,
and we were living in Egypt for a long time; and the Egyptians were
cruel to us and to our fathers:

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And the Lord gave ear to the voice of
our cry, and sent an angel and took us out of Egypt: and now we are in
Kadesh, a town on the edge of your land;

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Let us now go through your land: we
will not go into field or vine-garden, or take the water of the springs;
we will go by the highway, not turning to the right or to the left, till
we have gone past the limits of your land.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And Edom said, You are not to go
through my land, for if you do I will come out against you with the
sword.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And the children of Israel said to him,
We will go up by the highway: and if we or our cattle take of your
water, we will give you a price for it: only let us go through on our
feet, nothing more.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> But he said, You are not to go through.
And Edom came out against them in his strength, with a great army.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> So Edom would not let Israel go through
his land; and Israel went in another direction.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And they went on from Kadesh, and came,
with all their people, to Mount Hor.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> And at Mount Hor, at the edge of the
land of Edom, the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Aaron will be put to rest with his
people; he will not go into the land which I have given to the children
of Israel, because you went against my word at the waters of Meribah.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> So take Aaron and Eleazar, his son, up
into Mount Hor;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And take Aaron's robes off him and put
them on Eleazar, his son: and death will come to Aaron there, and he
will be put to rest with his people.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> So Moses did as the Lord had said, and
before the eyes of all the people they went up Mount Hor.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And Moses took off Aaron's robes, and
put them on Eleazar, his son; and there on the top of the mountain death
came to Aaron: then Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And when the people saw that Aaron was
dead, all the children of Israel gave themselves up to weeping for him
for thirty days.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And it came to the ears of the Canaanite,
the king of Arad, living in the South, that Israel was coming by the way
of Atharim, and he came out against them and took some of them
prisoners.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Then Israel made an oath to the Lord, and
said, If you will give up this people into my hands, then I will send
complete destruction on all their towns.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And the Lord, in answer to the voice of
Israel, gave the Canaanites up to them; and they put them and their
towns completely to destruction: and that place was named Hormah.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Then they went on from Mount Hor by the
way to the Red Sea, going round the land of Edom: and the spirit of the
people was overcome with weariness on the way.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And crying out against God and against
Moses, they said, Why have you taken us out of Egypt to come to our
death in the waste land? For there is no bread and no water, and this
poor bread is disgusting to us.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Then the Lord sent poison-snakes among
the people; and their bites were a cause of death to numbers of the
people of Israel.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Then the people came to Moses and said,
We have done wrong in crying out against the Lord and against you: make
prayer to the Lord to take away the snakes from us. So Moses made prayer
for the people.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Make an image
of a snake and put it on a rod, and anyone who has been wounded by the
snakes, looking on it will be made well.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> So Moses made a snake of brass and put it
on a rod; and anyone who had a snakebite, after looking on the snake of
brass, was made well.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Then the children of Israel went on and
put up their tents in Oboth.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And journeying on again from Oboth,
they put up their tents in Iye-abarim, in the waste land before Moab
looking east.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And moving on from there, they put up
their tents in the valley of Zered.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> From there they went on and put up
their tents on the other side of the Arnon, which is on the waste land
at the edge of the land of the Amorites; for the Arnon is the line of
division between Moab and the Amorites:

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> As it says in the book of the Wars of
the Lord, Vaheb in Suphah, and the valley of the Amon;

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> The slope of the valleys going down to
the tents of Ar and touching the edge of Moab.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> From there they went on to Beer, the
water-spring of which the Lord said to Moses, Make the people come
together and I will give them water.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> Then Israel gave voice to this song:
Come up, O water-spring, let us make a song to it:

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The fountain made by the chiefs, made
deep by the great ones of the people, with the law-givers' rod, and with
their sticks. Then from the waste land they went on to Mattanah:

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: and from
Nahaliel to Bamoth:

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And from Bamoth to the valley in the
open country of Moab, and to the top of Pisgah looking over Jeshimon.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And Israel sent men to Sihon, king of
the Amorites, saying,

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Let me go through your land: we will
not go into field or vine-garden, or take the water of the springs; we
will go by the highway till we have gone past the limits of your land.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And Sihon would not let Israel go
through his land; but got all his people together and went out against
Israel into the waste land, as far as Jahaz, to make war on Israel.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> But Israel overcame him, and took all
his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, as far as the country of the
children of Ammon, for the country of the children of Ammon was strongly
armed.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And Israel took all their towns, living
in Heshbon and all the towns and small places of the Amorites.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> For Heshbon was the town of Sihon, king
of the Amorites, who had made war against an earlier king of Moab and
taken from him all his land as far as the Arnon.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> So the makers of wise sayings say, Come
to Heshbon, building up the town of Sihon and making it strong:

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> For a fire has gone out of Heshbon, a
flame from the town of Sihon: for the destruction of Ar in Moab, and the
lords of the high places of the Arnon.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Sorrow is yours, O Moab! Destruction is
your fate, O people of Chemosh: his sons have gone in flight, and his
daughters are prisoners, in the hands of Sihon, king of the Amorites.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> They are wounded with our arrows;
destruction has come on Heshbon, even to Dibon; and we have made the
land waste as far as Nophah, stretching out to Medeba.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> So Israel put up their tents in the
land of the Amorites.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> And Moses sent men secretly to Jazer,
and they took its towns, driving out the Amorites who were living there.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Then turning they went up by the way of
Bashan; and Og, king of Bashan, went out against them with all his
people, to the fight at Edrei.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Have no
fear of him: for I have given him up into your hands, with all his
people and his land; do to him as you did to Sihon, king of the
Amorites, at Heshbon.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> So they overcame him and his sons and
his people, driving them all out: and they took his land for their
heritage.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Then the children of Israel, journeying
on, put up their tents in the lowlands of Moab, on the other side of
Jordan at Jericho.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Now Balak, the son of Zippor, saw what
Israel had done to the Amorites.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And in Moab there was great fear of the
people, because their numbers were so great: and the feeling of Moab was
bitter against the children of Israel.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Then Moab said to the responsible men of
Midian, It is clear that this great people will be the destruction of
everything round us, making a meal of us as the ox does of the grass of
the field. At that time Balak, the son of Zippor, was king of Moab.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> So he sent men to Balaam, son of Beor, at
Pethor by the River in the land of the children of his people, saying to
him, See, a people has come out of Egypt, covering all the face of the
earth, and they have put up their tents opposite to me:

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Come now, in answer to my prayer, and put
a curse on this people, for they are greater than I: and then I may be
strong enough to overcome them and send them out of the land: for it is
clear that good comes to him who has your blessing, but he on whom you
put your curse is cursed.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> So the responsible men of Moab and Midian
went away, taking in their hands rewards for the prophet; and they came
to Balaam and said to him what Balak had given them orders to say.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And he said to them, Take your rest here
tonight, and I will give you an answer after hearing what the Lord says;
so the chiefs of Moab kept there with Balaam that night.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And God came to Balaam and said, Who are
these men with you?

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And Balaam said to God, Balak, the son
of Zippor, king of Moab, has sent them to me, saying,

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> See, the people who have come out of
Egypt are covering all the earth: now, put a curse on this people for
me, so that I may be able to make war on them, driving them out of the
land.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And God said to Balaam, You are not to
go with them, or put a curse on this people, for they have my blessing.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> In the morning Balaam got up and said
to the chiefs of Balak, Go back to your land, for the Lord will not let
me go with you.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> So the chiefs of Moab went back to
Balak and said, Balaam will not come with us.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> So Balak sent more chiefs, greater in
number and of higher position than the others.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And they came to Balaam and said,
Balak, son of Zippor, says, Let nothing keep you from coming to me:

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> For I will give you a place of very
great honour, and whatever you say to me I will do; so come, in answer
to my prayer, and put a curse on this people.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> But Balaam, in answer; said to the
servants of Balak, Even if Balak gave me his house full of silver and
gold, it would not be possible for me to do anything more or less than
the orders of the Lord my God.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> So take your rest here this night, till
I have knowledge what more the Lord has to say to me.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And that night God came to Balaam and
said to him, If these men have come for you, go with them: but do only
what I say to you.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> So in the morning Balaam got up and,
making his ass ready, went with the chiefs of Moab.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> But God was moved to wrath because he
went: and the angel of the Lord took up a position in the road to keep
him from his purpose. Now he was seated on his ass, and his two servants
were with him.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And the ass saw the angel of the Lord
waiting in the road with his sword in his hand; and turning from the
road, the ass went into the field; and Balaam gave the ass blows, to get
her back on to the road.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then the angel of the Lord took up his
position in a narrow road through the vine-gardens, with a wall on this
side and on that.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And the ass saw the angel of the Lord,
and went near the wall, crushing Balaam's foot against the wall; and he
gave her more blows.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Then the angel of the Lord went
further, stopping in a narrow place where there was no room for turning
to the right or to the left.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And the ass saw the angel of the Lord
and went down on the earth under Balaam; and full of wrath, Balaam gave
her hard blows with his stick.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Then the Lord gave the ass the power of
talking, and opening her mouth she said to Balaam, What have I done to
you that you have given me blows these three times?

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> And Balaam said to the ass, You have
made me seem foolish: if only I had a sword in my hand I would put you
to death.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And the ass said to Balaam, Am I not
your ass upon which you have gone all your life till this day? and have
I ever done this to you before? And he said, No.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Then the Lord made Balaam's eyes open,
and he saw the angel of the Lord in the way with his sword in his hand:
and he went down on his face to the earth.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> And the angel of the Lord said to him,
Why have you given your ass blows these three times? See, I have come
out against you to keep you back, because your purpose is not pleasing
to me.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And the ass saw me, turning to one side
from me three times: if she had not gone to one side, I would certainly
have put you to death and kept her safe.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And Balaam said to the angel of the
Lord, I have done wrong, for I did not see that you were in the way
against me: but now, if it is evil in your eyes, I will go back again.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> And the angel of the Lord said to
Balaam, Go with the men; but say only what I give you to say. Then
Balaam went on with the chiefs of Balak.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> Now Balak, hearing that Balaam had
come, went to the chief town of Moab, on the edge of the Arnon, in the
farthest part of the land, for the purpose of meeting him.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> And Balak said to Balaam, Did I not
send to you, requesting you with all my heart to come to me? why did you
not come? am I not able to give you a place of honour?

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> Then Balaam said to Balak, Now I have
come to you; but have I power to say anything? Only what God puts into
my mouth may I say.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And Balaam went with Balak to
Kiriath-huzoth.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> And Balak made offerings of oxen and
sheep, and sent to Balaam and the chiefs who were with him.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And in the morning Balak took Balaam up
to the high places of Baal, and from there he was able to see the outer
limits of the people.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Balaam said to Balak, Make me here
seven altars and get ready seven oxen and seven male sheep.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And Balak did as Balaam had said; and
Balak and Balaam made an offering on every altar of an ox and a male
sheep.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then Balaam said to Balak, Take your
place by your burned offering, and I will go and see if the Lord comes
to me: and I will give you word of whatever he says to me. And he went
to an open place on a hill.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And God came to Balaam, and Balaam said
to him, I have made ready seven altars, offering an ox and a male sheep
on every altar.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And the Lord put words in Balaam's mouth,
and said, Go back to Balak, and this is what you are to say.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> So he went back to him where he was
waiting by his burned offering with all the chiefs of Moab.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And in the words which the Lord had given
him he said, From Aram Balak has sent for me, the king of Moab from the
mountains of the East: come, put curses on Jacob for me and be angry
with Israel.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> How may I put curses on him who is not
cursed by God? how may I be angry with him with whom the Lord is not
angry?

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> From the top of the rocks I see him,
looking down on him from the hills: it is a people made separate, not to
be numbered among the nations.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Who is able to take the measure of the
dust of Jacob or the number of the thousands of Israel? May my death be
the death of the upright and my last end like his!

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Then Balak said to Balaam, What have
you done to me? I sent for you so that my haters might be cursed, and
see, you have given them a blessing.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And in answer he said, Am I not ordered
to say only what the Lord puts into my mouth?

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And Balak said to him, Come with me now
into another place from which you will not be able to see them all, but
only the outskirts of them; and you will send curses on them from there.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> So he took him into the country of
Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and there they made seven altars, offering
an ox and a male sheep on every altar.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Then he said to Balak, Take your place
here by your burned offering, while I go over there to the Lord.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And the Lord came to Balaam, and put
words in his mouth, and said, Go back to Balak, and this is what you are
to say.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> So he came to him where he was waiting
by his burned offering with the chiefs of Moab by his side. And Balak
said to him, What has the Lord said?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And in the words which the Lord had
given him he said, Up! Balak, and give ear; give attention to me, O son
of Zippor:

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> God is not a man, to say what is false;
or the son of man, that his purpose may be changed: what he has said,
will he not do? and will he not give effect to the words of his mouth?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> See, I have had orders to give
blessing: and he has given a blessing which I have no power to take
away.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> He has seen no evil in Jacob or
wrongdoing in Israel: the Lord his God is with him, and the glad cry of
a king is among them.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> It is God who has taken them out of
Egypt; his horns are like those of the mountain ox.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> No evil power has effect against Jacob,
no secret arts against Israel; at the right time it will be said of
Jacob and of Israel, See what God has done!

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> See, Israel comes up like a she-lion,
lifting himself up like a lion: he will take no rest till he has made a
meal of those he has overcome, drinking the blood of those he has put to
death.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Then Balak said to Balaam, If you will
not put a curse on them, at all events do not give them a blessing.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> But Balaam in answer said to Balak, Did
I not say to you, I may only do what the Lord says?

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Then Balak said to Balaam, Come now, I
will take you to another place; it may be that God will let you put a
curse on them from there.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> So Balak took Balaam to the top of
Peor, looking down over the waste land.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> And Balaam said to Balak, Make me seven
altars here and get seven oxen and seven male sheep ready for me.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And Balak did as Balaam said, offering
an ox and a male sheep on every altar.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Now when Balaam saw that it was the
Lord's pleasure to give his blessing to Israel, he did not, as at other
times, make use of secret arts, but turning his face to the waste land,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And lifting up his eyes, he saw Israel
there, with their tents in the order of their tribes: and the spirit of
God came on him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And moved by the spirit, he said, These
are the words of Balaam, son of Beor, the words of the man whose eyes
are open:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> He says, whose ears are open to the words
of God, who has seen the vision of the Ruler of all, falling down, but
having his eyes open:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> How fair are your tents, O Jacob, your
houses, O Israel!

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> They are stretched out like valleys, like
gardens by the riverside, like flowering trees planted by the Lord, like
cedar-trees by the waters.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Peoples will be in fear before his
strength, his arm will be on great nations: his king will be higher than
Agag, and his kingdom made great in honour.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> It is God who has taken him out of Egypt;
his horns are like those of the mountain ox; the nations warring against
him will be his food, their bones will be broken, they will be wounded
with his arrows.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> He took his sleep stretched out like a
lion, and like a she-lion: by whom will his rest be broken? May a
blessing be on everyone who gives you blessing, and a curse on everyone
by whom you are cursed.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Then Balak was full of wrath against
Balaam, and angrily waving his hands he said to Balaam, I sent for you
so that those who are against me might be cursed, but now, see, three
times you have given them a blessing.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Go back quickly to the place you came
from: it was my purpose to give you a place of honour, but now the Lord
has kept you back from honour.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Then Balaam said to Balak, Did I not
say to the men you sent to me,

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Even if Balak gave me his house full of
silver and gold, it would not be possible for me to go outside the
orders of the Lord, doing good or evil at the impulse of my mind;
whatever the Lord says I will say?

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> So now I will go back to my people: but
first let me make clear to you what this people will do to your people
in days to come.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Then he went on with his story and
said, These are the words of Balaam, the son of Beor, the words of him
whose eyes are open:

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> He says, whose ear is open to the words
of God, who has knowledge of the Most High, who has seen the vision of
the Ruler of all, falling down and having his eyes open:

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> I see him, but not now: looking on him,
but not near: a star will come out of Jacob, and a rod of authority out
of Israel, sending destruction to the farthest limits of Moab and on the
head of all the sons of Sheth.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Edom will be his heritage, and he will
put an end to the last of the people of Seir.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And Israel will go on in strength, and
Jacob will have rule over his haters.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Then, turning his eyes to Amalek, he
went on with his story and said, Amalek was the first of the nations,
but his part will be destruction for ever.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And looking on the Kenites he went on
with his story and said, Strong is your living-place, and your secret
place is safe in the rock.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> But still the Kenites will be wasted,
till Asshur takes you away prisoner.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Then he went on with his story and
said, But who may keep his life when God does this?

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> But ships will come from the direction
of Kittim, troubling Asshur and troubling Eber, and like the others
their fate will be destruction.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Then Balaam got up and went back to his
place: and Balak went away.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Now when Israel was living in Shittim the
people became false to the Lord, doing evil with the daughters of Moab:

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> For they sent for the people to be
present at the offerings made to their gods; and the people took part in
their feasts and gave honour to their gods.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> So Israel had relations with the women of
Moab in honour of the Baal of Peor: and the Lord was moved to wrath
against Israel.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Then the Lord said to Moses, Take all the
chiefs of the people, hanging them up in the sun before the Lord, so
that the wrath of the Lord may be turned from Israel.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> So Moses said to the judges of Israel,
Let everyone put to death those of his men who have had relations with
the women of Moab in honour of the Baal of Peor.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Then one of the children of Israel came
to his brothers, taking with him a woman of Midian, before the eyes of
Moses and all the meeting of the people, while they were weeping at the
door of the Tent of meeting.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son
of Aaron the priest, seeing it, got up from among the people and took a
spear in his hand,

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And went after the man of Israel into the
tent, driving the spear through the two of them, through the man of
Israel and through the stomach of the woman. So the disease was stopped
among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But twenty-four thousand of them had come
to their death by the disease.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Through Phinehas, and because of his
passion for my honour, my wrath has been turned away from the children
of Israel, so that I have not sent destruction on them all in my wrath.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> So say to them that I will make with
him an agreement of peace:

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And by this agreement, he and his sons
after him have the right to be priests for ever; because, by his care
for the honour of his God, he took away the sin of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Now the man of Israel who was put to
death with the woman of Midian was Zimri, the son of Salu, a chief of
one of the families of the Simeonites.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> And the woman of Midian who was put to
death was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was the head of a family in
Midian.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Then the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Take up arms against the Midianites and
overcome them;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> For they are a danger to you with their
false ways, causing sin to come on you in the question of Peor, and
because of Cozbi, their sister, the daughter of the chief of Midian, who
was put to death at the time of the disease which came on you because of
Peor.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Now after the disease was over, the Lord
said to Moses and Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Let all the children of Israel be
numbered, by the names of their fathers' families, all those of twenty
years old and over who are able to go to war in Israel.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> So Moses and Eleazar the priest gave them
the order in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan at Jericho, saying,

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Let all the people of twenty years old
and over be numbered, as the Lord has given orders to Moses and the
children of Israel who have come out of Egypt.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Reuben, the first son of Israel: the sons
of Reuben by their families: of Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites: of
Pallu, the family of the Palluites:

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites:
of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> These are the families of the Reubenites:
their number was forty-three thousand, seven hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And the sons of Pallu, Eliab

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And the sons of Eliab: Nemuel and Dathan
and Abiram. These are the same Dathan and Abiram who had a place in the
meeting of the people, who together with Korah made an outcry against
Moses and Aaron and against the Lord:

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And they went down into the open mouth
of the earth, together with Korah, when death overtook him and all his
band; at the time when two hundred and fifty men were burned in the
fire, and they became a sign.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> But death did not overtake the sons of
Korah.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> The sons of Simeon by their families:
of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the
Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites:
of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> These are the families of the
Simeonites, twenty-two thousand, two hundred.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The sons of Gad by their families: of
Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the
Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of
Eri, the family of the Erites:

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of
Areli, the family of the Arelites.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> These are the families of the sons of
Gad as they were numbered, forty thousand, five hundred.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> The sons of Judah, Er and Onan: and Er
and Onan had come to their death in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And the sons of Judah by their families
were: of Shelah, the family of the Shelahites: of Perez, the family of
the Perezites: of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And the sons of Perez were: of Hezron,
the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> These are the families of Judah as they
were numbered, seventy-six thousand, five hundred.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> The sons of Issachar by their families:
of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Puvah, the family of the
Punites:

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> Of Jashub, the family of the
Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> These are the families of Issachar, as
they were numbered, sixty-four thousand, three hundred.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> The sons of Zebulun by their families:
of Sered, the family of the Seredites: of Elon, the family of the
Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> These are the families of the
Zebulunites as they were numbered, sixty thousand, five hundred.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> The sons of Joseph by their families:
Manasseh and Ephraim.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the
family of the Machirites: and Machir was the father of Gilead: of
Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> These are the sons of Gilead: of Iezer,
the family of the Iezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And of Asriel, the family of the
Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites:

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And of Shemida, the family of the
Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, had
no sons, but only daughters, and the names of the daughters of
Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> These are the families of Manasseh; and
those who were numbered of them were fifty-two thousand, seven hundred.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> These are the sons of Ephraim by their
families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites: of Becher, the
family of the Becherites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of
Eran, the family of the Eranites:

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> These are the families of Ephraim as
they were numbered, thirty-two thousand, five hundred. These are the
sons of Joseph by their families.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> The sons of Benjamin by their families:
of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the
Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> Of Shephupham, the family of the
Shuphamites: and of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> And the sons of Bela were Ard and
Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: of Naaman, the family of the
Naamites.

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> These are the sons of Benjamin by their
families: and those who were numbered of them were forty-five thousand,
six hundred.

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> These are the sons of Dan by their
families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the
families of Dan by their families.

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> All the families of the Shuhamites, as
they were numbered, were sixty-four thousand, four hundred.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> The sons of Asher by their families: of
Imnah, the family of the Imnites: of Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites:
of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the
family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites:

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> And the name of the daughter of Asher
was Serah.

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> These are the families of the sons of
Asher as they were numbered, fifty-three thousand, four hundred.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> The sons of Naphtali by their families:
of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the
Gunites:

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites:
of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> These are the families of Naphtali by
their families: and those who were numbered of them were forty-five
thousand, four hundred.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> Those who were numbered of the children
of Israel were six hundred and one thousand, seven hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> Let there be a division of the land
among these, for their heritage, in relation to the number of names.

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> To those families who are more in
number, give a greater heritage; to those who are less in number, a
smaller part: to every one let the heritage be given in relation to the
number in his family.

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> But let the distribution of the land be
made by the decision of the Lord: by the names of the tribes of their
fathers let their heritage be given them.

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> As it is ordered by the decision of the
Lord, let distribution be made between those who are more in number and
those who are less.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> These were those of the Levites who
were numbered by their families: of Gershon, the family of the
Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the
family of the Merarites.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> These are the families of Levi: the
family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the
Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. And
Kohath was the father of Amram.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter
of Levi, whom he had in Egypt: by Amram she had Moses and Aaron and
their sister Miriam.

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> Aaron's sons were Nadab and Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar.

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> Death overtook Nadab and Abihu when
they made an offering of strange fire before the Lord.

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> Of these, twenty-three thousand males,
from one month old and over, were numbered: they were not numbered with
the rest of the children of Israel, for they had no heritage among the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> All these were numbered by Moses and
Eleazar the priest when the children of Israel were numbered in the
lowlands of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> But among all these was not one of
those numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest when the children of Israel
were numbered in the waste land of Sinai.

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> For the Lord had said of them, Death
will certainly overtake them in the waste land. And of them all, only
Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua, the son of Nun, were still
living.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Then the daughters of Zelophehad, the son
of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of
the families of Manasseh, the son of Joseph, came forward: their names
are Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> They came before Moses and Eleazar the
priest and the chiefs and all the people at the door of the Tent of
meeting, and said,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Death overtook our father in the waste
land; he was not among those who were banded together with Korah against
the Lord; but death came to him in his sin; and he had no sons.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Why is the name of our father to be taken
away from among his family, because he had no son? Give us a heritage
among our father's brothers.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> So Moses put their cause before the Lord.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> What the daughters of Zelophehad say is
right: certainly you are to give them a heritage among their father's
brothers: and let the property which would have been their father's go
to them.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And say to the children of Israel, If a
man has no son at the time of his death, let his heritage go to his
daughter.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And if he has no daughter, then give his
heritage to his brothers.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And if he has no brothers, then give
his heritage to his father's brothers.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And if his father has no brothers, then
give it to his nearest relation in the family, as his heritage: this is
to be a decision made by law for the children of Israel, as the Lord
gave orders to Moses.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Go up into
this mountain of Abarim so that you may see the land which I have given
to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And when you have seen it, you will be
put to rest with your people, as your brother Aaron was:

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> Because in the waste land of Zin, when
the people were angry, you and he went against my word and did not keep
my name holy before their eyes, at the waters. (These are the waters of
Meribah in Kadesh in the waste land of Zin.)

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Then Moses said to the Lord,

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of
all flesh, put a man at the head of this people,

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> To go out and come in before them and
be their guide; so that the people of the Lord may not be like sheep
without a keeper.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And the Lord said to Moses, Take
Joshua, the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and put your hand
on him;

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And take him before Eleazar the priest
and all the meeting of the people, and give him his orders before their
eyes.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And put your honour on him, so that all
the children of Israel may be under his authority.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> He will take his place before Eleazar
the priest, so that he may get directions from the Lord for him, with
the Urim: at his word they will go out, and at his word they will come
in, he and all the children of Israel.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> So Moses did as the Lord said: he took
Joshua and put him before Eleazar the priest and the meeting of the
people:

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> And he put his hands on him and gave
him his orders, as the Lord had said by Moses.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Give orders to the children of Israel and
say to them, Let it be your care to give me my offerings at their
regular times, the food of the offerings made by fire to me for a sweet
smell.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Say to them, This is the offering made by
fire which you are to give to the Lord; he-lambs of the first year
without any mark, two every day as a regular burned offering.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> Let one be offered in the morning, and
the other at evening;

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And the tenth part of an ephah of the
best meal for a meal offering mixed with the fourth part of a hin of
clear oil.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> It is a regular burned offering, as it
was ordered in Mount Sinai, for a sweet smell, an offering made by fire
to the Lord.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And for its drink offering take the
fourth part of a hin for one lamb: in the holy place let the wine be
drained out for a drink offering for the Lord.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Let the other lamb be offered at evening;
like the meal offering of the morning and its drink offering, let it be
offered as an offering made by fire for a sweet smell to the Lord.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And on the Sabbath day, two he-lambs of
the first year, without any mark, and two tenth parts of the best meal
for a meal offering mixed with oil, and its drink offering:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> This is the burned offering for every
Sabbath day, in addition to the regular burned offering, and its drink
offering.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And on the first day of every month you
are to give a burned offering to the Lord; two oxen, one male sheep, and
seven he-lambs of the first year, without any mark;

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And three tenth parts of the best meal
for a meal offering mixed with oil, for every ox; and two tenth parts of
the best meal for a meal offering mixed with oil, for the one sheep;

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And a separate tenth part of the best
meal mixed with oil for a meal offering for every lamb; for a burned
offering of a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And their drink offerings are to be
half a hin of wine for an ox, and the third part of a hin for a male
sheep, and the fourth part of a hin for a lamb: this is the burned
offering for every month through all the months of the year.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering to
the Lord; it is to be offered in addition to the regular burned offering
and its drink offering.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And in the first month, on the
fourteenth day of the month, is the Lord's Passover.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> On the fifteenth day of this month
there is to be a feast; for seven days let your food be unleavened
cakes.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> On the first day there is to be a holy
meeting: you may do no sort of field-work:

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> And you are to give an offering made by
fire, a burned offering to the Lord; two oxen, one male sheep, and seven
he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And their meal offering, the best meal
mixed with oil: let three tenth parts of an ephah be offered for an ox
and two tenth parts for a male sheep;

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And a separate tenth part for every one
of the seven lambs;

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering to
take away your sin.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> These are to be offered in addition to
the morning burned offering, which is a regular burned offering at all
times.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> In this way, every day for seven days,
give the food of the offering made by fire, a sweet smell to the Lord:
it is to be offered in addition to the regular burned offering, and its
drink offering.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Then on the seventh day there will be a
holy meeting; you may do no field-work.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And at the time of the first-fruits,
when you give an offering of new meal to the Lord at your feast of
weeks, there is to be a holy meeting: you may do no field-work:

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> And give a burned offering for a sweet
smell to the Lord; two oxen, one male sheep, and seven he-lambs of the
first year;

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And their meal offering, the best meal
mixed with oil, three tenth parts for an ox, two tenth parts for a male
sheep,

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And a separate tenth part for every one
of the seven lambs;

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And one he-goat to take away your sin.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> These are in addition to the regular
burned offering and its meal offering; take care that they are without
any mark, and let them be offered with their drink offerings.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> In the seventh month, on the first day of
the month, let there be a holy meeting; on it you may do no field-work;
let the day be marked by the blowing of horns;

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And give to the Lord a burned offering
for a sweet smell; one ox, one male sheep, seven he-lambs of the first
year, without any mark on them:

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And their meal offering, the best meal
mixed with oil, three tenth parts for an ox, two tenth parts for a male
sheep,

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And a separate tenth part for every one
of the seven lambs;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering, to
take away your sin:

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> In addition to the burned offering of the
new moon, and its meal offering, and the regular burned offering and its
meal offering, and their drink offerings, as they are ordered, for a
sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And on the tenth day of this seventh
month there will be a holy meeting; keep yourselves from pleasure, and
do no sort of work;

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And give to the Lord a burned offering
for a sweet smell; one ox, one male sheep, seven he-lambs of the first
year: only those without any mark on them may be used:

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And their meal offering, the best meal
mixed with oil, three tenth parts for an ox, two tenth parts for a male
sheep,

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> A separate tenth part for every one of
the seven lambs;

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> One he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the offering for taking away your sin, and the regular
burned offering and its meal offering, and their drink offerings.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And on the fifteenth day of the seventh
month let there be a holy meeting; do no field-work, and keep a feast to
the Lord for seven days;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And give a burned offering, an offering
made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord, thirteen oxen, two male
sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, all without any mark on
them;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And their meal offering, the best meal
mixed with oil, three tenth parts for every one of the thirteen oxen,
two tenth parts for every male sheep,

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> And a separate tenth part for every one
of the fourteen lambs;

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its
drink offering.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> On the second day of the feast give an
offering of twelve oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first
year, without any mark on them;

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the oxen and the sheep and the lambs, in relation to their
number, as it is ordered:

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering in
addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and
their drink offerings.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> And on the third day eleven oxen, two
male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark;

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And their meal offering and drink
offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in
relation to their number, as it is ordered:

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its
drink offering.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And on the fourth day ten oxen, two
male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in
relation to their number, as it is ordered.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its
drink offering.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And on the fifth day nine oxen, two
male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in
relation to their number, as it is ordered:

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its
drink offering.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And on the sixth day eight oxen, two
male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> And their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in
relation to their number, as it is ordered:

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the regular burned offering, its meal offering, and its
drink offerings.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And on the seventh day seven oxen, two
male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> And their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in
relation to their number, as it is ordered:

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the regular burned offering, its meal offering, and its
drink offering.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> On the eighth day let there be a holy
meeting: you may do no field-work;

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> And give a burned offering, an offering
made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord: one ox, one male sheep, seven
he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> With the meal offering and the drink
offerings for the ox, the male sheep, and the lambs, in relation to
their number, as it is ordered:

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in
addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its
drink offering.

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> These are the offerings which you are
to give to the Lord at your regular feasts, in addition to the offerings
for an oath, and the free offerings you give, for your burned offerings
and your drink offerings and your peace-offerings.

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> So Moses gave the children of Israel
all these directions as the Lord had given him orders.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And Moses said to the heads of the tribes
of the children of Israel, This is the order of the Lord.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> When a man takes an oath to the Lord, or
gives an undertaking having the force of an oath, let him not go back
from his word, but let him do whatever he has said he will do.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> If a woman, being young and under the
authority of her father, takes an oath to the Lord or gives an
undertaking;

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> If her father, hearing of her oath or the
undertaking she has given, says nothing to her, then all her oaths and
every undertaking she has given will have force.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> But if her father, hearing of it, makes
her take back her word, then the oaths or the undertakings she has given
will have no force; and she will have forgiveness from the Lord, because
her oath was broken by her father.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And if she is married to a husband at the
time when she is under an oath or an undertaking given without thought;

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> If her husband, hearing of it, says
nothing to her at the time, then the oaths she made and the undertakings
she gave will have force.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> But if her husband, hearing of it, makes
her take it back, then the oath she made and the undertaking she gave
without thought will have no force or effect, and she will have the
Lord's forgiveness.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> But an oath made by a widow or one who is
no longer married to her husband, and every undertaking she has given,
will have force.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> If she made an oath while she was under
the authority of her husband,

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And her husband, hearing of it, said
nothing to her and did not put a stop to it, then all her oaths and
every undertaking she gave will have force.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> But if her husband, on hearing of it,
made them without force or effect, then whatever she has said about her
oaths or her undertaking has no force: her husband has made them without
effect, and she will have the Lord's forgiveness.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Every oath, and every undertaking which
she gives, to keep herself from pleasure, may be supported or broken by
her husband.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> But if the days go on, and her husband
says nothing whatever to her, then he is giving the support of his
authority to her oaths and undertakings, because at the time of hearing
them he said nothing to her.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> But if at some time after hearing of
them, he makes them without force, then he is responsible for her
wrongdoing.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> These are the laws which the Lord gave
Moses in relation to a man and his wife, or a father and a young
daughter who is under his authority.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Then the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Give the Midianites punishment for the
wrong they did to the children of Israel: and after that you will go to
rest with your people.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> So Moses said to the people, Let men from
among you be armed for war to put into effect against Midian the Lord's
punishment on them.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> From every tribe of Israel send a
thousand to the war.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> So from the thousands of Israel a
thousand were taken from every tribe, twelve thousand men armed for war.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And Moses sent them out to war, a
thousand from every tribe, and with them Phinehas, the son of Eleazar
the priest, taking in his hands the vessels of the holy place and the
horns for sounding the note of war.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And they made war on Midian, as the Lord
gave orders to Moses; and they put to death every male.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> They put the kings of Midian to death
with the rest, Evi and Reken and Zur and Hur and Reba, the five kings of
Midian: and Balaam, the son of Beor, they put to death with the sword.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> The women of Midian with their little
ones the children of Israel took prisoner; and all their cattle and
flocks and all their goods they took for themselves;

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And after burning all their towns and
all their tent-circles,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> They went away with the goods they had
taken, man and beast.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And the prisoners and the goods and
everything they had taken, they took to Moses and Eleazar the priest and
the people of Israel, to the tent-circle in the lowlands of Moab by the
Jordan at Jericho.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Then Moses and Eleazar the priest and
the chiefs of the people went out to them before they had come into the
tent-circle.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Moses was angry with the chiefs of
the army, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds who had
come back from the war.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And Moses said to them, Why have you
kept all the women safe?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> It was these who, moved by Balaam, were
the cause of Israel's sin against the Lord in the question of Peor,
because of which disease came on the people of the Lord.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> So now put every male child to death,
and every woman who has had sex relations with a man.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> But all the female children who have
had no sex relations with men, you may keep for yourselves.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> You yourselves will have to keep
outside the tent-circle for seven days, anyone of you who has put any
person to death or come near a dead body; and on the third day and on
the seventh day make yourselves and your prisoners clean.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> And every bit of clothing, and anything
made of leather or goats' hair or wood, you are to make clean.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> Then Eleazar the priest said to the men
of war who had been to the fight, This is the rule of the law which the
Lord has given to Moses:

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> But gold and silver and brass and iron
and tin and lead,

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> And anything which may be heated, is to
go through the fire and be made clean; but in addition it is to be put
in the water of cleaning: and anything which may not go through the fire
is to be put in the water.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And on the seventh day, after washing
your clothing, you will be clean, and then you may come into the
tent-circle.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Get an account of everything which was
taken in the war, of man and of beast, you and Eleazar the priest and
the heads of families of the people:

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> And let division be made of it into two
parts, one for the men of war who went out to the fight, and one for all
the people:

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> And from the men of war who went out
let there be offered to the Lord one out of every five hundred, from the
persons, and from the oxen and asses and sheep:

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Take this from their part and give it
to Eleazar the priest as an offering to be lifted up to the Lord.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And from the part given to the children
of Israel, take one out of every fifty, from the persons, and from the
oxen and asses and sheep, and give it to the Levites who have the care
of the House of the Lord.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> So Eleazar and Moses did as the Lord
had given orders to Moses.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> Now the beasts taken, in addition to
what the fighting-men took for themselves, were six hundred and
seventy-five thousand sheep,

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> And seventy-two thousand oxen,

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> And sixty-one thousand asses;

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> And thirty-two thousand persons, that
is, women who had never had sex relations with a man.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> And the half given as their part to the
men who went to the war, was three hundred and thirty-seven thousand,
five hundred sheep,

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Of which the Lord's part was six
hundred and seventy-five.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> The number of oxen was thirty-six
thousand, of which the Lord's part was seventy-two;

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> The number of asses was thirty
thousand, five hundred, of which the Lord's part was sixty-one.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> And the number of persons was sixteen
thousand, of which the Lord's part was thirty-two persons.

<span id="an_31:41">31:41</span> And Moses gave the Lord's part, lifted
up as an offering, to Eleazar the priest, as the Lord had given orders
to Moses.

<span id="an_31:42">31:42</span> And from the half given to the children
of Israel, which Moses had kept separate from that given to the
fighting-men,

<span id="an_31:43">31:43</span> (Now the people's half was three
hundred and thirty-seven thousand, five hundred sheep,

<span id="an_31:44">31:44</span> And thirty-six thousand oxen,

<span id="an_31:45">31:45</span> And thirty thousand, five hundred
asses,

<span id="an_31:46">31:46</span> And sixteen thousand persons;)

<span id="an_31:47">31:47</span> Even from the children of Israel's
half, Moses took one out of every fifty, men and beasts, and gave them
to the Levites who had the care of the House of the Lord; as the Lord
gave orders to Moses.

<span id="an_31:48">31:48</span> Then the men in authority over the
thousands of the army, the captains of thousands and captains of
hundreds, came to Moses,

<span id="an_31:49">31:49</span> And said to him, Your servants have
taken note of the number of all the fighting-men under our orders, and
every one is present;

<span id="an_31:50">31:50</span> And we have here an offering for the
Lord from what every man took in the war, ornaments of gold, leg-chains
and arm-rings, finger-rings, ear-rings, and neck-ornaments, to make our
souls free from sin before the Lord.

<span id="an_31:51">31:51</span> So Moses and Eleazar the priest took
the gold from them, even all the worked ornaments.

<span id="an_31:52">31:52</span> And the gold which the captains of
thousands and captains of hundreds gave, as an offering to be lifted up
before the Lord, came to sixteen thousand, seven hundred and fifty
shekels.

<span id="an_31:53">31:53</span> (For every man of the army had taken
goods for himself in the war.)

<span id="an_31:54">31:54</span> Then Moses and Eleazar the priest took
the gold given by the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds,
and took it into the Tent of meeting, to be a sign in memory of the
children of Israel before the Lord.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Now the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad had a great number of cattle: and when they saw that the
land of Jazer and the land of Gilead was a good place for cattle;

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> The children of Gad and the children of
Reuben came and said to Moses and to Eleazar the priest and to the
chiefs of the meeting,

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and
Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon,

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> The land which the Lord gave into the
hands of the children of Israel, is a land for cattle, and your servants
have cattle.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And they said, With your approval, let
this land be given to your servants as their heritage: do not take us
over Jordan.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Moses said to the children of Gad and
the children of Reuben, Are your brothers to go to the war, while you
take your rest here?

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Why would you take from the children of
Israel the desire to go over into the land which the Lord has given
them?

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> So did your fathers, when I sent them
from Kadesh-barnea to see the land.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For when they went up to the valley of
Eshcol, and saw the land, they took from the children of Israel the
desire to go into the land which the Lord had given them.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> And at that time the Lord was moved to
wrath, and made an oath, saying,

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Truly, not one of the men of twenty
years old and over who came out of Egypt will see the land which I gave
by oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; because they have not been true to
me with all their heart;

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> But only Caleb, the son of Jephunneh
the Kenizzite, and Joshua, the son of Nun: because they have been true
to the Lord.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Then the Lord was angry with Israel,
and he made them wanderers in the waste land for forty years? till all
that generation who had done evil in the eyes of the Lord was dead.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> And now you have come to take the place
of your fathers, another generation of sinners, increasing the wrath of
the Lord against Israel.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> For if you are turned away from him, he
will send them wandering again in the waste land; and you will be the
cause of the destruction of all this people.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> Then they came to him, and said, We
will make safe places for our cattle here, and towns for our little
ones;

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> But we ourselves will be ready armed to
go before the children of Israel till we have taken them to their place:
but our little ones will be safe in the walled towns against the people
of the land.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> We will not come back to our houses
till every one of the children of Israel has come into his heritage.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> For we will not have our heritage with
them on the other side of Jordan and forward; because our heritage has
come to us on this side of Jordan to the east.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Then Moses said to them, If you will do
this, arming yourselves to go before the Lord to the war,

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> Every armed man of you going across
Jordan before the Lord till he has overcome and sent in flight all who
are against him,

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And the land is under the rule of the
Lord: then after that you may come back, having done no wrong to the
Lord and to Israel; and this land will be yours for your heritage before
the Lord.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> But if you do not do this, then you are
sinners against the Lord; and you may be certain that your sin will have
its reward.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> So get to work building your towns for
your little ones, and safe places for your sheep; and do as you have
said.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And the children of Gad and the
children of Reuben said to Moses, Your servants will do as my lord says.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Our little ones, our wives, and our
flocks, and all our cattle, will be there in the towns of Gilead;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> But your servants will go over, every
man armed for war, before the Lord to the fight, as my lord says.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> So Moses gave orders about them to
Eleazar the priest and to Joshua, the son of Nun, and to the heads of
families of the tribes of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And Moses said to them, If the children
of Gad and the children of Reuben go with you over Jordan, every man
armed for the fight before the Lord, and all the land is given into your
hands, then let them have the land of Gilead for a heritage:

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> But if they do not go over with you
armed, they will have to take their heritage with you in the land of
Canaan.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> Then the children of Gad and the
children of Reuben said, As the Lord has said to your servants, so will
we do.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> We will go over armed before the Lord
into the land of Canaan, and you will give us our heritage on this side
of Jordan.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> So Moses gave to them, even to the
children of Gad and the children of Reuben and to the half-tribe of
Manasseh, the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon, king of the Amorites
and Og, king of Bashan, all the land with its towns and the country
round them.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> And the children of Gad were the
builders of Dibon and Ataroth and Aroer;

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> And Atroth-shophan and Jazer and
Jogbehah;

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> And Beth-nimrah and Beth-haran: walled
towns and shut-in places for sheep.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> And the children of Reuben were the
builders of Heshbon and Elealeh and Kiriathaim;

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> And Nebo and Baal-meon, (their names
being changed,) and Sibmah: and they gave other names to the towns they
made.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> And the children of Machir, the son of
Manasseh, went to Gilead and took it, driving out the Amorites who were
living there.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> And Moses gave Gilead to Machir, the
son of Manasseh; and he made it his living-place.

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> And Jair, the son of Manasseh, went and
took the towns of Gilead, naming them Havvoth-Jair.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> And Nobah went and took Kenath and its
small towns, naming it Nobah, after himself.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> These are the journeys of the children of
Israel, when they went out of the land of Egypt in their armies, under
the direction of Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And the stages of their journey on their
way out were put down in writing by Moses at the order of the Lord:
these are the stages of their journey and the way they went.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> On the fifteenth day of the first month
they went out from Rameses; on the day after the Passover the children
of Israel went out by the power of the Lord before the eyes of all the
Egyptians,

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> While the Egyptians were placing in the
earth the bodies of their sons on whom the Lord had sent destruction:
and their gods had been judged by him.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> So the children of Israel went from
Rameses and put up their tents in Succoth.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And they went on from Succoth and put up
their tents in Etham on the edge of the waste land.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And from Etham, turning back to
Pi-hahiroth which is before Baal-zephon, they put up their tents before
Migdol.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And journeying on from before Hahiroth,
they went through the sea into the waste land: they went three days'
journey through the waste land of Etham and put up their tents in Marah.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And from Marah they went on to Elim: and
in Elim there were twelve water-springs and seventy palm-trees; and they
put up their tents there.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And they went on from Elim and put up
their tents by the Red Sea.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Then from the Red Sea they went on and
put up their tents in the waste land of Sin.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And they went on from the waste land of
Sin, and put up their tents in Dophkah.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And they went on from Dophkah, and put
up their tents in Alush.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And they went on from Alush, and put up
their tents in Rephidim, where there was no drinking-water for the
people.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And they went on from Rephidim, and put
up their tents in the waste land of Sinai.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And they went on from the waste land of
Sinai and put up their tents in Kibroth-hattaavah.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And they went on from
Kibroth-hattaavah, and put up their tents in Hazeroth.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And they went on from Hazeroth, and put
up their tents in Rithmah.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And they went on from Rithmah, and put
up their tents in Rimmon-perez.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And they went on from Rimmon-perez, and
put up their tents in Libnah.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And they went on from Libnah, and put
up their tents in Rissah.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And they went on from Rissah, and put
up their tents in Kehelathah.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And they went on from Kehelathah, and
put up their tents in Mount Shepher.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And they went on from Mount Shepher,
and put up their tents in Haradah.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> And they went on from Haradah, and put
up their tents in Makheloth.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> And they went on from Makheloth, and
put up their tents in Tahath.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> And they went on from Tahath, and put
up their tents in Terah.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And they went on from Terah, and put up
their tents in Mithkah.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> And they went on from Mithkah, and put
up their tents in Hashmonah.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> And they went on from Hashmonah, and
put up their tents in Moseroth.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> And they went on from Moseroth, and put
up their tents in Bene-jaakan.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> And they went on from Bene-jaakan, and
put up their tents in Hor-haggidgad.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And they went on from Hor-haggidgad,
and put up their tents in Jotbathah.

<span id="an_33:34">33:34</span> And they went on from Jotbathah, and
put up their tents in Abronah.

<span id="an_33:35">33:35</span> And they went on from Abronah, and put
up their tents in Ezion-geber.

<span id="an_33:36">33:36</span> And they went on from Ezion-geber, and
put up their tents in the waste land of Zin (which is Kadesh).

<span id="an_33:37">33:37</span> And they went on from Kadesh, and put
up their tents in Mount Hor, on the edge of the land of Edom.

<span id="an_33:38">33:38</span> And Aaron the priest went up into the
mountain at the order of the Lord, and came to his death there, in the
fortieth year after the children of Israel had come out of the land of
Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month.

<span id="an_33:39">33:39</span> Aaron was a hundred and twenty-three
years old at the time of his death in Mount Hor.

<span id="an_33:40">33:40</span> And news of the coming of the children
of Israel came to the king of Arad, the Canaanite, who was living in the
South in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_33:41">33:41</span> And from Mount Hor they went on, and
put up their tents in Zalmonah.

<span id="an_33:42">33:42</span> And they went on from Zalmonah, and put
up their tents in Punon.

<span id="an_33:43">33:43</span> And they went on from Punon, and put up
their tents in Oboth.

<span id="an_33:44">33:44</span> And they went on from Oboth, and put up
their tents in Iye-abarim at the edge of Moab.

<span id="an_33:45">33:45</span> And they went on from Iyim, and put up
their tents in Dibon-gad.

<span id="an_33:46">33:46</span> And from Dibon-gad they went on, and
put up their tents in Almon-diblathaim.

<span id="an_33:47">33:47</span> And from Almon-diblathaim they went on,
and put up their tents in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.

<span id="an_33:48">33:48</span> And they went on from the mountains of
Abarim, and put up their tents in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan at
Jericho;

<span id="an_33:49">33:49</span> Planting their tents by the side of
Jordan from Beth-jeshimoth as far as Abel-shittim in the lowlands of
Moab.

<span id="an_33:50">33:50</span> And in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan
at Jericho, the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_33:51">33:51</span> Say to the children of Israel, When you
go over Jordan into the land of Canaan,

<span id="an_33:52">33:52</span> See that all the people of the land are
forced out from before you, and put to destruction all their pictured
stones, and all their metal images, and all their high places:

<span id="an_33:53">33:53</span> And take the land for yourselves, for
your resting-place: for to you I have given the land as your heritage.

<span id="an_33:54">33:54</span> And you will take up your heritage in
the land by the decision of the Lord, to every family its part; the
greater the family the greater its heritage, and the smaller the family
the smaller will be its heritage; wherever the decision of the Lord
gives to any man his part, that will be his; distribution will be made
to you by your fathers' tribes.

<span id="an_33:55">33:55</span> But if you are slow in driving out the
people of the land, then those of them who are still there will be like
pin-points in your eyes and like thorns in your sides, troubling you in
the land where you are living.

<span id="an_33:56">33:56</span> And it will come about that as it was
my purpose to do to them, so I will do to you.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Give orders to the children of Israel and
say to them, When you come into the land of Canaan; (this is the land
which is to be your heritage, the land of Canaan inside these limits,)

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Then your south quarter will be from the
waste land of Zin by the side of Edom, and your limit on the south will
be from the east end of the Salt Sea,

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And round to the south of the slope of
Akrabbim, and on to Zin: and its direction will be south of
Kadesh-barnea, and it will go as far as Hazar-addar and on to Azmon:

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And from Azmon it will go round to the
stream of Egypt as far as the sea.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And for your limit on the west you will
have the Great Sea and its edge: this will be your limit on the west.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And your limit on the north will be the
line from the Great Sea to Mount Hor:

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And from Mount Hor the line will go in
the direction of Hamath; the farthest point of it will be at Zedad:

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And the limit will go on to Ziphron, with
its farthest point at Hazar-enan: this will be your limit on the north.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And on the east, your limit will be
marked out from Hazar-enan to Shepham,

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Going down from Shepham to Riblah on
the east side of Ain, and on as far as the east side of the sea of
Chinnereth:

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> And so down to Jordan, stretching to
the Salt Sea: all the land inside these limits will be yours.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And Moses gave orders to the children
of Israel saying, This is the land which is to be your heritage, by the
decision of the Lord, which by the Lord's order is to be given to the
nine tribes and the half-tribe:

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> For the tribe of the children of
Reuben, by their fathers' families, and the tribe of the children of
Gad, by their fathers' families, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, have
been given their heritage:

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> The two tribes and the half-tribe have
been given their heritage on the other side of Jordan at Jericho, on the
east looking to the dawn.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> These are the names of the men who are
to make the distribution of the land among you: Eleazar the priest and
Joshua, the son of Nun.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> And you are to take one chief from
every tribe to make the distribution of the land.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And these are the names of the men: of
the tribe of Judah, Caleb, the son of Jephunneh.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> And of the tribe of the children of
Simeon, Shemuel, the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad, the
son of Chislon.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> And of the tribe of the children of
Dan, a chief, Bukki, the son of Jogli.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Of the children of Joseph: of the tribe
of the children of Manasseh, a chief, Hanniel, the son of Ephod:

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> And of the tribe of the children of
Ephraim, a chief, Kemuel, the son of Shiphtan.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> And of the tribe of the children of
Zebulun, a chief, Elizaphan, the son of Parnach.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And of the tribe of the children of
Issachar, a chief, Paltiel, the son of Azzan.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And of the tribe of the children of
Asher, a chief, Ahihud, the son of Shelomi.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And of the tribe of the children of
Naphtali, a chief, Pedahel, the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> These are they to whom the Lord gave
orders to make the distribution of the heritage among the children of
Israel in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses in the
lowlands of Moab by Jordan at Jericho,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Give orders to the children of Israel to
give to the Levites, from the heritage which is theirs, towns for
themselves, with land on the outskirts of the towns.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> These towns are to be their
living-places, with land round them for their cattle and their food and
all their beasts,

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Stretching from the wall of the towns a
distance of a thousand cubits all round.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> The measure of this space of land is to
be two thousand cubits outside the town on the east, and two thousand
cubits on the south and on the west and on the north, the town being in
the middle. This space will be the outskirts of their towns.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And the towns which you give the Levites
are to be the six safe places to which the taker of life may go in
flight; and in addition you are to give them forty-two towns.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> Forty-eight towns are to be given to the
Levites, all with land round them.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And these towns are to be given out of
the heritage of the children of Israel, taking the greater number from
those who have much, and a smaller number from those who have little:
everyone, in the measure of his heritage, is to give of his property to
the Levites.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> And the Lord said to Moses,

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Say to the children of Israel, when you
have gone over Jordan into the land of Canaan;

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Then let certain towns be marked out as
safe places to which anyone who takes the life of another in error may
go in flight.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> In these towns you may be safe from him
who has the right of punishment; so that death may not overtake the
taker of life till he has been judged by the meeting of the people.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Six of the towns which you give will be
such safe places;

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Three on the other side of Jordan and
three in the land of Canaan, to be safe places for flight.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> For the children of Israel and for the
man from another country who is living among them, these six towns are
to be safe places, where anyone causing the death of another through
error may go in flight.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> But if a man gives another man a blow
with an iron instrument, causing his death, he is a taker of life and is
certainly to be put to death.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> Or if he gives him a blow with a stone
in his hand, causing his death, he is a taker of life and is certainly
to be put to death.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> Or if he gave him blows with a wood
instrument in his hands, causing his death, he is a taker of life and is
certainly to be put to death.

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> He whose right it is to give punishment
for blood, may himself put to death the taker of life when he comes face
to face with him.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> If in his hate he put a sword through
him, or waiting secretly for him sent a spear or stone at him, causing
his death;

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> Or in hate gave him blows with his
hand, causing death; he who gave the death-blow is to be put to death;
he is a taker of life: he whose right it is to give punishment for blood
may put to death the taker of life when he comes face to face with him.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> But if a man has given a wound to
another suddenly and not in hate, or without design has sent something
against him,

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> Or has given him a blow with a stone,
without seeing him, so causing his death, though he had nothing against
him and no desire to do him evil:

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> Then let the meeting of the people be
judge between the man responsible for the death and him who has the
right of punishment for blood, acting by these rules:

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> And let the people keep the man
responsible for the death safe from the hands of him who has the right
of punishment for blood, and send him back to his safe town where he had
gone in flight: there let him be till the death of the high priest who
was marked with the holy oil.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> But if ever he goes outside the walls
of the safe town where he had gone in flight,

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And the giver of punishment, meeting
him outside the walls of the town, puts him to death, he will not be
responsible for his blood:

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> Because he had been ordered to keep
inside the safe town till the death of the high priest: but after the
death of the high priest the taker of life may come back to the place of
his heritage.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> These rules are to be your guide in
judging through all your generations wherever you may be living.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> Anyone causing the death of another is
himself to be put to death on the word of witnesses: but the word of one
witness is not enough.

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> Further, no price may be given for the
life of one who has taken life and whose right reward is death: he is
certainly to be put to death.

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> And no price may be offered for one who
has gone in flight to a safe town, for the purpose of letting him come
back to his place before the death of the high priest.

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> So do not make the land where you are
living unholy: for blood makes the land unholy: and there is no way of
making the land free from the blood which has come on it, but only by
the death of him who was the cause of it.

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> Do not make unclean the land where you
are living and in which is my House: for I the Lord am present among the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Now the heads of the families of the
children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the
families of the sons of Joseph, came to Moses, the chiefs and the heads
of families of the children of Israel being present,

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And said, The Lord gave orders to my lord
to make distribution of the land as their heritage to the children of
Israel: and my lord was ordered by the Lord to give the heritage of
Zelophehad, our brother, to his daughters.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> Now if they get married to any of the
sons of other tribes of the children of Israel, then their property will
be taken away from the heritage of our fathers, and become part of the
heritage of the tribe into which they get married: and their heritage
will be taken away from the heritage of our tribe.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And at the time of the Jubilee of the
children of Israel, their property will be joined to the heritage of the
tribe of which they are part and will be taken away from the heritage of
the tribe of our fathers.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> So by the direction of the Lord, Moses
gave orders to the children of Israel, saying, What the tribe of the
sons of Joseph have said is right.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> This is the order of the Lord about the
daughters of Zelophehad: The Lord says, Let them take as their husbands
whoever is most pleasing to them, but only among the family of their
father's tribe.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> And so no property will be handed from
tribe to tribe among the children of Israel; but every one of the
children of Israel will keep the heritage of his father's tribe.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And every daughter owning property in any
tribe of the children of Israel is to be married to one of the family of
her father's tribe, so that every man of the children of Israel may keep
the heritage of his fathers.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And no property will be handed from one
tribe to another, but every tribe of the children of Israel will keep
its heritage.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> So the daughters of Zelophehad did as
the Lord gave orders to Moses:

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and
Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, took as their husbands
the sons of their father's brothers:

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And were married into the families of
the sons of Manasseh, the son of Joseph, and their property was kept in
the tribe of their father's family

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> These are the laws and the orders which
the Lord gave to the children of Israel by Moses, in the lowlands of
Moab by Jordan at Jericho.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy](deu)
