[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jam)  [Next](pe2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 1 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Peter, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the
saints who are living in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Who, through the purpose of God, have been
made holy by the Spirit, disciples of Jesus, made clean by his blood:
May you have grace and peace in full measure.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who through his great mercy has given us a new birth and a
living hope by the coming again of Jesus Christ from the dead,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And a heritage fair, holy and for ever new,
waiting in heaven for you,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Who, by the power of God are kept, through
faith, for that salvation, which will be seen at the last day.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> You have cause for great joy in this,
though it may have been necessary for you to be troubled for a little
time, being tested in all sorts of ways,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> So that the true metal of your faith, being
of much greater value than gold (which, though it comes to an end, is
tested by fire), may come to light in praise and glory and honour, at
the revelation of Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> To whom your love is given, though you have
not seen him; and the faith which you have in him, though you do not see
him now, gives you joy greater than words and full of glory:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For so you have the true end of your faith,
even the salvation of your souls.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For the prophets who gave the news of the
grace which would come to you, made search with all care for knowledge
of this salvation;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Attempting to see what sort of time the
Spirit of Christ which was in them was pointing to, when it gave witness
to the pains which Christ would undergo and the glories which would come
after them.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And it was made clear to those prophets
that they were God's servants not for themselves but for you, to give
you word of the things which have now come to your ears from the
preachers of the good news through the Holy Spirit sent down from
heaven; things which even angels have a desire to see.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> So make your minds ready, and keep on the
watch, hoping with all your power for the grace which is to come to you
at the revelation of Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Like children ruled by God, do not go
back to the old desires of the time when you were without knowledge:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> But be holy in every detail of your
lives, as he, whose servants you are, is holy;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Because it has been said in the Writings,
You are to be holy, for I am holy.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And if you give the name of Father to him
who, judging every man by his acts, has no respect for a man's position,
then go in fear while you are on this earth:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Being conscious that you have been made
free from that foolish way of life which was your heritage from your
fathers, not through a payment of things like silver or gold which come
to destruction,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> But through holy blood, like that of a
clean and unmarked lamb, even the blood of Christ:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Who was marked out by God before the
making of the world, but was caused to be seen in these last times for
you,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Who through him have faith in God who
took him up again from the dead into glory; so that your faith and hope
might be in God.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And as you have made your souls clean,
being ruled by what is true, and loving one another without deceit, see
that your love is warm and from the heart:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Because you have had a new birth, not
from the seed of man, but from eternal seed, through the word of a
living and unchanging God.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> For it is said, All flesh is like grass,
and all its glory like the flower of the grass. The grass becomes dry
and the flower dead:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But the word of the Lord is eternal. And
this is the word of the good news which was given to you.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> So putting away all wrongdoing, and all
tricks and deceits and envies and evil talk,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Be full of desire for the true milk of the
word, as babies at their mothers' breasts, so that you may go on to
salvation;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> If you have had a taste of the grace of the
Lord:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> To whom you come, as to a living stone, not
honoured by men, but of great and special value to God;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> You, as living stones, are being made into
a house of the spirit, a holy order of priests, making those offerings
of the spirit which are pleasing to God through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Because it is said in the Writings, See, I
am placing a keystone in Zion, of great and special value; and the man
who has faith in him will not be put to shame.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the value is for you who have faith;
but it is said for those without faith, The very stone which the
builders put on one side, was made the chief stone of the building;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And, A stone of falling, a rock of trouble;
the word is the cause of their fall, because they go against it, and
this was the purpose of God.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But you are a special people, a holy
nation, priests and kings, a people given up completely to God, so that
you may make clear the virtues of him who took you out of the dark into
the light of heaven.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> In the past you were not a people, but
now you are the people of God; then there was no mercy for you, but now
mercy has been given to you.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> My loved ones, I make this request with
all my heart, that, as those for whom this world is a strange country,
you will keep yourselves from the desires of the flesh which make war
against the soul;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Being of good behaviour among the
Gentiles; so that though they say now that you are evil-doers, they may
see your good works and give glory to God when he comes to be their
judge.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Keep all the laws of men because of the
Lord; those of the king, who is over all,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And those of the rulers who are sent by
him for the punishment of evil-doers and for the praise of those who do
well.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Because it is God's pleasure that foolish
and narrow-minded men may be put to shame by your good behaviour:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> As those who are free, not using your
free position as a cover for wrongdoing, but living as the servants of
God;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Have respect for all, loving the
brothers, fearing God, honouring the king.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Servants, take orders from your masters
with all respect; not only if they are good and gentle, but even if they
are bad-humoured.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For it is a sign of grace if a man,
desiring to do right in the eyes of God, undergoes pain as punishment
for something which he has not done.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> What credit is it if, when you have done
evil, you take your punishment quietly? but if you are given punishment
for doing right, and take it quietly, this is pleasing to God.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> This is God's purpose for you: because
Jesus himself underwent punishment for you, giving you an example, so
that you might go in his footsteps:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who did no evil, and there was no deceit
in his mouth:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> To sharp words he gave no sharp answer;
when he was undergoing pain, no angry word came from his lips; but he
put himself into the hands of the judge of righteousness:

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> He took our sins on himself, giving his
body to be nailed on the tree, so that we, being dead to sin, might have
a new life in righteousness, and by his wounds we have been made well.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Because, like sheep, you had gone out of
the way; but now you have come back to him who keeps watch over your
souls.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Wives, be ruled by your husbands; so that
even if some of them give no attention to the word, their hearts may be
changed by the behaviour of their wives,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> When they see your holy behaviour in the
fear of God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Do not let your ornaments be those of the
body such as dressing of the hair, or putting on of jewels of gold or
fair clothing;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But let them be those of the unseen man of
the heart, the ever-shining ornament of a gentle and quiet spirit, which
is of great price in the eyes of God.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And these were the ornaments of the holy
women of the past, whose hope was in God, being ruled by their husbands:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> As Sarah was ruled by Abraham, naming him
lord; whose children you are if you do well, and are not put in fear by
any danger.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And you husbands, give thought to your way
of life with your wives, giving honour to the woman who is the feebler
vessel, but who has an equal part in the heritage of the grace of life;
so that you may not be kept from prayer.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Last of all, see that you are all in
agreement; feeling for one another, loving one another like brothers,
full of pity, without pride:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Not giving back evil for evil, or curse for
curse, but in place of cursing, blessing; because this is the purpose of
God for you that you may have a heritage of blessing.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For it is said, Let the man who has a
love of life, desiring to see good days, keep his tongue from evil and
his lips from words of deceit:

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And let him be turned from evil and do
good; searching for peace and going after it with all his heart.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For the eyes of the Lord are on the
upright, and his ears are open to their prayers: but the face of the
Lord is against those who do evil.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Who will do you any damage if you keep
your minds fixed on what is good?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But you are happy if you undergo pain
because of righteousness; have no part in their fear and do not be
troubled;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But give honour to Christ in your hearts
as your Lord; and be ready at any time when you are questioned about the
hope which is in you, to give an answer in the fear of the Lord and
without pride;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Being conscious that you have done no
wrong; so that those who say evil things about your good way of life as
Christians may be put to shame.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Because if it is God's purpose for you to
undergo pain, it is better to do so for well-doing than for evil-doing.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Because Christ once went through pain for
sins, the upright one taking the place of sinners, so that through him
we might come back to God; being put to death in the flesh, but given
life in the Spirit;

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> By whom he went to the spirits in prison,
preaching to those

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Who, in the days of Noah, went against
God's orders; but God in his mercy kept back the punishment, while Noah
got ready the ark, in which a small number, that is to say eight
persons, got salvation through water:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And baptism, of which this is an image,
now gives you salvation, not by washing clean the flesh, but by making
you free from the sense of sin before God, through the coming again of
Jesus Christ from the dead;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Who has gone into heaven, and is at the
right hand of God, angels and authorities and powers having been put
under his rule.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> So that as Jesus was put to death in the
flesh, do you yourselves be of the same mind; for the death of the flesh
puts an end to sin;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> So that you may give the rest of your lives
in the flesh, not to the desires of men, but to the purpose of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Because for long enough, in times past, we
have been living after the way of the Gentiles, given up to the desires
of the flesh, to drinking and feasting and loose behaviour and unclean
worship of images;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And they are wondering that you no longer
go with them in this violent wasting of life, and are saying evil things
of you:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But they will have to give an account of
themselves to him who is ready to be the judge of the living and the
dead.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For this was the reason why the good news
of Jesus was given even to the dead, so that they might be judged as men
in the flesh, but might be living before God in the spirit.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But the end of all things is near: so be
serious in your behaviour and keep on the watch with prayer;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And most of all be warm in your love for
one another; because in love there is forgiveness for sins without
number:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Keep open house for all with a glad heart;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Making distribution among one another of
whatever has been given to you, like true servants of the unmeasured
grace of God;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> If anyone has anything to say, let it be
as the words of God; if anyone has the desire to be the servant of
others, let him do it in the strength which is given by God; so that in
all things God may have the glory through Jesus Christ, whose are the
glory and the power for ever.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Dear brothers, do not be surprised, as if
it was something strange, if your faith is tested as by fire:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But be glad that you are given a part in
the pains of Christ; so that at the revelation of his glory you may have
great joy.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> If men say evil things of you because of
the name of Christ, happy are you; for the Spirit of glory and of God is
resting on you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Let no one among you undergo punishment
as a taker of life, or as a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as one who is
over-interested in other men's business;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> But if he undergoes punishment as a
Christian, that is no shame to him; let him give glory to God in this
name.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For the time has come for the judging,
starting with the church of God; but if it makes a start with us, what
will be the end of those who are not under the rule of God?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And if it is hard for even the good man
to get salvation, what chance has the man without religion or the
sinner?

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> For this reason let those who by the
purpose of God undergo punishment, keep on in well-doing and put their
souls into the safe hands of their Maker.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I who am myself one of the rulers of the
church, and a witness of the death of Christ, having my part in the
coming glory, send this serious request to the chief men among you:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Keep watch over the flock of God which is
in your care, using your authority, not as forced to do so, but gladly;
and not for unclean profit but with a ready mind;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Not as lords over God's heritage, but
making yourselves examples to the flock.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And at the coming of the chief Keeper of
the sheep, you will be given the eternal crown of glory.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And in the same way, let the younger men be
ruled by the older ones. Let all of you put away pride and make
yourselves ready to be servants: for God is a hater of pride, but he
gives grace to those who make themselves low.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For this cause make yourselves low under
the strong hand of God, so that when the time comes you may be lifted
up;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Putting all your troubles on him, for he
takes care of you.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be serious and keep watch; the Evil One,
who is against you, goes about like a lion with open mouth in search of
food;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Do not give way to him but be strong in
your faith, in the knowledge that your brothers who are in the world
undergo the same troubles.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And after you have undergone pain for a
little time, the God of all grace who has given you a part in his
eternal glory through Christ Jesus, will himself give you strength and
support, and make you complete in every good thing;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> His is the power for ever. So be it.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> I have sent you this short letter by
Silvanus, a true brother, in my opinion; comforting you and witnessing
that this is the true grace of God; keep to it.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> She who is in Babylon, who has a part
with you in the purpose of God, sends you her love; and so does my son
Mark.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Give one another the kiss of love. Peace
be to you all in Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter](pe2)
