[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psa)  [Next](ecc) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Proverbs

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The wise sayings of Solomon, the son of
David, king of Israel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To have knowledge of wise teaching; to be
clear about the words of reason:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To be trained in the ways of wisdom, in
righteousness and judging truly and straight behaviour:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> To make the simple-minded sharp, and to
give the young man knowledge, and serious purpose:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> (The wise man, hearing, will get greater
learning, and the acts of the man of good sense will be wisely guided:)

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> To get the sense of wise sayings and
secrets, and of the words of the wise and their dark sayings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The fear of the Lord is the start of
knowledge: but the foolish have no use for wisdom and teaching.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> My son, give ear to the training of your
father, and do not give up the teaching of your mother:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For they will be a crown of grace for your
head, and chain-ornaments about your neck.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> My son, if sinners would take you out of
the right way, do not go with them.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> If they say, Come with us; let us make
designs against the good, waiting secretly for the upright, without
cause;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Let us overcome them living, like the
underworld, and in their strength, as those who go down to death;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Goods of great price will be ours, our
houses will be full of wealth;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Take your chance with us, and we will all
have one money-bag:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> My son, do not go with them; keep your
feet from their ways:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For their feet are running after evil,
and they are quick to take a man's life.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Truly, to no purpose is the net stretched
out before the eyes of the bird:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And they are secretly waiting for their
blood and making ready destruction for themselves.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Such is the fate of everyone who goes in
search of profit; it takes away the life of its owners.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wisdom is crying out in the street; her
voice is loud in the open places;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Her words are sounding in the
meeting-places, and in the doorways of the town:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> How long, you simple ones, will foolish
things be dear to you? and pride a delight to the haters of authority?
how long will the foolish go on hating knowledge?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Be turned again by my sharp words: see, I
will send the flow of my spirit on you, and make my words clear to you.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Because your ears were shut to my voice;
no one gave attention to my out-stretched hand;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> You were not controlled by my guiding,
and would have nothing to do with my sharp words:

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> So in the day of your trouble I will be
laughing; I will make sport of your fear;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> When your fear comes on you like a storm,
and your trouble like a rushing wind; when pain and sorrow come on you.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then I will give no answer to their
cries; searching for me early, they will not see me:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For they were haters of knowledge, and
did not give their hearts to the fear of the Lord:

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> They had no desire for my teaching, and
my words of protest were as nothing to them.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> So the fruit of their way will be their
food, and with the designs of their hearts they will be made full.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> For the turning back of the simple from
teaching will be the cause of their death, and the peace of the foolish
will be their destruction.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> But whoever gives ear to me will take his
rest safely, living in peace without fear of evil.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My son, if you will take my words to your
heart, storing up my laws in your mind;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So that your ear gives attention to wisdom,
and your heart is turned to knowledge;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Truly, if you are crying out for good
sense, and your request is for knowledge;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> If you are looking for her as for silver,
and searching for her as for stored-up wealth;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then the fear of the Lord will be clear to
you, and knowledge of God will be yours.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For the Lord gives wisdom; out of his mouth
come knowledge and reason:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He has salvation stored up for the upright,
he is a breastplate to those in whom there is no evil;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> He keeps watch on the ways which are right,
and takes care of those who have the fear of him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then you will have knowledge of
righteousness and right acting, and upright behaviour, even of every
good way.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For wisdom will come into your heart, and
knowledge will be pleasing to your soul;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Wise purposes will be watching over you,
and knowledge will keep you;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Giving you salvation from the evil man,
from those whose words are false;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Who give up the way of righteousness, to
go by dark roads;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who take pleasure in wrongdoing, and have
joy in the evil designs of the sinner;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Whose ways are not straight, and whose
footsteps are turned to evil:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To take you out of the power of the
strange woman, who says smooth words with her tongue;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Who is false to the husband of her early
years, and does not keep the agreement of her God in mind:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For her house is on the way down to
death; her footsteps go down to the shades:

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Those who go to her do not come back
again; their feet do not keep in the ways of life:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> So that you may go in the way of good
men, and keep in the footsteps of the upright.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For the upright will be living in the
land, and the good will have it for their heritage.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But sinners will be cut off from the
land, and those whose acts are false will be uprooted.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> My son, keep my teaching in your memory,
and my rules in your heart:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For they will give you increase of days,
years of life, and peace.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let not mercy and good faith go from you;
let them be hanging round your neck, recorded on your heart;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> So you will have grace and a good name in
the eyes of God and men.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Put all your hope in God, not looking to
your reason for support.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> In all your ways give ear to him, and he
will make straight your footsteps.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Put no high value on your wisdom: let the
fear of the Lord be before you, and keep yourself from evil:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> This will give strength to your flesh, and
new life to your bones.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Give honour to the Lord with your wealth,
and with the first-fruits of all your increase:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> So your store-houses will be full of
grain, and your vessels overflowing with new wine.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> My son, do not make your heart hard
against the Lord's teaching; do not be made angry by his training:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For to those who are dear to him the Lord
says sharp words, and makes the son in whom he has delight undergo pain.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Happy is the man who makes discovery of
wisdom, and he who gets knowledge.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For trading in it is better than trading
in silver, and its profit greater than bright gold.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> She is of more value than jewels, and
nothing for which you may have a desire is fair in comparison with her.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Long life is in her right hand, and in
her left are wealth and honour.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Her ways are ways of delight, and all her
goings are peace.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> She is a tree of life to all who take her
in their hands, and happy is everyone who keeps her.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The Lord by wisdom put in position the
bases of the earth; by reason he put the heavens in their place.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> By his knowledge the deep was parted, and
dew came dropping from the skies.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> My son, keep good sense, and do not let
wise purpose go from your eyes.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> So they will be life for your soul, and
grace for your neck.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then you will go safely on your way, and
your feet will have no cause for slipping.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> When you take your rest you will have no
fear, and on your bed sleep will be sweet to you.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Have no fear of sudden danger, or of the
storm which will come on evil-doers:

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> For the Lord will be your hope, and will
keep your foot from being taken in the net.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Do not keep back good from those who have
a right to it, when it is in the power of your hand to do it.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Say not to your neighbour, Go, and come
again, and tomorrow I will give; when you have it by you at the time.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Do not make evil designs against your
neighbour, when he is living with you without fear.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Do not take up a cause at law against a
man for nothing, if he has done you no wrong.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Have no envy of the violent man, or take
any of his ways as an example.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For the wrong-hearted man is hated by the
Lord, but he is a friend to the upright.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> The curse of the Lord is on the house of
the evil-doer, but his blessing is on the tent of the upright.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> He makes sport of the men of pride, but
he gives grace to the gentle-hearted.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The wise will have glory for their
heritage, but shame will be the reward of the foolish.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Give ear, my sons, to the teaching of a
father; give attention so that you may have knowledge:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For I give you good teaching; do not give
up the knowledge you are getting from me.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For I was a son to my father, a gentle and
an only one to my mother.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And he gave me teaching, saying to me, Keep
my words in your heart; keep my rules so that you may have life:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Get wisdom, get true knowledge; keep it in
memory, do not be turned away from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Do not give her up, and she will keep you;
give her your love, and she will make you safe.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The first sign of wisdom is to get wisdom;
go, give all you have to get true knowledge.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Put her in a high place, and you will be
lifted up by her; she will give you honour, when you give her your love.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> She will put a crown of grace on your head,
giving you a head-dress of glory.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Give ear, O my son, and let your heart be
open to my sayings; and long life will be yours.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I have given you teaching in the way of
wisdom, guiding your steps in the straight way.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> When you go, your way will not be narrow,
and in running you will not have a fall.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Take learning in your hands, do not let
her go: keep her, for she is your life.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Do not go in the road of sinners, or be
walking in the way of evil men.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Keep far from it, do not go near; be
turned from it, and go on your way.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For they take no rest till they have done
evil; their sleep is taken away if they have not been the cause of
someone's fall.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The bread of evil-doing is their food,
the wine of violent acts their drink.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But the way of the upright is like the
light of early morning, getting brighter and brighter till the full day.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The way of sinners is dark; they see not
the cause of their fall.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> My son, give attention to my words; let
your ear be turned to my sayings.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Let them not go from your eyes; keep them
deep in your heart.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For they are life to him who gets them,
and strength to all his flesh.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And keep watch over your heart with all
care; so you will have life.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Put away from you an evil tongue, and let
false lips be far from you.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Keep your eyes on what is in front of
you, looking straight before you.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Keep a watch on your behaviour; let all
your ways be rightly ordered.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Let there be no turning to the right or
to the left, keep your feet from evil.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> My son, give attention to my wisdom; let
your ear be turned to my teaching:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> So that you may be ruled by a wise purpose,
and your lips may keep knowledge.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For honey is dropping from the lips of the
strange woman, and her mouth is smoother than oil;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But her end is bitter as wormwood, and
sharp as a two-edged sword;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Her feet go down to death, and her steps to
the underworld;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> She never keeps her mind on the road of
life; her ways are uncertain, she has no knowledge.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Give ear to me then, my sons, and do not
put away my words from you.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Go far away from her, do not come near the
door of her house;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For fear that you may give your honour to
others, and your wealth to strange men:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And strange men may be full of your
wealth, and the fruit of your work go to the house of others;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And you will be full of grief at the end
of your life, when your flesh and your body are wasted;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And you will say, How was teaching hated
by me, and my heart put no value on training;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> I did not give attention to the voice of
my teachers, my ear was not turned to those who were guiding me!

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I was in almost all evil in the company
of the people.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Let water from your store and not that of
others be your drink, and running water from your fountain.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Let not your springs be flowing in the
streets, or your streams of water in the open places.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let them be for yourself only, not for
other men with you.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Let blessing be on your fountain; have
joy in the wife of your early years.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> As a loving hind and a gentle doe, let
her breasts ever give you rapture; let your passion at all times be
moved by her love.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Why let yourself, my son, go out of the
way with a strange woman, and take another woman in your arms?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For a man's ways are before the eyes of
the Lord, and he puts all his goings in the scales.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The evil-doer will be taken in the net of
his crimes, and prisoned in the cords of his sin.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> He will come to his end for need of
teaching; he is so foolish that he will go wandering from the right way.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> My son, if you have made yourself
responsible for your neighbour, or given your word for another,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> You are taken as in a net by the words of
your mouth, the sayings of your lips have overcome you.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Do this, my son, and make yourself free,
because you have come into the power of your neighbour; go without
waiting, and make a strong request to your neighbour.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Give no sleep to your eyes, or rest to
them;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Make yourself free, like the roe from the
hand of the archer, and the bird from him who puts a net for her.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Go to the ant, you hater of work; give
thought to her ways and be wise:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Having no chief, overseer, or ruler,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> She gets her meat in the summer, storing up
food at the time of the grain-cutting.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> How long will you be sleeping, O hater of
work? when will you get up from your sleep?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> A little sleep, a little rest, a little
folding of the hands in sleep:

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then loss will come on you like an
outlaw, and your need like an armed man

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> A good-for-nothing man is an evil-doer;
he goes on his way causing trouble with false words;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Making signs with his eyes, rubbing with
his feet, and giving news with his fingers;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> His mind is ever designing evil: he lets
loose violent acts.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> For this cause his downfall will be
sudden; quickly he will be broken, and there will be no help for him.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Six things are hated by the Lord; seven
things are disgusting to him:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Eyes of pride, a false tongue, hands
which take life without cause;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> A heart full of evil designs, feet which
are quick in running after sin;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> A false witness, breathing out untrue
words, and one who lets loose violent acts among brothers.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> My son, keep the rule of your father, and
have in memory the teaching of your mother:

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Keep them ever folded in your heart, and
have them hanging round your neck.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> In your walking, it will be your guide;
when you are sleeping, it will keep watch over you; when you are awake,
it will have talk with you.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the rule is a light, and the teaching
a shining light; and the guiding words of training are the way of life.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> They will keep you from the evil woman,
from the smooth tongue of the strange woman.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Let not your heart's desire go after her
fair body; let not her eyes take you prisoner.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> For a loose woman is looking for a cake
of bread, but another man's wife goes after one's very life.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> May a man take fire to his breast without
burning his clothing?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Or may one go on lighted coals, and his
feet not be burned?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> So it is with him who goes in to his
neighbour's wife; he who has anything to do with her will not go free
from punishment.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Men do not have a low opinion of a thief
who takes food when he is in need of it:

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> But if he is taken in the act he will
have to give back seven times as much, giving up all his property which
is in his house.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> He who takes another man's wife is
without all sense: he who does it is the cause of destruction to his
soul.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> Wounds will be his and loss of honour,
and his shame may not be washed away.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> For bitter is the wrath of an angry
husband; in the day of punishment he will have no mercy.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> He will not take any payment; and he will
not make peace with you though your money offerings are increased.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> My son, keep my sayings, and let my rules
be stored up with you.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Keep my rules and you will have life; let
my teaching be to you as the light of your eyes;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Let them be fixed to your fingers, and
recorded in your heart.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Say to wisdom, You are my sister; let
knowledge be named your special friend:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> So that they may keep you from the strange
woman, even from her whose words are smooth.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Looking out from my house, and watching
through the window,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> I saw among the young men one without
sense,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Walking in the street near the turn of her
road, going on the way to her house,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> At nightfall, in the evening of the day, in
the black dark of the night.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the woman came out to him, in the
dress of a loose woman, with a designing heart;

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> She is full of noise and uncontrolled;
her feet keep not in her house.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Now she is in the street, now in the open
spaces, waiting at every turning of the road.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> So she took him by his hand, kissing him,
and without a sign of shame she said to him:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I have a feast of peace-offerings, for
today my oaths have been effected.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> So I came out in the hope of meeting you,
looking for you with care, and now I have you.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> My bed is covered with cushions of
needlework, with coloured cloths of the cotton thread of Egypt;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> I have made my bed sweet with perfumes
and spices.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Come, let us take our pleasure in love
till the morning, having joy in love's delights.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the master of the house is away on a
long journey:

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> He has taken a bag of money with him; he
is coming back at the full moon.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> With her fair words she overcame him,
forcing him with her smooth lips.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> The simple man goes after her, like an ox
going to its death, like a roe pulled by a cord;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Like a bird falling into a net; with no
thought that his life is in danger, till an arrow goes into his side.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> So now, my sons, give ear to me; give
attention to the sayings of my mouth;

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Let not your heart be turned to her ways,
do not go wandering in her footsteps.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> For those wounded and made low by her are
great in number; and all those who have come to their death through her
are a great army.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Her house is the way to the underworld,
going down to the rooms of death.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Is not wisdom crying out, and the voice of
knowledge sounding?

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> At the top of the highways, at the meeting
of the roads, she takes her place;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Where the roads go into the town her cry
goes out, at the doorways her voice is loud:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I am crying out to you, O men; my voice
comes to the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Become expert in reason, O you simple ones;
you foolish ones, take training to heart.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Give ear, for my words are true, and my
lips are open to give out what is upright.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For good faith goes out of my mouth, and
false lips are disgusting to me.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> All the words of my mouth are
righteousness; there is nothing false or twisted in them.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They are all true to him whose mind is
awake, and straightforward to those who get knowledge.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Take my teaching, and not silver; get
knowledge in place of the best gold.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For wisdom is better than jewels, and all
things which may be desired are nothing in comparison with her.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I, wisdom, have made wise behaviour my
near relation; I am seen to be the special friend of wise purposes.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The fear of the Lord is seen in hating
evil: pride, a high opinion of oneself, the evil way, and the false
tongue, are unpleasing to me.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Wise design and good sense are mine;
reason and strength are mine.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Through me kings have their power, and
rulers give right decisions.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Through me chiefs have authority, and the
noble ones are judging in righteousness.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Those who have given me their love are
loved by me, and those who make search for me with care will get me.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Wealth and honour are in my hands, even
wealth without equal and righteousness.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> My fruit is better than gold, even than
the best gold; and my increase is more to be desired than silver.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> I go in the road of righteousness, in the
way of right judging:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> So that I may give my lovers wealth for
their heritage, making their store-houses full.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> The Lord made me as the start of his way,
the first of his works in the past.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> From eternal days I was given my place,
from the birth of time, before the earth was.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> When there was no deep I was given birth,
when there were no fountains flowing with water.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Before the mountains were put in their
places, before the hills was my birth:

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> When he had not made the earth or the
fields or the dust of the world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> When he made ready the heavens I was
there: when he put an arch over the face of the deep:

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> When he made strong the skies overhead:
when the fountains of the deep were fixed:

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> When he put a limit to the sea, so that
the waters might not go against his word: when he put in position the
bases of the earth:

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Then I was by his side, as a master
workman: and I was his delight from day to day, playing before him at
all times;

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Playing in his earth; and my delight was
with the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Give ear to me then, my sons: for happy
are those who keep my ways.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Take my teaching and be wise; do not let
it go.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Happy is the man who gives ear to me,
watching at my doors day by day, keeping his place by the pillars of my
house.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whoever gets me gets life, and grace
from the Lord will come to him.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> But he who does evil to me, does wrong to
his soul: all my haters are in love with death.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Wisdom has made her house, putting up her
seven pillars.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> She has put her fat beasts to death; her
wine is mixed, her table is ready.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> She has sent out her women-servants; her
voice goes out to the highest places of the town, saying,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Whoever is simple, let him come in here;
and to him who has no sense, she says:

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Come, take of my bread, and of my wine
which is mixed.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Give up the simple ones and have life, and
go in the way of knowledge.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He who gives teaching to a man of pride
gets shame for himself; he who says sharp words to a sinner gets a bad
name.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Do not say sharp words to a man of pride,
or he will have hate for you; make them clear to a wise man, and you
will be dear to him.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Give teaching to a wise man, and he will
become wiser; give training to an upright man, and his learning will be
increased.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The fear of the Lord is the start of
wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy One gives a wise mind

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For by me your days will be increased,
and the years of your life will be long.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If you are wise, you are wise for
yourself; if your heart is full of pride, you only will have the pain of
it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> The foolish woman is full of noise; she
has no sense at all.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Seated at the door of her house, in the
high places of the town,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Crying out to those who go by, going
straight on their way, she says:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Whoever is simple, let him come in here:
and to him who is without sense, she says:

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Drink taken without right is sweet, and
food in secret is pleasing.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But he does not see that the dead are
there, that her guests are in the deep places of the underworld.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> A wise son makes a glad father, but a
foolish son is a sorrow to his mother.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Wealth which comes from sin is of no
profit, but righteousness gives salvation from death.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> The Lord will not let the upright be in
need of food, but he puts far from him the desire of the evil-doers.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> He who is slow in his work becomes poor,
but the hand of the ready worker gets in wealth.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> He who in summer gets together his store
is a son who does wisely; but he who takes his rest when the grain is
being cut is a son causing shame.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Blessings are on the head of the upright,
but the face of sinners will be covered with sorrow.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The memory of the upright is a blessing,
but the name of the evil-doer will be turned to dust.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The wise-hearted man will let himself be
ruled, but the man whose talk is foolish will have a fall.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He whose ways are upright will go safely,
but he whose ways are twisted will be made low.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> He who makes signs with his eyes is a
cause of trouble, but he who makes a man see his errors is a cause of
peace.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The mouth of the upright man is a
fountain of life, but the mouth of the evil-doer is a bitter cup.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Hate is a cause of violent acts, but
all errors are covered up by love.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> In the lips of him who has knowledge
wisdom is seen; but a rod is ready for the back of him who is without
sense.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Knowledge is stored up by the wise, but
the mouth of the foolish man is a destruction which is near.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The property of the man of wealth is
his strong town: the poor man's need is his destruction.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The work of the upright gives life: the
increase of the evil-doer is a cause of sin.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> He who takes note of teaching is a way
of life, but he who gives up training is a cause of error.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Hate is covered up by the lips of the
upright man, but he who lets out evil about another is foolish.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Where there is much talk there will be
no end to sin, but he who keeps his mouth shut does wisely.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> The tongue of the upright man is like
tested silver: the heart of the evil-doer is of little value.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The lips of the upright man give food
to men, but the foolish come to death for need of sense.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The blessing of the Lord gives wealth:
hard work makes it no greater.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> It is sport to the foolish man to do
evil, but the man of good sense takes delight in wisdom.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The thing feared by the evil-doer will
come to him, but the upright man will get his desire.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> When the storm-wind is past, the sinner
is seen no longer, but the upright man is safe for ever.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Like acid drink to the teeth and as
smoke to the eyes, so is the hater of work to those who send him.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The fear of the Lord gives long life,
but the years of the evil-doer will be cut short.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The hope of the upright man will give
joy, but the waiting of the evil-doer will have its end in sorrow.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> The way of the Lord is a strong tower
for the upright man, but destruction to the workers of evil.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> The upright man will never be moved,
but evil-doers will not have a safe resting-place in the land.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> The mouth of the upright man is budding
with wisdom, but the twisted tongue will be cut off.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> The lips of the upright man have
knowledge of what is pleasing, but twisted are the mouths of evil-doers.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Scales of deceit are hated by the Lord,
but a true weight is his delight.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> When pride comes, there comes shame, but
wisdom is with the quiet in spirit.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The righteousness of the upright will be
their guide, but the twisted ways of the false will be their
destruction.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Wealth is of no profit in the day of
wrath, but righteousness keeps a man safe from death.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The righteousness of the good man will
make his way straight, but the sin of the evil-doer will be the cause of
his fall.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The righteousness of the upright will be
their salvation, but the false will themselves be taken in their evil
designs.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> At the death of an upright man his hope
does not come to an end, but the hope of the evil-doer comes to
destruction.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The upright man is taken out of trouble,
and in his place comes the sinner.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> With his mouth the evil man sends
destruction on his neighbour; but through knowledge the upright are
taken out of trouble.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> When things go well for the upright
man, all the town is glad; at the death of sinners, there are cries of
joy.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By the blessing of the upright man the
town is made great, but it is overturned by the mouth of the evil-doer.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> He who has a poor opinion of his
neighbour has no sense, but a wise man keeps quiet.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> He who goes about talking of others
makes secrets public, but the true-hearted man keeps things covered.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> When there is no helping suggestion the
people will have a fall, but with a number of wise guides they will be
safe.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He who makes himself responsible for a
strange man will undergo much loss; but the hater of such undertakings
will be safe.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> A woman who is full of grace is
honoured, but a woman hating righteousness is a seat of shame: those
hating work will undergo loss, but the strong keep their wealth.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> The man who has mercy will be rewarded,
but the cruel man is the cause of trouble to himself.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> The sinner gets the payment of deceit;
but his reward is certain who puts in the seed of righteousness.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> So righteousness gives life; but he who
goes after evil gets death for himself.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> The uncontrolled are hated by the Lord,
but those whose ways are without error are his delight

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Certainly the evil-doer will not go
free from punishment, but the seed of the upright man will be safe.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Like a ring of gold in the nose of a
pig, is a beautiful woman who has no sense.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The desire of the upright man is only
for good, but wrath is waiting for the evil-doer.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> A man may give freely, and still his
wealth will be increased; and another may keep back more than is right,
but only comes to be in need.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> He who gives blessing will be made fat,
but the curser will himself be cursed.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> He who keeps back grain will be cursed
by the people; but a blessing will be on the head of him who lets them
have it for a price.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> He who, with all his heart, goes after
what is good is searching for grace; but he who is looking for trouble
will get it.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> He who puts his faith in wealth will
come to nothing; but the upright man will be full of growth like the
green leaf.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> The troubler of his house will have the
wind for his heritage, and the foolish will be servant to the
wise-hearted.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The fruit of righteousness is a tree of
life, but violent behaviour takes away souls.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> If the upright man is rewarded on
earth, how much more the evil-doer and the sinner!

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> A lover of training is a lover of
knowledge; but a hater of teaching is like a beast.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> A good man has grace in the eyes of the
Lord; but the man of evil designs gets punishment from him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> No man will make himself safe through
evil-doing; but the root of upright men will never be moved.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A woman of virtue is a crown to her
husband; but she whose behaviour is a cause of shame is like a wasting
disease in his bones.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> The purposes of upright men are right,
but the designs of evil-doers are deceit.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The words of sinners are destruction for
the upright; but the mouth of upright men is their salvation.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Evil-doers are overturned and never seen
again, but the house of upright men will keep its place.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> A man will be praised in the measure of
his wisdom, but a wrong-minded man will be looked down on.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> He who is of low position and has a
servant, is better than one who has a high opinion of himself and is in
need of bread.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> An upright man has thought for the life
of his beast, but the hearts of evil-doers are cruel.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He who does work on his land will not
be short of bread; but he who goes after foolish men is without sense.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The resting-place of the sinner will
come to destruction, but the root of upright men is for ever.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> In the sin of the lips is a net which
takes the sinner, but the upright man will come out of trouble.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> From the fruit of his mouth will a man
have good food in full measure, and the work of a man's hands will be
rewarded.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The way of the foolish man seems right
to him? but the wise man gives ear to suggestions.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> A foolish man lets his trouble be
openly seen, but a sharp man keeps shame secret.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The breathing out of true words gives
knowledge of righteousness; but a false witness gives out deceit.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> There are some whose uncontrolled talk
is like the wounds of a sword, but the tongue of the wise makes one well
again.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> True lips are certain for ever, but a
false tongue is only for a minute.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Deceit is in the heart of those whose
designs are evil, but for those purposing peace there is joy.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> No trouble will come to upright men,
but sinners will be full of evil.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> False lips are hated by the Lord, but
those whose acts are true are his delight.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> A sharp man keeps back his knowledge;
but the heart of foolish men makes clear their foolish thoughts.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The hand of the ready worker will have
authority, but he who is slow in his work will be put to forced work.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Care in the heart of a man makes it
weighted down, but a good word makes it glad.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> The upright man is a guide to his
neighbour, but the way of evil-doers is a cause of error to them.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> He who is slow in his work does not go
in search of food; but the ready worker gets much wealth.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> In the road of righteousness is life,
but the way of the evil-doer goes to death.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> A wise son is a lover of teaching, but
the ears of the haters of authority are shut to sharp words.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> A man will get good from the fruit of his
lips, but the desire of the false is for violent acts.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He who keeps a watch on his mouth keeps
his life; but he whose lips are open wide will have destruction.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The hater of work does not get his
desires, but the soul of the hard workers will be made fat.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> The upright man is a hater of false
words: the evil-doer gets a bad name and is put to shame.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Righteousness keeps safe him whose way is
without error, but evil-doers are overturned by sin.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> A man may be acting as if he had wealth,
but have nothing; another may seem poor, but have great wealth.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> A man will give his wealth in exchange
for his life; but the poor will not give ear to sharp words.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> There is a glad dawn for the upright man,
but the light of the sinner will be put out.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> The only effect of pride is fighting;
but wisdom is with the quiet in spirit.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Wealth quickly got will become less;
but he who gets a store by the work of his hands will have it increased.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Hope put off is a weariness to the
heart; but when what is desired comes, it is a tree of life.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> He who makes sport of the word will
come to destruction, but the respecter of the law will be rewarded.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The teaching of the wise is a fountain
of life, turning men away from the nets of death.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Wise behaviour gets approval, but the
way of the false is their destruction.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> A sharp man does everything with
knowledge, but a foolish man makes clear his foolish thoughts.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> A man taking false news is a cause of
trouble, but he who gives news rightly makes things well.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Need and shame will be the fate of him
who is uncontrolled by training; but he who takes note of teaching will
be honoured.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> To get one's desire is sweet to the
soul, but to give up evil is disgusting to the foolish.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Go with wise men and be wise: but he
who keeps company with the foolish will be broken.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Evil will overtake sinners, but the
upright will be rewarded with good.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> The heritage of the good man is handed
down to his children's children; and the wealth of the sinner is stored
up for the upright man.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> There is much food in the ploughed land
of the poor; but it is taken away by wrongdoing.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> He who keeps back his rod is unkind to
his son: the loving father gives punishment with care.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The upright man has food to the full
measure of his desire, but there will be no food for the stomach of
evil-doers.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Wisdom is building her house, but the
foolish woman is pulling it down with her hands.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He who goes on his way in righteousness
has before him the fear of the Lord; but he whose ways are twisted gives
him no honour.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> In the mouth of the foolish man is a rod
for his back, but the lips of the wise will keep them safe.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Where there are no oxen, their food-place
is clean; but much increase comes through the strength of the ox.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> A true witness does not say what is
false, but a false witness is breathing out deceit.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> The hater of authority, searching for
wisdom, does not get it; but knowledge comes readily to the open-minded
man.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go away from the foolish man, for you
will not see the lips of knowledge.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The wisdom of the man of good sense makes
his way clear; but the unwise behaviour of the foolish is deceit.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> In the tents of those hating authority
there is error, but in the house of the upright man there is grace.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> No one has knowledge of a man's grief
but himself; and a strange person has no part in his joy.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The house of the sinner will be
overturned, but the tent of the upright man will do well.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> There is a way which seems straight
before a man, but its end is the ways of death.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Even while laughing the heart may be
sad; and after joy comes sorrow.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> He whose heart is turned away will have
the reward of his ways in full measure; but a good man will have the
reward of his doings.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> The simple man has faith in every word,
but the man of good sense gives thought to his footsteps.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> The wise man, fearing, keeps himself
from evil; but the foolish man goes on in his pride, with no thought of
danger.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> He who is quickly angry will do what is
foolish, but the man of good sense will have quiet.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Foolish behaviour is the heritage of
the simple, but men of good sense are crowned with knowledge.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The knees of the evil are bent before
the good; and sinners go down in the dust at the doors of the upright.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> The poor man is hated even by his
neighbour, but the man of wealth has numbers of friends.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He who has no respect for his neighbour
is a sinner, but he who has pity for the poor is happy.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Will not the designers of evil come
into error? But mercy and good faith are for the designers of good.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In all hard work there is profit, but
talk only makes a man poor.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> Their wisdom is a crown to the wise,
but their foolish behaviour is round the head of the unwise.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> A true witness is the saviour of lives;
but he who says false things is a cause of deceit.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> For him in whose heart is the fear of
the Lord there is strong hope: and his children will have a safe place.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> The fear of the Lord is a fountain of
life, by which one may be turned from the nets of death.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> A king's glory is in the number of his
people: and for need of people a ruler may come to destruction.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> He who is slow to be angry has great
good sense; but he whose spirit is over-quick gives support to what is
foolish.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> A quiet mind is the life of the body,
but envy is a disease in the bones.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> He who is hard on the poor puts shame
on his Maker; but he who has mercy on those who are in need gives him
honour.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The sinner is overturned in his
evil-doing, but the upright man has hope in his righteousness.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Wisdom has her resting-place in the
mind of the wise, but she is not seen among the foolish.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> By righteousness a nation is lifted up,
but sin is a cause of shame to the peoples.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> The king has pleasure in a servant who
does wisely, but his wrath is against him who is a cause of shame.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> By a soft answer wrath is turned away,
but a bitter word is a cause of angry feelings.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Knowledge is dropping from the tongue of
the wise; but from the mouth of the foolish comes a stream of foolish
words.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
keeping watch on the evil and the good.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> A comforting tongue is a tree of life,
but a twisted tongue is a crushing of the spirit.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> A foolish man puts no value on his
father's training; but he who has respect for teaching has good sense.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> In the house of the upright man there is
a great store of wealth; but in the profits of the sinner there is
trouble.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The lips of the wise keep knowledge, but
the heart of the foolish man is not right.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> The offering of the evil-doer is
disgusting to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright man is his
delight.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The way of the evil-doer is disgusting to
the Lord, but he who goes after righteousness is dear to him.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> There is bitter punishment for him who
is turned from the way; and death will be the fate of the hater of
teaching.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Before the Lord are the underworld and
destruction: how much more, then, the hearts of the children of men!

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> The hater of authority has no love for
teaching: he will not go to the wise.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> A glad heart makes a shining face, but
by the sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The heart of the man of good sense goes
in search of knowledge, but foolish things are the food of the unwise.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> All the days of the troubled are evil;
but he whose heart is glad has an unending feast.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Better is a little with the fear of the
Lord, than great wealth together with trouble.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Better is a simple meal where love is,
than a fat ox and hate with it.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> An angry man makes men come to blows,
but he who is slow to get angry puts an end to fighting.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Thorns are round the way of the hater
of work; but the road of the hard worker becomes a highway.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> A wise son makes a glad father, but a
foolish man has no respect for his mother.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Foolish behaviour is joy to the unwise;
but a man of good sense makes his way straight.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Where there are no wise suggestions,
purposes come to nothing; but by a number of wise guides they are made
certain.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> A man has joy in the answer of his
mouth: and a word at the right time, how good it is!

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Acting wisely is the way of life,
guiding a man away from the underworld.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> The house of the man of pride will be
uprooted by the Lord, but he will make safe the heritage of the widow.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Evil designs are disgusting to the
Lord, but the words of the clean-hearted are pleasing.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> He whose desires are fixed on profit is
a cause of trouble to his family; but he who has no desire for offerings
will have life.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> The heart of the upright gives thought
to his answer; but from the mouth of the evil-doer comes a stream of
evil things.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> The Lord is far from sinners, but his
ear is open to the prayer of the upright.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> The light of the eyes is a joy to the
heart, and good news makes the bones fat.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> The man whose ear is open to the
teaching of life will have his place among the wise.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> He who will not be controlled by
training has no respect for his soul, but he who gives ear to teaching
will get wisdom.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> The fear of the Lord is the teaching of
wisdom; and a low opinion of oneself goes before honour.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The designs of the heart are man's, but
the answer of the tongue comes from the Lord.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> All a man's ways are clean to himself;
but the Lord puts men's spirits into his scales.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Put your works into the hands of the
Lord, and your purposes will be made certain.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> The Lord has made everything for his
purpose, even the sinner for the day of evil.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Everyone who has pride in his heart is
disgusting to the Lord: he will certainly not go free from punishment.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> By mercy and good faith evil-doing is
taken away: and by the fear of the Lord men are turned away from evil.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> When a man's ways are pleasing to the
Lord, he makes even his haters be at peace with him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Better is a little with righteousness,
than great wealth with wrongdoing.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> A man may make designs for his way, but
the Lord is the guide of his steps.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Decision is in the lips of the king:
his mouth will not go wrong in judging.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> True measures and scales are the
Lord's: all the weights of the bag are his work.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Evil-doing is disgusting to kings: for
the seat of the ruler is based on righteousness.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Lips of righteousness are the delight
of kings; and he who says what is upright is dear to him.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The wrath of the king is like those who
give news of death, but a wise man will put peace in place of it.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the light of the king's face there
is life; and his approval is like a cloud of spring rain.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> How much better it is to get wisdom
than gold! and to get knowledge is more to be desired than silver.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The highway of the upright is to be
turned away from evil: he who takes care of his way will keep his soul.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Pride goes before destruction, and a
stiff spirit before a fall.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Better it is to have a gentle spirit
with the poor, than to take part in the rewards of war with men of
pride.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> He who gives attention to the law of
right will get good; and whoever puts his faith in the Lord is happy.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The wise-hearted will be named men of
good sense: and by pleasing words learning is increased.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Wisdom is a fountain of life to him who
has it; but the punishment of the foolish is their foolish behaviour.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The heart of the wise man is the
teacher of his mouth, and gives increased learning to his lips.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Pleasing words are like honey, sweet to
the soul and new life to the bones.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> There is a way which seems straight
before a man, but its end is the ways of death.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> The desire of the working man is
working for him, for his need of food is driving him on.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> A good-for-nothing man is a designer of
evil, and in his lips there is a burning fire.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> A man of twisted purposes is a cause of
fighting everywhere: and he who says evil secretly makes trouble between
friends.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> A violent man puts desire of evil into
his neighbour's mind, and makes him go in a way which is not good.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> He whose eyes are shut is a man of
twisted purposes, and he who keeps his lips shut tight makes evil come
about.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> The grey head is a crown of glory, if
it is seen in the way of righteousness.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> He who is slow to be angry is better
than a man of war, and he who has control over his spirit than he who
takes a town.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> A thing may be put to the decision of
chance, but it comes about through the Lord.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Better a bit of dry bread in peace, than
a house full of feasting and violent behaviour.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> A servant who does wisely will have rule
over a son causing shame, and will have his part in the heritage among
brothers.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The heating-pot is for silver and the
oven-fire for gold, but the Lord is the tester of hearts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> A wrongdoer gives attention to evil lips,
and a man of deceit gives ear to a damaging tongue.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Whoever makes sport of the poor puts
shame on his Maker; and he who is glad because of trouble will not go
free from punishment.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Children's children are the crown of old
men, and the glory of children is their fathers.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Fair words are not to be looked for from
a foolish man, much less are false lips in a ruler.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> An offering of money is like a stone of
great price in the eyes of him who has it: wherever he goes, he does
well.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> He who keeps a sin covered is looking for
love; but he who keeps on talking of a thing makes division between
friends.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> A word of protest goes deeper into one
who has sense than a hundred blows into a foolish man.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> An uncontrolled man is only looking for
trouble, so a cruel servant will be sent against him.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> It is better to come face to face with
a bear whose young ones have been taken away than with a foolish man
acting foolishly.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> If anyone gives back evil for good,
evil will never go away from his house.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> The start of fighting is like the
letting out of water: so give up before it comes to blows.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> He who gives a decision for the
evil-doer and he who gives a decision against the upright, are equally
disgusting to the Lord.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> How will money in the hand of the
foolish get him wisdom, seeing that he has no sense?

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> A friend is loving at all times, and
becomes a brother in times of trouble.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> A man without sense gives his hand in
an agreement, and makes himself responsible before his neighbour.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> The lover of fighting is a lover of
sin: he who makes high his doorway is looking for destruction.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> Nothing good comes to him whose heart
is fixed on evil purposes: and he who has an evil tongue will come to
trouble.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> He who has an unwise son gets sorrow
for himself, and the father of a foolish son has no joy.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> A glad heart makes a healthy body, but
a crushed spirit makes the bones dry.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> A sinner takes an offering out of his
robe, to get a decision for himself in a cause.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Wisdom is before the face of him who
has sense; but the eyes of the foolish are on the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> A foolish son is a grief to his father,
and bitter pain to her who gave him birth.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> To give punishment to the upright is
not good, or to give blows to the noble for their righteousness.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> He who has knowledge says little: and
he who has a calm spirit is a man of good sense.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Even the foolish man, when he keeps
quiet, is taken to be wise: when his lips are shut he is credited with
good sense.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> He who keeps himself separate for his
private purpose goes against all good sense.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> A foolish man has no pleasure in good
sense, but only to let what is in his heart come to light.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> When the evil-doer comes, a low opinion
comes with him, and with the loss of honour comes shame.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The words of a man's mouth are like deep
waters: the fountain of wisdom is like a flowing stream.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> To have respect for the person of the
evil-doer is not good, or to give a wrong decision against the upright.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> A foolish man's lips are a cause of
fighting, and his mouth makes him open to blows.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The mouth of a foolish man is his
destruction, and his lips are a net for his soul.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The words of one who says evil of his
neighbour secretly are like sweet food, and go down into the inner parts
of the stomach.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> He who does not give his mind to his work
is brother to him who makes destruction.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The name of the Lord is a strong tower:
the upright man running into it is safe.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The property of a man of wealth is his
strong town, and it is as a high wall in the thoughts of his heart.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Before destruction the heart of man is
full of pride, and before honour goes a gentle spirit.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> To give an answer before hearing is a
foolish thing and a cause of shame.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> The spirit of a man will be his support
when he is ill; but how may a broken spirit be lifted up?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The heart of the man of good sense gets
knowledge; the ear of the wise is searching for knowledge.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> A man's offering makes room for him,
letting him come before great men.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> The man who first puts his cause before
the judge seems to be in the right; but then his neighbour comes and
puts his cause in its true light.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> The decision of chance puts an end to
argument, parting the strong.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> A brother wounded is like a strong
town, and violent acts are like a locked tower.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> With the fruit of a man's mouth his
stomach will be full; the produce of his lips will be his in full
measure.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Death and life are in the power of the
tongue; and those to whom it is dear will have its fruit for their food.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Whoever gets a wife gets a good thing,
and has the approval of the Lord.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> The poor man makes requests for grace,
but the man of wealth gives a rough answer.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> There are friends who may be a man's
destruction, but there is a lover who keeps nearer than a brother.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Better is the poor man whose ways are
upright, than the man of wealth whose ways are twisted.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Further, without knowledge desire is not
good; and he who is over-quick in acting goes out of the right way.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> By his foolish behaviour a man's ways are
turned upside down, and his heart is bitter against the Lord.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Wealth makes a great number of friends;
but the poor man is parted from his friend.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> A false witness will not go without
punishment, and the breather out of deceit will not go free.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Great numbers will make attempts to get
the approval of a ruler: and every man is the special friend of him who
has something to give.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> All the brothers of the poor man are
against him: how much more do his friends go far from him! ...

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He who gets wisdom has love for his soul:
he who keeps good sense will get what is truly good.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> A false witness will not go without
punishment, and the breather out of deceit will be cut off.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Material comfort is not good for the
foolish; much less for a servant to be put over rulers.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> A man's good sense makes him slow to
wrath, and the overlooking of wrongdoing is his glory.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> The king's wrath is like the loud cry
of a lion, but his approval is like dew on the grass.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> A foolish son is the destruction of his
father; and the bitter arguments of a wife are like drops of rain
falling without end.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> House and wealth are a heritage from
fathers, but a wife with good sense is from the Lord.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Hate of work sends deep sleep on a man:
and he who has no industry will go without food.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> He who keeps the law keeps his soul;
but death will be the fate of him who takes no note of the word.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He who has pity on the poor gives to
the Lord, and the Lord will give him his reward.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Give your son training while there is
hope; let not your heart be purposing his death.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> A man of great wrath will have to take
his punishment: for if you get him out of trouble you will have to do it
again.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Let your ear be open to suggestion and
take teaching, so that at the end you may be wise.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> A man's heart may be full of designs,
but the purpose of the Lord is unchanging.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> The ornament of a man is his mercy, and
a poor man is better than one who is false.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The fear of the Lord gives life: and he
who has it will have need of nothing; no evil will come his way.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> The hater of work puts his hand deep
into the basin, and will not even take it to his mouth again.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> When blows overtake the man of pride,
the simple will get sense; say sharp words to the wise, and knowledge
will be made clear to him.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> He who is violent to his father,
driving away his mother, is a son causing shame and a bad name.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> A son who no longer gives attention to
teaching is turned away from the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> A good-for-nothing witness makes sport
of the judge's decision: and the mouth of evil-doers sends out evil like
a stream.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Rods are being made ready for the man
of pride, and blows for the back of the foolish.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Wine makes men foolish, and strong drink
makes men come to blows; and whoever comes into error through these is
not wise.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> The wrath of a king is like the loud cry
of a lion: he who makes him angry does wrong against himself.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> It is an honour for a man to keep from
fighting, but the foolish are ever at war.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> The hater of work will not do his
ploughing because of the winter; so at the time of grain-cutting he will
be requesting food and will get nothing.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> The purpose in the heart of a man is like
deep water, but a man of good sense will get it out.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Most men make no secret of their kind
acts: but where is a man of good faith to be seen?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> An upright man goes on in his
righteousness: happy are his children after him!

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> A king on the seat of judging puts to
flight all evil with his eyes.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Who is able to say, I have made my heart
clean, I am free from my sin?

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Unequal weights and unequal measures,
they are all disgusting to the Lord.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Even a child may be judged by his
doings, if his work is free from sin and if it is right.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> The hearing ear and the seeing eye are
equally the Lord's work.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Do not be a lover of sleep, or you will
become poor: keep your eyes open, and you will have bread enough.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> A poor thing, a poor thing, says he who
is giving money for goods: but when he has gone on his way, then he
makes clear his pride in what he has got.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> There is gold and a store of corals:
but the lips of knowledge are a jewel of great price.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Take a man's clothing if he makes
himself responsible for a strange man, and get an undertaking from him
who gives his word for strange men.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but
after, his mouth will be full of sand.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Every purpose is put into effect by
wise help: and by wise guiding make war.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> He who goes about talking of the
business of others gives away secrets: so have nothing to do with him
whose lips are open wide.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> If anyone puts a curse on his father or
his mother, his light will be put out in the blackest night.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> A heritage may be got quickly at first,
but the end of it will not be a blessing.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Do not say, I will give punishment for
evil: go on waiting for the Lord, and he will be your saviour.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Unequal weights are disgusting to the
Lord, and false scales are not good.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> A man's steps are of the Lord; how then
may a man have knowledge of his way?

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> It is a danger to a man to say without
thought, It is holy, and, after taking his oaths, to be questioning if
it is necessary to keep them.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A wise king puts evil-doers to flight,
and makes their evil-doing come back on them.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The Lord keeps watch over the spirit of
man, searching all the deepest parts of the body.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Mercy and good faith keep the king
safe, and the seat of his power is based on upright acts.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> The glory of young men is their
strength, and the honour of old men is their grey hairs.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> By the wounds of the rod evil is taken
away, and blows make clean the deepest parts of the body.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The king's heart in the hands of the Lord
is like the water streams, and by him it is turned in any direction at
his pleasure.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Every way of a man seems right to
himself, but the Lord is the tester of hearts.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> To do what is right and true is more
pleasing to the Lord than an offering.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> A high look and a heart of pride, \*\*\*
of the evil-doer is sin.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The purposes of the man of industry have
their outcome only in wealth; but one who is over-quick in acting will
only come to be in need.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> He who gets stores of wealth by a false
tongue, is going after what is only breath, and searching for death.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> By their violent acts the evil-doers will
be pulled away, because they have no desire to do what is right.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Twisted is the way of him who is full of
crime; but as for him whose heart is clean, his work is upright.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> It is better to be living in an angle of
the house-top, than with a bitter-tongued woman in a wide house.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The desire of the evil-doer is fixed on
evil: he has no kind feeling for his neighbour.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> When the man of pride undergoes
punishment, the simple man gets wisdom; and by watching the wise he gets
knowledge.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The Upright One, looking on the house
of the evil-doer, lets sinners be overturned to their destruction.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> He whose ears are stopped at the cry of
the poor, will himself get no answer to his cry for help.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> By a secret offering wrath is turned
away, and the heat of angry feelings by money in the folds of the robe.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> It is a joy to the good man to do
right, but it is destruction to the workers of evil.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> The wanderer from the way of knowledge
will have his resting-place among the shades.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> The lover of pleasure will be a poor
man: the lover of wine and oil will not get wealth.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The evil-doer will be given as a price
for the life of the good man, and the worker of deceit in the place of
the upright.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> It is better to be living in a waste
land, than with a bitter-tongued and angry woman.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> There is a store of great value in the
house of the wise, but it is wasted by the foolish man.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> He who goes after righteousness and
mercy will get life, righteousness, and honour.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> A wise man goes up into the town of the
strong ones, and overcomes its strength in which they put their faith.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> He who keeps watch over his mouth and
his tongue keeps his soul from troubles.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> The man of pride, lifted up in soul, is
named high-hearted; he is acting in an outburst of pride.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The desire of the hater of work is
death to him, for his hands will do no work.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> All the day the sinner goes after his
desire: but the upright man gives freely, keeping nothing back.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> The offering of evil-doers is
disgusting: how much more when they give it with an evil purpose!

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> A false witness will be cut off, ...

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> The evil-doer makes his face hard, but
as for the upright, he gives thought to his way.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> Wisdom and knowledge and wise
suggestions are of no use against the Lord.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> The horse is made ready for the day of
war, but power to overcome is from the Lord.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A good name is more to be desired than
great wealth, and to be respected is better than silver and gold.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The man of wealth and the poor man come
face to face: the Lord is the maker of them all.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> The sharp man sees the evil and takes
cover: the simple go straight on and get into trouble.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> The reward of a gentle spirit and the
fear of the Lord is wealth and honour and life.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Thorns and nets are in the way of the
twisted: he who keeps watch over his soul will be far from them.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If a child is trained up in the right
way, even when he is old he will not be turned away from it.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> The man of wealth has rule over the poor,
and he who gets into debt is a servant to his creditor.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> By planting the seed of evil a man will
get in the grain of sorrow, and the rod of his wrath will be broken.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He who is kind will have a blessing, for
he gives of his bread to the poor.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Send away the man of pride, and
argument will go out; truly fighting and shame will come to an end.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He whose heart is clean is dear to the
Lord; for the grace of his lips the king will be his friend.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> The eyes of the Lord keep knowledge,
but by him the acts of the false man will be overturned.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The hater of work says, There is a lion
outside: I will be put to death in the streets.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The mouth of strange women is a deep
hole: he with whom the Lord is angry will go down into it.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Foolish ways are deep-seated in the
heart of a child, but the rod of punishment will send them far from him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He who is cruel to the poor for the
purpose of increasing his profit, and he who gives to the man of wealth,
will only come to be in need.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Let your ear be bent down for hearing
my words, and let your heart give thought to knowledge.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> For it is a delight to keep them in
your heart, to have them ready on your lips.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> So that your faith may be in the Lord,
I have made them clear to you this day, even to you.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Have I not put in writing for you
thirty sayings, with wise suggestions and knowledge,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> To make you see how certain are true
words, so that you may give a true answer to those who put questions to
you?

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Do not take away the property of the
poor man because he is poor, or be cruel to the crushed ones when they
come before the judge:

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> For the Lord will give support to their
cause, and take the life of those who take their goods.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Do not be friends with a man who is
given to wrath; do not go in the company of an angry man:

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> For fear of learning his ways and
making a net ready for your soul.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Be not one of those who give their
hands in an agreement, or of those who make themselves responsible for
debts:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> If you have nothing with which to make
payment, he will take away your bed from under you.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Let not the old landmark be moved which
your fathers have put in place.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Have you seen a man who is expert in
his business? he will take his place before kings; his place will not be
among low persons.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> When you take your seat at the feast with
a ruler, give thought with care to what is before you;

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And put a knife to your throat, if you
have a strong desire for food.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Have no desire for his delicate food, for
it is the bread of deceit.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Take no care to get wealth; let there be
an end to your desire for money.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Are your eyes lifted up to it? it is
gone: for wealth takes to itself wings, like an eagle in flight up to
heaven.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Do not take the food of him who has an
evil eye, or have any desire for his delicate meat:

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> For as the thoughts of his heart are, so
is he: Take food and drink, he says to you; but his heart is not with
you.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The food which you have taken will come
up again, and your pleasing words will be wasted.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Say nothing in the hearing of a foolish
man, for he will put no value on the wisdom of your words.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Do not let the landmark of the widow be
moved, and do not go into the fields of those who have no father;

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For their saviour is strong, and he
will take up their cause against you.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Give your heart to teaching, and your
ears to the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Do not keep back training from the
child: for even if you give him blows with the rod, it will not be death
to him.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Give him blows with the rod, and keep
his soul safe from the underworld.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My son, if your heart becomes wise, I,
even I, will be glad in heart;

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And my thoughts in me will be full of
joy when your lips say right things.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Have no envy of sinners in your heart,
but keep in the fear of the Lord all through the day;

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> For without doubt there is a future,
and your hope will not be cut off.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Give ear, my son, and be wise, guiding
your heart in the right way.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Do not be among those who give
themselves to wine-drinking, or among those who make themselves full
with meat:

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> For those who take delight in drink and
feasting will come to be in need; and through love of sleep a man will
be poorly clothed.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Give ear to your father whose child you
are, and do not keep honour from your mother when she is old.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Get for yourself that which is true,
and do not let it go for money; get wisdom and teaching and good sense.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> The father of the upright man will be
glad, and he who has a wise child will have joy because of him.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Let your father and your mother be
glad, let her who gave you birth have joy.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> My son, give me your heart, and let
your eyes take delight in my ways.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> For a loose woman is a deep hollow, and
a strange woman is a narrow water-hole.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Yes, she is waiting secretly like a
beast for its food, and deceit by her is increased among men.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Who says, Oh! who says, Ah! who has
violent arguments, who has grief, who has wounds without cause, whose
eyes are dark?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Those who are seated late over the
wine: those who go looking for mixed wine.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Keep your eyes from looking on the wine
when it is red, when its colour is bright in the cup, when it goes
smoothly down:

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> In the end, its bite is like that of a
snake, its wound like the wound of a poison-snake.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Your eyes will see strange things, and
you will say twisted things.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Yes, you will be like him who takes his
rest on the sea, or on the top of a sail-support.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> They have overcome me, you will say,
and I have no pain; they gave me blows without my feeling them: when
will I be awake from my wine? I will go after it again.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Have no envy for evil men, or any desire
to be with them:

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> For the purposes of their hearts are
destruction, and their lips are talking of trouble.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> The building of a house is by wisdom, and
by reason it is made strong:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And by knowledge its rooms are full of
all dear and pleasing things.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> A wise man is strong; and a man of
knowledge makes strength greater.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For by wise guiding you will overcome in
war: and in a number of wise guides there is salvation.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Wisdom is outside the power of the
foolish: he keeps his mouth shut in the public place.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> He whose purposes are bad will be named a
man of evil designs.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The purpose of the foolish is sin: and
the hater of authority is disgusting to others.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> If you give way in the day of trouble,
your strength is small.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Be the saviour of those who are given
up to death, and do not keep back help from those who are slipping to
destruction.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If you say, See, we had no knowledge of
this: does not the tester of hearts give thought to it? and he who keeps
your soul, has he no knowledge of it? and will he not give to every man
the reward of his work?

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> My son, take honey, for it is good; and
the flowing honey, which is sweet to your taste:

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> So let your desire be for wisdom: if
you have it, there will be a future, and your hope will not be cut off.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Do not keep a secret watch, O
evil-doer, against the fields of the upright man, or send destruction on
his resting-place:

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> For an upright man, after falling seven
times, will get up again: but trouble is the downfall of the evil.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Do not be glad at the fall of your
hater, and let not your heart have joy at his downfall:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> For fear that the Lord may see it, and
it may be evil in his eyes, and his wrath may be turned away from him.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Do not be troubled because of
evil-doers, or have envy of sinners:

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> For there will be no future for the
evil man; the light of sinners will be put out.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> My son, go in fear of the Lord and the
king: have nothing to do with those who are in high positions:

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> For their downfall will come suddenly;
and who has knowledge of the destruction of those in high positions?

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> These are more sayings of the wise: To
have respect for a person's position when judging is not good.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> He who says to the evil-doer, You are
upright, will be cursed by peoples and hated by nations.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> But those who say sharp words to him
will have delight, and a blessing of good will come on them.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> He gives a kiss with his lips who gives
a right answer.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Put your work in order outside, and
make it ready in the field; and after that, see to the building of your
house.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Do not be a violent witness against
your neighbour, or let your lips say what is false.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Say not, I will do to him as he has
done to me; I will give the man the reward of his work.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> I went by the field of the hater of
work, and by the vine-garden of the man without sense;

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And it was all full of thorns, and
covered with waste plants, and its stone wall was broken down.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Then looking at it, I gave thought: I
saw, and I got teaching from it.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> A little sleep, a little rest, a little
folding of the hands in sleep:

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> So loss will come on you like an
outlaw, and your need like an armed man.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> These are more wise sayings of Solomon,
copied out by the men of Hezekiah, king of Judah.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> It is the glory of God to keep a thing
secret: but the glory of kings is to have it searched out.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> The heaven is high and the earth is deep,
and the hearts of kings may not be searched out.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Take away the waste from silver, and a
vessel will come out for the silver-worker.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Take away evil-doers from before the
king, and the seat of his power will be made strong in righteousness.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Do not take glory for yourself before the
king, and do not put yourself in the place of the great:

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> For it is better to have it said to you,
Come up here; than for you to be put down in a lower place before the
ruler.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Do not be quick to go to law about what
you have seen, for what will you do in the end, when your neighbour has
put you to shame?

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Have a talk with your neighbour himself
about your cause, but do not give away the secret of another:

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Or your hearer may say evil of you, and
your shame will not be turned away.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> A word at the right time is like apples
of gold in a network of silver.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Like a nose-ring of gold and an
ornament of the best gold, is a wise man who says sharp words to an ear
ready to give attention.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> As the cold of snow in the time of
grain-cutting, so is a true servant to those who send him; for he gives
new life to the soul of his master.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> As clouds and wind without rain, so is
one who takes credit for an offering he has not given.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> A judge is moved by one who for a long
time undergoes wrongs without protest, and by a soft tongue even bone is
broken.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> If you have honey, take only as much as
is enough for you; for fear that, being full of it, you may not be able
to keep it down.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Let not your foot be frequently in your
neighbour's house, or he may get tired of you, and his feeling be turned
to hate.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> One who gives false witness against his
neighbour is a hammer and a sword and a sharp arrow.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Putting one's faith in a false man in
time of trouble is like a broken tooth and a shaking foot.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> Like one who takes off clothing in cold
weather and like acid on a wound, is he who makes melody to a sad heart.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> If your hater is in need of food, give
him bread; and if he is in need of drink, give him water:

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> For so you will put coals of fire on
his head, and the Lord will give you your reward.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> As the north wind gives birth to rain,
so is an angry face caused by a tongue saying evil secretly.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> It is better to be living in an angle
of the house-top, than with a bitter-tongued woman in a wide house.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> As cold water to a tired soul, so is
good news from a far country.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Like a troubled fountain and a dirty
spring, is an upright man who has to give way before evil-doers.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> It is not good to take much honey: so
he who is not looking for honour will be honoured.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> He whose spirit is uncontrolled is like
an unwalled town which has been broken into.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Like snow in summer and rain when the
grain is being cut, so honour is not natural for the foolish.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> As the sparrow in her wandering and the
swallow in her flight, so the curse does not come without a cause.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> A whip for the horse, a mouth-bit for the
ass, and a rod for the back of the foolish.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Do not give to the foolish man a foolish
answer, or you will be like him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Give a foolish man a foolish answer, or
he will seem wise to himself.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> He who sends news by the hand of a
foolish man is cutting off his feet and drinking in damage.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The legs of one who has no power of
walking are hanging loose; so is a wise saying in the mouth of the
foolish.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Giving honour to a foolish man is like
attempting to keep a stone fixed in a cord.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Like a thorn which goes up into the hand
of a man overcome by drink, so is a wise saying in the mouth of a
foolish man.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Like an archer wounding all who go by,
is a foolish man overcome by drink.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Like a dog going back to the food which
he has not been able to keep down, is the foolish man doing his foolish
acts over again.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Have you seen a man who seems to
himself to be wise? There is more hope for the foolish than for him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> The hater of work says, There is a lion
in the way; a lion is in the streets.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> A door is turned on its pillar, and the
hater of work on his bed.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The hater of work puts his hand deep
into the basin: lifting it again to his mouth is a weariness to him.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> The hater of work seems to himself
wiser than seven men who are able to give an answer with good sense.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> He who gets mixed up in a fight which
is not his business, is like one who takes a dog by the ears while it is
going by.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> As one who is off his head sends about
flaming sticks and arrows of death,

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> So is the man who gets the better of
his neighbour by deceit, and says, Am I not doing so in sport?

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Without wood, the fire goes out; and
where there is no secret talk, argument is ended.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> Like breath on coals and wood on fire,
so a man given to argument gets a fight started.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> The words of one who says evil of his
neighbour secretly are like sweet food, they go down into the inner
parts of the stomach.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> Smooth lips and an evil heart are like
a vessel of earth plated with silver waste.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> With his lips the hater makes things
seem what they are not, but deceit is stored up inside him;

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> When he says fair words, have no belief
in him; for in his heart are seven evils:

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> Though his hate is covered with deceit,
his sin will be seen openly before the meeting of the people.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> He who makes a hole in the earth will
himself go falling into it: and on him by whom a stone is rolled the
stone will come back again.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> A false tongue has hate for those who
have clean hearts, and a smooth mouth is a cause of falling.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Do not make a noise about tomorrow, for
you are not certain what a day's outcome may be.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Let another man give you praise, and not
your mouth; one who is strange to you, and not your lips.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> A stone has great weight, and sand is
crushing; but the wrath of the foolish is of greater weight than these.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Wrath is cruel, and angry feeling an
overflowing stream; but who does not give way before envy?

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Better is open protest than love kept
secret.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> The wounds of a friend are given in good
faith, but the kisses of a hater are false.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The full man has no use for honey, but to
the man in need of food every bitter thing is sweet.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Like a bird wandering from the place of
her eggs is a man wandering from his station.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Oil and perfume make glad the heart, and
the wise suggestion of a friend is sweet to the soul.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Do not give up your friend and your
father's friend; and do not go into your brother's house in the day of
your trouble: better is a neighbour who is near than a brother far off.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> My son, be wise and make my heart glad,
so that I may give back an answer to him who puts me to shame.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> The sharp man sees the evil and takes
cover: the simple go straight on and get into trouble.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Take a man's clothing if he makes
himself responsible for a strange man, and get an undertaking from him
who gives his word for strange men.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He who gives a blessing to his friend
with a loud voice, getting up early in the morning, will have it put to
his account as a curse.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Like an unending dropping on a day of
rain is a bitter-tongued woman.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> He who keeps secret the secret of his
friend, will get himself a name for good faith.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Iron makes iron sharp; so a man makes
sharp his friend.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Whoever keeps a fig-tree will have its
fruit; and the servant waiting on his master will be honoured.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Like face looking at face in water, so
are the hearts of men to one another.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> The underworld and Abaddon are never
full, and the eyes of man have never enough.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The heating-pot is for silver and the
oven-fire for gold, and a man is measured by what he is praised for.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Even if a foolish man is crushed with a
hammer in a vessel among crushed grain, still his foolish ways will not
go from him.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Take care to have knowledge about the
condition of your flocks, looking well after your herds;

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> For wealth is not for ever, and money
does not go on for all generations.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The grass comes up and the young grass
is seen, and the mountain plants are got in.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> The lambs are for your clothing, and
the he-goats make the value of a field:

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> There will be goats' milk enough for
your food, and for the support of your servant-girls.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The evil man goes running away when no
man is after him, but the upright are without fear, like the lion.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Because of the sin of the land, its
troubles are increased; but by a man of wisdom and knowledge they will
be put out like a fire.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> A man of wealth who is cruel to the poor
is like a violent rain causing destruction of food.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> Those who have no respect for the law
give praise to the evil-doer; but such as keep the law are against him.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Evil men have no knowledge of what is
right; but those who go after the Lord have knowledge of all things.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Better is the poor man whose ways are
upright, than the man of wealth whose ways are not straight.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> He who keeps the law is a wise son, but
he who keeps company with feasters puts shame on his father.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> He who makes his wealth greater by taking
interest, only gets it together for him who has pity on the poor.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> As for the man whose ear is turned away
from hearing the law, even his prayer is disgusting.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Anyone causing the upright to go
wandering in an evil way, will himself go down into the hole he has
made; but the upright will have good things for their heritage.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> The man of wealth seems to himself to
be wise, but the poor man who has sense has a low opinion of him.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> When the upright do well, there is
great glory; but when evil-doers are lifted up, men do not let
themselves be seen.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> He who keeps his sins secret will not
do well; but one who is open about them, and gives them up, will get
mercy.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Happy is the man in whom is the fear of
the Lord at all times; but he whose heart is hard will come into
trouble.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Like a loud-voiced lion and a wandering
bear, is an evil ruler over a poor people.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> The prince who has no sense is a cruel
ruler; but he who has no desire to get profit for himself will have long
life.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> One who has been the cause of a man's
death will go in flight to the underworld: let no man give him help.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> He whose ways are upright will be safe,
but sudden will be the fall of him whose ways are twisted.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> By ploughing his land a man will have
bread in full measure; but he who goes after good-for-nothing persons
will be poor enough.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> A man of good faith will have great
blessing, but one attempting to get wealth quickly will not go free from
punishment.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> It is not good to have respect for a
man's position: for a man will do wrong for a bit of bread.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> He who is ever desiring wealth goes
running after money, and does not see that need will come on him.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> He who says words of protest to a man
will later have more approval than one who says smooth words with his
tongue.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> He who takes from his father or his
mother what is theirs by right, and says, It is no sin; is the same as a
taker of life.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> He who is ever desiring profit is a
cause of fighting; but he who puts his faith in the Lord will be made
fat.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> He whose faith is in himself is
foolish; but everyone walking wisely will be kept safe.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> He who gives to the poor will never be
in need, but great curses will be on him who gives no attention to them.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> When evil-doers are lifted up, men take
cover; but when destruction overtakes them, the upright are increased.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> A man hating sharp words and making his
heart hard, will suddenly be broken and will not be made well again.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> When the upright have power, the people
are glad; when an evil man is ruler, grief comes on the people.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> A man who is a lover of wisdom is a joy
to his father: but he who goes in the company of loose women is a waster
of wealth.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> A king, by right rule, makes the land
safe; but one full of desires makes it a waste.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> A man who says smooth things to his
neighbour is stretching out a net for his steps.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> In the steps of an evil man there is a
net for him, but the upright man gets away quickly and is glad.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> The upright man gives attention to the
cause of the poor: the evil-doer gives no thought to it.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Men of pride are the cause of violent
acts in a town, but by wise men wrath is turned away.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> If a wise man goes to law with a foolish
man, he may be angry or laughing, but there will be no rest.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Men of blood are haters of the good
man, and evil-doers go after his soul.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> A foolish man lets out all his wrath,
but a wise man keeps it back quietly.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> If a ruler gives attention to false
words, all his servants are evil-doers.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The poor man and his creditor come face
to face: the Lord gives light to their eyes equally.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> The king who is a true judge in the
cause of the poor, will be safe for ever on the seat of his power.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> The rod and sharp words give wisdom:
but a child who is not guided is a cause of shame to his mother.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> When evil men are in power, wrongdoing
is increased; but the upright will have pleasure when they see their
downfall.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Give your son training, and he will
give you rest; he will give delight to your soul.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Where there is no vision, the people
are uncontrolled; but he who keeps the law will be happy.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> A servant will not be trained by words;
for though the sense of the words is clear to him, he will not give
attention.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Have you seen a man who is quick with
his tongue? There is more hope for a foolish man than for him.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> If a servant is gently cared for from
his early years, he will become a cause of sorrow in the end.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> An angry man is the cause of fighting,
and a man given to wrath does much wrong.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> A man's pride will be the cause of his
fall, but he who has a gentle spirit will get honour.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> A man who takes part with a thief has
hate for his soul; he is put under oath, but says nothing.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> The fear of man is a cause of danger:
but whoever puts his faith in the Lord will have a safe place on high.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> The approval of a ruler is desired by
great numbers: but the decision in a man's cause comes from the Lord.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> An evil man is disgusting to the
upright, and he who is upright is disgusting to evil-doers.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The words of Agur, the son of Jakeh, from
Massa. The man says: I am full of weariness, O God, I am full of
weariness; O God, I have come to an end:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> For I am more like a beast than any man,
I have no power of reasoning like a man:

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> I have not got wisdom by teaching, so
that I might have the knowledge of the Holy One.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Who has gone up to heaven and come down?
who has taken the winds in his hands, prisoning the waters in his robe?
by whom have all the ends of the earth been fixed? what is his name, and
what is his son's name, if you are able to say?

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Every word of God is tested: he is a
breastplate to those who put their faith in him.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Make no addition to his words, or he will
make clear your error, and you will be seen to be false.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> I have made request to you for two
things; do not keep them from me before my death:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Put far from me all false and foolish
things: do not give me great wealth or let me be in need, but give me
only enough food:

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> For fear that if I am full, I may be
false to you and say, Who is the Lord? or if I am poor, I may become a
thief, using the name of my God wrongly.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Do not say evil of a servant to his
master, or he will put a curse on you, and you will get into trouble.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> There is a generation who put a curse
on their father, and do not give a blessing to their mother.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> There is a generation who seem to
themselves to be free from sin, but are not washed from their unclean
ways.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is a generation, O how full of
pride are their eyes! O how their brows are lifted up!

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> There is a generation whose teeth are
like swords, their strong teeth like knives, for the destruction of the
poor from the earth, and of those who are in need from among men.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The night-spirit has two daughters,
Give, give. There are three things which are never full, even four which
never say, Enough:

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> The underworld, and the woman without a
child; the earth which never has enough water, and the fire which never
says, Enough.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The eye which makes sport of a father,
and sees no value in a mother when she is old will be rooted out by the
ravens of the valley, and be food for the young eagles.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> There are three things, the wonder of
which overcomes me, even four things outside my knowledge:

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> The way of an eagle in the air; the way
of a snake on a rock; the way of a ship in the heart of the sea; and the
way of a man with a girl.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> This is the way of a false wife; she
takes food, and, cleaning her mouth, says, I have done no wrong.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> For three things the earth is moved,
and there are four which it will not put up with:

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> A servant when he becomes a king; a man
without sense when his wealth is increased;

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> A hated woman when she is married; and
a servant-girl who takes the place of her master's wife.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> There are four things which are little
on the earth, but they are very wise:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> The ants are a people not strong, but
they put by a store of food in the summer;

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> The conies are only a feeble people,
but they make their houses in the rocks;

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> The locusts have no king, but they all
go out in bands;

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> You may take the lizard in your hands,
but it is in kings' houses.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> There are three things whose steps are
good to see, even four whose goings are fair:

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> The lion, which is strongest among
beasts, not turning from his way for any;

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> The war-horse, and the he-goat, and the
king when his army is with him.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> If you have done foolishly in lifting
yourself up, or if you have had evil designs, put your hand over your
mouth.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> The shaking of milk makes butter, and
the twisting of the nose makes blood come: so the forcing of wrath is a
cause of fighting.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> The words of Lemuel, king of Massa: the
teaching which he had from his mother.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> What am I to say to you, O Lemuel, my
oldest son? and what, O son of my body? and what, O son of my oaths?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Do not give your strength to women, or
your ways to that which is the destruction of kings.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not
for kings to take wine, or for rulers to say, Where is strong drink?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> For fear that through drinking they may
come to have no respect for the law, wrongly judging the cause of those
who are in trouble.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Give strong drink to him who is near to
destruction, and wine to him whose soul is bitter:

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Let him have drink, and his need will go
from his mind, and the memory of his trouble will be gone.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Let your mouth be open for those who have
no voice, in the cause of those who are ready for death.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Let your mouth be open, judging rightly,
and give right decisions in the cause of the poor and those in need.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Who may make discovery of a woman of
virtue? For her price is much higher than jewels.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> The heart of her husband has faith in
her, and he will have profit in full measure.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> She does him good and not evil all the
days of her life.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> She gets wool and linen, working at the
business of her hands.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> She is like the trading-ships, getting
food from far away.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> She gets up while it is still night,
and gives meat to her family, and their food to her servant-girls.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> After looking at a field with care, she
gets it for a price, planting a vine-garden with the profit of her work.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> She puts a band of strength round her,
and makes her arms strong.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> She sees that her marketing is of
profit to her: her light does not go out by night.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> She puts her hands to the cloth-working
rod, and her fingers take the wheel.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> Her hands are stretched out to the
poor; yes, she is open-handed to those who are in need.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> She has no fear of the snow for her
family, for all those in her house are clothed in red.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> She makes for herself cushions of
needlework; her clothing is fair linen and purple.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Her husband is a man of note in the
public place, when he takes his seat among the responsible men of the
land.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> She makes linen robes and gets a price
for them, and traders take her cloth bands for a price.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Strength and self-respect are her
clothing; she is facing the future with a smile.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Her mouth is open to give out wisdom,
and the law of mercy is on her tongue.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> She gives attention to the ways of her
family, she does not take her food without working for it.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Her children get up and give her
honour, and her husband gives her praise, saying,

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Unnumbered women have done well, but
you are better than all of them.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Fair looks are a deceit, and a
beautiful form is of no value; but a woman who has the fear of the Lord
is to be praised.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Give her credit for what her hands have
made: let her be praised by her works in the public place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes](ecc)
