[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ecc)  [Next](isa) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Song of Solomon

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The song of Songs, which is Solomon's.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Let him give me the kisses of his mouth:
for his love is better than wine.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Sweet is the smell of your perfumes; your
name is as perfume running out; so the young girls give you their love.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Take me to you, and we will go after you:
the king has taken me into his house. We will be glad and full of joy in
you, we will give more thought to your love than to wine: rightly are
they your lovers.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I am dark, but fair of form, O daughters of
Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Let not your eyes be turned on me, because
I am dark, because I was looked on by the sun; my mother's children were
angry with me; they made me the keeper of the vine-gardens; but my
vine-garden I have not kept.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Say, O love of my soul, where you give food
to your flock, and where you make them take their rest in the heat of
the day; why have I to be as one wandering by the flocks of your
friends?

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If you have not knowledge, O most beautiful
among women, go on your way in the footsteps of the flock, and give your
young goats food by the tents of the keepers.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I have made a comparison of you, O my love,
to a horse in Pharaoh's carriages.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Your face is a delight with rings of
hair, your neck with chains of jewels.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> We will make you chains of gold with
ornaments of silver.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> While the king is seated at his table, my
spices send out their perfume.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> As a bag of myrrh is my well-loved one to
me, when he is at rest all night between my breasts.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> My love is to me as a branch of the
cypress-tree in the vine-gardens of En-gedi.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> See, you are fair, my love, you are fair;
you have the eyes of a dove.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> See, you are fair, my loved one, and a
pleasure; our bed is green.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Cedar-trees are the pillars of our house;
and our boards are made of fir-trees.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I am a rose of Sharon, a flower of the
valleys.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> As the lily-flower among the thorns of the
waste, so is my love among the daughters.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> As the apple-tree among the trees of the
wood, so is my loved one among the sons. I took my rest under his shade
with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He took me to the house of wine, and his
flag over me was love.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Make me strong with wine-cakes, let me be
comforted with apples; I am overcome with love.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> His left hand is under my head, and his
right hand is round about me.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by
the roes of the field, do not let love be moved till it is ready.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The voice of my loved one! See, he comes
dancing on the mountains, stepping quickly on the hills.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> My loved one is like a roe; see, he is on
the other side of our wall, he is looking in at the windows, letting
himself be seen through the spaces.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> My loved one said to me, Get up, my love,
my fair one, and come away.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For, see, the winter is past, the rain is
over and gone;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The flowers are come on the earth; the
time of cutting the vines is come, and the voice of the dove is sounding
in our land;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The fig-tree puts out her green fruit and
the vines with their young fruit give a good smell. Get up from your
bed, my beautiful one, and come away.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> O my dove, you are in the holes of the
mountain sides, in the cracks of the high hills; let me see your face,
let your voice come to my ears; for sweet is your voice, and your face
is fair.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Take for us the foxes, the little foxes,
which do damage to the vines; our vines have young grapes.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> My loved one is mine, and I am his: he
takes his food among the flowers.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Till the evening comes, and the sky
slowly becomes dark, come, my loved one, and be like a roe on the
mountains of Bether.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> By night on my bed I was looking for him
who is the love of my soul: I was looking for him, but I did not see
him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I will get up now and go about the town, in
the streets and in the wide ways I will go after him who is the love of
my soul: I went after him, but I did not see him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The watchmen who go about the town came by
me; to them I said, Have you seen him who is my heart's desire?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> I was but a little way from them, when I
came face to face with him who is the love of my soul. I took him by the
hands, and did not let him go, till I had taken him into my mother's
house, and into the room of her who gave me birth.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by
the roes of the field, let not love be moved till it is ready.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who is this coming out of the waste places
like pillars of smoke, perfumed with sweet spices, with all the spices
of the trader?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> See, it is the bed of Solomon; sixty men of
war are about it, of the army of Israel,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> All of them armed with swords, trained in
war; every man has his sword at his side, because of fear in the night.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> King Solomon made himself a bed of the wood
of Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> He made its pillars of silver, its base
of gold, its seat of purple, the middle of it of ebony.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Go out, O daughters of Jerusalem, and see
King Solomon, with the crown which his mother put on his head on the day
when he was married, and on the day of the joy of his heart.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> See, you are fair, my love, you are fair;
you have the eyes of a dove; your hair is as a flock of goats, which
take their rest on the side of Gilead.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Your teeth are like a flock of sheep whose
wool is newly cut, which come up from the washing; every one has two
lambs, and there is not one without young.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Your red lips are like a bright thread, and
your mouth is fair of form; the sides of your head are like pomegranate
fruit under your veil.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Your neck is like the tower of David made
for a store-house of arms, in which a thousand breastplates are hanging,
breastplates for fighting-men.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Your two breasts are like two young roes of
the same birth, which take their food among the lilies.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Till the evening comes, and the sky slowly
becomes dark, I will go to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of
frankincense.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> You are all fair, my love; there is no mark
on you.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, with
me from Lebanon; see from the top of Amana, from the top of Senir and
Hermon, from the places of the lions, from the mountains of the
leopards.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> You have taken away my heart, my sister, my
bride; you have taken away my heart, with one look you have taken it,
with one chain of your neck!

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How fair is your love, my sister! How
much better is your love than wine, and the smell of your oils than any
perfume!

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Your lips are dropping honey; honey and
milk are under your tongue; and the smell of your clothing is like the
smell of Lebanon.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> A garden walled-in is my sister, my
bride; a garden shut up, a spring of water stopped.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> The produce of the garden is
pomegranates; with all the best fruits, henna and spikenard,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Spikenard and safron; calamus and
cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the
chief spices.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> You are a fountain of gardens, a spring
of living waters, and flowing waters from Lebanon.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Be awake, O north wind; and come, O
south, blowing on my garden, so that its spices may come out. Let my
loved one come into his garden, and take of his good fruits.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I have come into my garden, my sister, my
bride; to take my myrrh with my spice; my wax with my honey; my wine
with my milk. Take meat, O friends; take wine, yes, be overcome with
love.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> I am sleeping, but my heart is awake; it is
the sound of my loved one at the door, saying, Be open to me, my sister,
my love, my dove, my very beautiful one; my head is wet with dew, and my
hair with the drops of the night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have put off my coat; how may I put it
on? My feet are washed; how may I make them unclean?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> My loved one put his hand on the door, and
my heart was moved for him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I got up to let my loved one in; and my
hands were dropping with myrrh, and my fingers with liquid myrrh, on the
lock of the door.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I made the door open to my loved one; but
my loved one had taken himself away, and was gone, my soul was feeble
when his back was turned on me; I went after him, but I did not come
near him; I said his name, but he gave me no answer.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The keepers who go about the town overtook
me; they gave me blows and wounds; the keepers of the walls took away my
veil from me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if
you see my loved one, what will you say to him? That I am overcome with
love.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> What is your loved one more than another, O
fairest among women? What is your loved one more than another, that you
say this to us?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> My loved one is white and red, the chief
among ten thousand.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> His head is as the most delicate gold;
his hair is thick, and black as a raven.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the
water streams, washed with milk, and rightly placed.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> His face is as beds of spices, giving out
perfumes of every sort; his lips like lilies, dropping liquid myrrh.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> His hands are as rings of gold ornamented
with beryl-stones; his body is as a smooth plate of ivory covered with
sapphires.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> His legs are as pillars of stone on a
base of delicate gold; his looks are as Lebanon, beautiful as the
cedar-tree.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> His mouth is most sweet; yes, he is all
beautiful. This is my loved one, and this is my friend, O daughters of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Where is your loved one gone, O most fair
among women? Where is your loved one turned away, that we may go looking
for him with you?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> My loved one is gone down into his garden,
to the beds of spices, to take food in the gardens, and to get lilies.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> I am for my loved one, and my loved one is
for me; he takes food among the lilies.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> You are beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, as
fair as Jerusalem; you are to be feared like an army with flags.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Let your eyes be turned away from me; see,
they have overcome me; your hair is as a flock of goats which take their
rest on the side of Gilead.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Your teeth are like a flock of sheep which
come up from the washing; every one has two lambs, and there is not one
without young.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Like pomegranate fruit are the sides of
your head under your veil.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> There are sixty queens, and eighty
servant-wives, and young girls without number.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> My dove, my very beautiful one, is but one;
she is the only one of her mother, she is the dearest one of her who
gave her birth. The daughters saw her, and gave her a blessing; yes, the
queens and the servant-wives, and they gave her praises.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Who is she, looking down as the morning
light, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, who is to be feared like an
army with flags?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> I went down into the garden of nuts to
see the green plants of the valley, and to see if the vine was in bud,
and the pomegranate-trees were in flower.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Before I was conscious of it, ...

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Come back, come back, O Shulammite; come
back, come back, so that our eyes may see you. What will you see in the
Shulammite? A sword-dance.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> How beautiful are your feet in their shoes,
O king's daughter! The curves of your legs are like jewels, the work of
the hands of a good workman:

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Your stomach is a store of grain with
lilies round it, and in the middle a round cup full of wine.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Your two breasts are like two young roes of
the same birth.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Your neck is as a tower of ivory; your eyes
like the waters in Heshbon, by the doorway of Bath-rabbim; your nose is
as the tower on Lebanon looking over Damascus:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Your head is like Carmel, and the hair of
your head is like purple, in whose net the king is prisoner.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> How beautiful and how sweet you are, O
love, for delight.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> You are tall like a palm-tree, and your
breasts are like the fruit of the vine.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I said, Let me go up the palm-tree, and let
me take its branches in my hands: your breasts will be as the fruit of
the vine, and the smell of your breath like apples;

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the roof of your mouth like good wine
flowing down smoothly for my loved one, moving gently over my lips and
my teeth.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> I am for my loved one, and his desire is
for me.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Come, my loved one, let us go out into
the field; let us take rest among the cypress-trees.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Let us go out early to the vine-gardens;
let us see if the vine is in bud, if it has put out its young fruit, and
the pomegranate is in flower. There I will give you my love.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The mandrakes give out a sweet smell, and
at our doors are all sorts of good fruits, new and old, which I have
kept for my loved one.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Oh that you were my brother, who took milk
from my mother's breasts! When I came to you in the street, I would give
you kisses; yes, I would not be looked down on.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I would take you by the hand into my
mother's house, and she would be my teacher. I would give you drink of
spiced wine, drink of the pomegranate.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> His left hand would be under my head, and
his right hand about me.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, do
not let love be moved till it is ready.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Who is this, who comes up from the waste
places, resting on her loved one? It was I who made you awake under the
apple-tree, where your mother gave you birth; there she was in pain at
your birth.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Put me as a sign on your heart, as a sign
on your arm; love is strong as death, and wrath bitter as the
underworld: its coals are coals of fire; violent are its flames.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Much water may not put out love, or the
deep waters overcome it: if a man would give all the substance of his
house for love, it would be judged a price not great enough.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> We have a young sister, and she has no
breasts; what are we to do for our sister in the day when she is given
to a man?

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> If she is a wall, we will make on her a
strong base of silver; and if she is a door, we will let her be shut up
with cedar-wood.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> I am a wall, and my breasts are like
towers; then was I in his eyes as one to whom good chance had come.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Solomon had a vine-garden at Baal-hamon;
he let out the vine-garden to keepers; every one had to give a thousand
bits of silver for its fruit.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> My vine-garden, which is mine, is before
me: you, O Solomon, will have the thousand, and those who keep the fruit
of them two hundred.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> You who have your resting-place in the
gardens, the friends give ear to your voice; make me give ear to it.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Come quickly, my loved one, and be like a
roe on the mountains of spice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah](isa)
