[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](col)  [Next](th2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 1 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the
church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace to you and peace.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> We give praise to God at all times for you,
keeping you in memory in our prayers;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Having ever in mind your work of faith and
acts of love and the strength of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ,
before our God and Father;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Being conscious, my brothers, dear to God,
that you have been marked out by God's purpose;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Because our good news came to you, not in
word only, but in power, and in the Holy Spirit, so that you were
completely certain of it; even as you saw what our behaviour to you was
like from our love to you.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And you took us and the Lord as your
example, after the word had come to you in much trouble, with joy in the
Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> So that you became an example to all those
who have faith in Christ in Macedonia and Achaia.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For not only was the word of the Lord
sounding out from you in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your
faith in God is made clear; so that we have no need to say anything.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For they themselves give the news of how we
came among you; and how you were turned from images to God, to the
worship of a true and living God,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Waiting for his Son from heaven, who came
back from the dead, even Jesus, our Saviour from the wrath to come.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For you yourselves, brothers, are conscious
that our coming among you was not without effect:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> But after we had first undergone much pain
and been cruelly attacked as you saw, at Philippi, by the help of God we
gave you the good news without fear, though everything was against us.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For our witness does not come from error or
from an unclean heart or from deceit:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But even as the good news was given to us
by the approval of God, so we give it out; not as pleasing men, but God
by whom our hearts are tested.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For it is common knowledge among you that
we never made use of smooth-sounding false words, and God is witness
that at no time were we secretly desiring profit for ourselves,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Or looking for glory from men, from you or
from others, when we might have made ourselves a care to you as Apostles
of Christ.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But we were gentle among you, like a woman
caring for her little ones:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Even so, being full of loving desire for
you, we took delight in giving you not only God's good news, but even
our lives, because you were dear to us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For you have the memory, my brothers, of
our trouble and care; how, working night and day, so that we might not
be a trouble to any of you, we gave you the good news of God.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> You are witnesses, with God, how holy and
upright and free from all evil was our way of life among you who have
faith;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Even as you saw how, like a father with
his children, we were teaching and comforting you all, and giving
witness,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So that your lives might be pleasing to
God, who has given you a part in his kingdom and his glory.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And for this cause we still give praise
to God, that, when the word came to your ears through us, you took it,
not as the word of man, but, as it truly is, the word of God, which has
living power in you who have faith.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For you, my brothers, took as your
examples the churches of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus;
because you underwent the same things from your countrymen as they did
from the Jews;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Who put to death the Lord Jesus and the
prophets, violently driving us out; who are unpleasing to God and
against all men;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Who, to make the measure of their sins
complete, kept us from giving the word of salvation to the Gentiles: but
the wrath of God is about to come on them in the fullest degree.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But we, my brothers, being away from you
for a short time, in body but not in heart, had all the more desire to
see your face;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For which reason we made attempts to come
to you, even I, Paul, once and again; but Satan kept us from coming.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For what is our hope or joy or crown of
glory? Are not even you, before our Lord Jesus, at his coming?

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For you are our glory and our joy.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> At last our desire to have news of you was
so strong that, while we ourselves were waiting at Athens,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> We sent Timothy, our brother and God's
servant in the good news of Christ, to give you strength and comfort in
your faith;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So that no man might be moved by these
troubles; because you see that these things are part of God's purpose
for us.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And when we were with you, we said to you
that trouble was before us; and so it came about, as you see.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this reason, when I was no longer able
to keep quiet, I sent to get news of your faith, fearing that you might
be tested by the Evil One and that our work might come to nothing.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But now that Timothy has come to us from
you, and has given us good news of your faith and love, and that you
have happy memories of us, desiring greatly to see us, even as we do to
see you;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For this cause, brothers, in all our
trouble and grief we were comforted about you because of your faith;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For it is life to us if you keep your faith
in the Lord unchanged.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For how great is the praise which we give
to God for you, and how great the joy with which we are glad because of
you before our God;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Night and day requesting God again and
again that we may see your face and make your faith complete.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Now may our God and Father himself and
our Lord Jesus make a way for us to come to you;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And the Lord give you increase of love in
fullest measure to one another and to all men, even as our love to you;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> So that your hearts may be strong and
free from all sin before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord
Jesus with all his saints.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And last of all, the prayer which we make
to you from our heart and in the name of the Lord Jesus, is this: that
as we made clear to you what sort of behaviour is pleasing to God, as in
fact you are doing now, so you will go on in these ways, but more and
more.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Because you have in mind the orders we gave
you through the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For the purpose of God for you is this:
that you may be holy, and may keep yourselves from the desires of the
flesh;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> So that every one of you may keep his body
holy and in honour;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Not in the passion of evil desires, like
the Gentiles, who have no knowledge of God;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And that no man may make attempts to get
the better of his brother in business: for the Lord is the judge in all
these things, as we said to you before and gave witness.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Because it is God's purpose that our way of
life may be not unclean but holy.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Whoever, then, goes against this word, goes
against not man but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But about loving the brothers, there is no
need for me to say anything to you in this letter: for you have the
teaching of God that love for one another is right and necessary;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And, truly, you are lovers of all the
brothers in Macedonia; but it is our desire that your love may be
increased still more;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And that you may take pride in being
quiet and doing your business, working with your hands as we gave you
orders;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> That you may be respected by those who
are outside, and may have need of nothing.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But it is our desire, brothers, that you
may be certain about those who are sleeping; so that you may have no
need for sorrow, as others have who are without hope.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if we have faith that Jesus underwent
death and came back again, even so those who are sleeping will come
again with him by God's power.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For this we say to you by the word of the
Lord, that we who are still living at the coming of the Lord, will not
go before those who are sleeping.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Because the Lord himself will come down
from heaven with a word of authority, with the voice of the chief angel,
with the sound of a horn: and the dead in Christ will come to life
first;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Then we who are still living will be
taken up together with them into the clouds to see the Lord in the air:
and so will we be for ever with the Lord.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> So then, give comfort to one another with
these words.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But about the times and their order, my
brothers, there is no need for me to say anything to you.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For you yourselves have the knowledge that
the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> When they say, There is peace and no
danger, then sudden destruction will come on them, as birth-pains on a
woman with child; and they will not be able to get away from it.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But you, my brothers, are not in the dark,
for that day to overtake you like a thief:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For you are all sons of light and of the
day: we are not of the night or of the dark.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> So then, let us not take our rest as the
others do, but let us be self-controlled and awake.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For those who are sleeping do so in the
night; and those who are the worse for drink are so in the night;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But let us, who are of the day, be serious,
putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and on our heads, the hope
of salvation.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For God's purpose for us is not wrath, but
salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Who was put to death for us, so that,
awake or sleeping, we may have a part in his life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> So then, go on comforting and building up
one another, as you have been doing.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But we make this request to you, my
brothers: give attention to those who are working among you, who are
over you in the Lord to keep order among you;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And have a high opinion of them in love
because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And our desire is that you will keep
control over those whose lives are not well ordered, giving comfort to
the feeble-hearted, supporting those with little strength, and putting
up with much from all.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Let no one give evil for evil; but ever
go after what is good, for one another and for all.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Have joy at all times.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Keep on with your prayers.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> In everything give praise: for this is
the purpose of God in Christ Jesus for you.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Do not put out the light of the Spirit;

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Do not make little of the words of the
prophets;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Let all things be tested; keep to what is
good;

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Keep from every form of evil.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And may the God of peace himself make you
holy in every way; and may your spirit and soul and body be free from
all sin at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> God, by whom you have been marked out in
his purpose, is unchanging and will make it complete.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Brothers, keep us in mind in your
prayers.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Give all the brothers a holy kiss.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> I give orders in the name of the Lord
that all the brothers are to be present at the reading of this letter.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians](th2.md)
