[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th1)  [Next](ti1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 2 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the
church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God the Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> It is right for us to give praise to God at
all times for you, brothers, because of the great increase of your
faith, and the wealth of your love for one another;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> So that we ourselves take pride in you in
the churches of God for your untroubled mind and your faith in all the
troubles and sorrows which you are going through;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Which is a clear sign of the decision which
God in his righteousness has made; to give you a part in his kingdom,
for which you have undergone this pain;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For it is an act of righteousness on God's
part to give trouble as their reward to those who are troubling you,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And to you who are troubled, rest with us,
when the Lord Jesus comes from heaven with the angels of his power in
flames of fire,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> To give punishment to those who have no
knowledge of God, and to those who do not give ear to the good news of
our Lord Jesus:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Whose reward will be eternal destruction
from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his strength,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> At his coming, when he will have glory in
his saints, and will be a cause of wonder in all those who had faith
(because our witness among you had effect) in that day.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For this reason, you are ever in our
prayers, that you may seem to our God such as may have a part in his
purpose and that by his power he will make all his good purpose, and the
work of faith, complete;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> So that glory may be given to the name of
our Lord Jesus through you, and you may have glory in him, by the grace
of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now as to the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and our meeting with him, it is our desire, my brothers,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That you may not be moved in mind or
troubled by a spirit, or by a word, or by a letter as from us, with the
suggestion that the day of the Lord is even now come;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Give no belief to false words: because
there will first be a falling away from the faith, and the revelation of
the man of sin, the son of destruction,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Who puts himself against all authority,
lifting himself up over all which is named God or is given worship; so
that he takes his seat in the Temple of God, putting himself forward as
God.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Have you no memory of what I said when I
was with you, giving you word of these things?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And now it is clear to you what is keeping
back his revelation till the time comes for him to be seen.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the secret of evil is even now at work:
but there is one who is keeping back the evil till he is taken out of
the way.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And then will come the revelation of that
evil one, whom the Lord Jesus will put to death with the breath of his
mouth, and give to destruction by the revelation of his coming;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Even the one whose coming is marked by the
working of Satan, with all power and signs and false wonders,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And with every deceit of wrongdoing among
those whose fate is destruction; because they were quite without that
love of the true faith by which they might have salvation.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And for this cause, God will give them up
to the power of deceit and they will put their faith in what is false:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So that they all may be judged, who had
no faith in what is true, but took pleasure in evil.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But it is right for us to give praise to
God at all times for you, brothers, loved by the Lord, because it was
the purpose of God from the first that you might have salvation, being
made holy by the Spirit and by faith in what is true:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And in this purpose he gave you a part
through the good news of which we were the preachers, even that you
might have part in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> So then, brothers, be strong in purpose,
and keep the teaching which has been given to you by word or by letter
from us.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
God our Father who had love for us and has given us eternal comfort and
good hope through grace,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Give you comfort and strength in every
good work and word.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For the rest, my brothers, let there be
prayer for us that the word of the Lord may go forward with increasing
glory, even as it does with you;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And that we may be made free from foolish
and evil men; for not all have faith.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But the Lord is true, who will give you
strength and keep you safe from evil.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And we have faith in the Lord about you,
that you are doing and will do the things about which we give you
orders.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And may your hearts be guided by the Lord
into the love of God and quiet waiting for Christ.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Now we give you orders, brothers, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to keep away from all those whose
behaviour is not well ordered and in harmony with the teaching which
they had from us.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For you yourselves are used to taking us as
your example, because our life among you was ruled by order,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And we did not take food from any man for
nothing, but were working hard night and day not to be a trouble to any
of you:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Not because we have not the right, but to
make ourselves an example to you, so that you might do the same.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For even when we were with you we gave
you orders, saying, If any man does no work, let him not have food.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For it has come to our ears that there
are some among you whose behaviour is uncontrolled, who do no work at
all, but are over-interested in the business of others.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Now to such we give orders and make
request in the Lord Jesus, that, working quietly, they get their living.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And you, my brothers, do not get tired of
well-doing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And if any man does not give attention to
what we have said in this letter, take note of that man, and keep away
from him, so that he may be shamed.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Have no feeling of hate for him, but take
him in hand seriously as a brother.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Now the Lord of peace himself give you
peace at all times and in every way. May the Lord be with you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> These words of love to you at the end are
in my writing, Paul's writing, and this is the mark of every letter from
me.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy](ti1.md)
