[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th2)  [Next](ti2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 1 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the
order of God our Saviour and Christ Jesus our hope;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To Timothy, my true child in the faith:
Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> It was my desire, when I went on into
Macedonia, that you might make a stop at Ephesus, to give orders to
certain men not to put forward a different teaching,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Or to give attention to stories and long
lists of generations, from which come questionings and doubts, in place
of God's ordered way of life which is in faith;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But the effect of the order is love coming
from a clean heart, and a knowledge of what is right, and true faith:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From which some have been turned away,
giving themselves to foolish talking;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Desiring to be teachers of the law, though
they have no knowledge of what they say or of the statements which they
make so certainly.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> We are conscious that the law is good, if a
man makes a right use of it,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> With the knowledge that the law is made,
not for the upright man, but for those who have no respect for law and
order, for evil men and sinners, for the unholy and those who have no
religion, for those who put their fathers or mothers to death, for
takers of life,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For those who go after loose women, for
those with unnatural desires, for those who take men prisoners, who make
false statements and false oaths, and those who do any other things
against the right teaching,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Which may be seen in the good news of the
glory of the great God, which was given into my care.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I give praise to him who gave me power,
Christ Jesus our Lord, because he took me to be true, making me his
servant,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Though I had said violent words against
God, and done cruel acts, causing great trouble: but I was given mercy,
because I did it without knowledge, not having faith;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the grace of our Lord was very great,
with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> It is a true saying, in which all may put
their faith, that Christ Jesus came into the world to give salvation to
sinners, of whom I am the chief:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> But for this reason I was given mercy, so
that in me, the chief of sinners, Jesus Christ might make clear all his
mercy, as an example to those who in the future would have faith in him
to eternal life.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now to the King eternal, ever-living,
unseen, the only God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. So be it.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> This order I give to you, Timothy my son,
in harmony with the words of the prophets about you, so that by them you
may be strong, fighting the good fight,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Keeping faith, and being conscious of
well-doing; for some, by not doing these things, have gone wrong in
relation to the faith:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Such are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I
have given up to Satan, so that they may say no more evil words against
God.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My desire is, first of all, that you will
make requests and prayers and give praise for all men;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For kings and all those in authority; so
that we may have a calm and quiet life in all fear of God and serious
behaviour.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> This is good and pleasing in the eyes of
God our Saviour;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Whose desire is that all men may have
salvation and come to the knowledge of what is true.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For there is one God and one peacemaker
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Who gave himself as an offering for all;
witness of which was to be given at the right time;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And of this I became a preacher and an
Apostle (what I say is true, not false,) and a teacher of the Gentiles
in the true faith.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> It is my desire, then, that in every place
men may give themselves to prayer, lifting up holy hands, without wrath
or argument.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And that women may be dressed in simple
clothing, with a quiet and serious air; not with twisted hair and gold
or jewels or robes of great price;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But clothed with good works, as is right
for women who are living in the fear of God.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Let a woman quietly take the place of a
learner and be under authority.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> In my opinion it is right for a woman not
to be a teacher, or to have rule over a man, but to be quiet.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For Adam was first formed, then Eve;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Adam was not taken by deceit, but the
woman, being tricked, became a wrongdoer.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> But if they go on in faith and love and
holy self-control, she will be kept safe at the time of childbirth.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This is a true saying, A man desiring the
position of a Bishop has a desire for a good work.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The Bishop, then, is to be a man of good
name, the husband of one wife, self-controlled, serious-minded, having
respect for order, opening his house freely to guests, a ready teacher;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Not quickly moved to wrath or blows, but
gentle; no fighter, no lover of money;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Ruling his house well, having his children
under control with all serious behaviour;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> (For if a man has not the art of ruling his
house, how will he take care of the church of God?)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Not one newly taken into the church, for
fear that, through his high opinion of himself, he may come into the
same sin as the Evil One.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he is to have a good name among those
outside the church, so that nothing may be said against him and he may
not be taken by the designs of the Evil One.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Deacons, in the same way, are to be serious
in their behaviour, not false in word, not given to taking much wine or
greatly desiring the wealth of this world;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Keeping the secret of the faith in a heart
free from sin.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And let these first be put to the test;
then let them become Deacons if there is nothing against them.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Women are to be serious in behaviour,
saying no evil of others, controlling themselves, true in all things.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let Deacons be husbands of one wife,
ruling their children and their houses well.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For those who have done good work as
Deacons get for themselves a good position and become free from fear in
the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I am writing these things to you, though
I am hoping to come to you before long;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But if I am long in coming, this will
make clear to you what behaviour is right for men in the house of God,
which is the church of the living God, the pillar and base of what is
true.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And without argument, great is the secret
of religion: He who was seen in the flesh, who was given God's approval
in the spirit, was seen by the angels, of whom the good news was given
among the nations, in whom the world had faith, who was taken up in
glory.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But the Spirit says clearly that in later
times some will be turned away from the faith, giving their minds to
spirits of deceit, and the teachings of evil spirits,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Through the false ways of men whose words
are untrue, whose hearts are burned as with a heated iron;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Who keep men from being married and from
taking food which God made to be taken with praise by those who have
faith and true knowledge.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Because everything which God has made is
good, and nothing is evil, if it is taken with praise:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For it is made holy by the word of God and
by prayer.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> If you keep these things before the minds
of the brothers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, trained in
the words of the faith and of the right teaching which has been your
guide:

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But have nothing to do with unclean and
foolish stories. Give yourself training in religion:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For the training of the body is of profit
for a little, but religion is of profit in every way, giving hope for
the life which now is, and for that which is to come.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> This is a true saying, in which all may put
their faith.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And this is the purpose of all our work
and our fighting, because our hope is in the living God, who is the
Saviour of all men, and specially of those who have faith.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Let these be your orders and your
teaching.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no one make little of you because you
are young, but be an example to the church in word, in behaviour, in
love, in faith, in holy living.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Till I come, give attention to the
reading of the holy Writings, to comforting the saints, and to teaching.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Make use of that grace in you, which was
given to you by the word of the prophets, when the rulers of the church
put their hands on you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Have a care for these things; give
yourself to them with all your heart, so that all may see how you go
forward.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Give attention to yourself and your
teaching. Go on in these things; for in doing so you will get salvation
for yourself and for those who give hearing to you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Do not say sharp words to one who has
authority in the church, but let your talk be as to a father, and to the
younger men as to brothers:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> To the older women as to mothers, to the
younger as to sisters, with a clean heart.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Give honour to widows who are truly widows.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But if any widow has children or children's
children, let these see that it is right to take care of their family
and their fathers and mothers: for this is pleasing in the eyes of God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now she who is truly a widow and without
family puts her hope in God, giving herself to prayer day and night.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But she who gives herself to pleasure is
dead while she is living.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Give orders to this effect, so that no evil
may be said of anyone.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> If anyone has no care for his family and
those in his house, he is false to the faith, and is worse than one who
has no faith.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let no woman be numbered among the widows
who is under sixty years old, and only if she has been the wife of one
man,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And if witness is given of her good
works; if she has had the care of children, if she has been kind to
travellers, washing the feet of the saints, helping those who are in
trouble, giving herself to good works.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But to the younger widows say No: for
when their love is turned away from Christ, they have a desire to be
married;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And they are judged because they have
been false to their first faith;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And they get into the way of doing no
work, going about from house to house; and not only doing no work, but
talking foolishly, being over-interested in the business of others,
saying things which they have no right to say.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> So it is my desire that the younger
widows may be married and have children, controlling their families, and
giving the Evil One no chance to say anything against them,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> For even now some are turned away to
Satan.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any woman of the faith has relations
who are widows, let her give them help, so that the care of them does
not come on the church, and so it may give help to those who are truly
widowed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let rulers whose rule is good be honoured
twice over, specially those whose work is preaching and teaching.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For the Writings say, It is not right to
keep the ox from taking the grain when he is crushing it. And, The
worker has a right to his reward.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Do not take as true any statement made
against one in authority, but only if two or three give witness to it.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Say sharp words to sinners when all are
present, so that the rest may be in fear.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I give you orders before God and Christ
Jesus and the angels of God's selection, to keep these orders without
giving thought to one side more than another.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Do not put hands on any man without
thought, and have no part in other men's sins: keep yourself clean.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Do not take only water as your drink, but
take a little wine for the good of your stomach, and because you are
frequently ill.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> The sins of some men are clearly seen,
going before them to be judged; but with others, their sins go after
them.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> In the same way, there are good works
which are clearly seen; and those which are not so, may not be kept
secret.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Let all who are servants under the yoke
give all honour to their masters, so that no evil may be said against
the name of God and his teaching.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And let those whose masters are of the
faith have respect for them because they are brothers, working for them
the more readily, because those who take part in the good work are of
the faith and are dear. Give orders and teaching about these things.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If any man gives different teaching, not in
agreement with the true words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the
teaching which is in agreement with true religion,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> He has an over-high opinion of himself;
being without knowledge, having only an unhealthy love of questionings
and wars of words, from which come envy, fighting, cruel words, evil
thoughts,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Bitter talk of men who, being evil in mind
and dead to what is true, take the faith to be a way of making profit.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But true faith, with peace of mind, is of
great profit:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For we came into the world with nothing,
and we are not able to take anything out;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But if we have food and a roof over us, let
that be enough.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But those who have a desire for wealth are
falling into danger, and are taken as in a net by a number of foolish
and damaging desires, through which men are overtaken by death and
destruction.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For the love of money is a root of all
evil: and some whose hearts were fixed on it have been turned away from
the faith, and been wounded with unnumbered sorrows.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But you, O man of God, keep yourself from
these things, and go after righteousness, religion, faith, love, a quiet
mind, gentle behaviour.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Be fighting the good fight of the faith;
take for yourself the life eternal, for which you were marked out, and
of which you gave witness in the eyes of all.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I give you orders before God, the giver
of life, and Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate gave witness to the
faith,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> To keep the word untouched by evil, clear
from all shame, till the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Which at the right time he will make
clear, who is the eternal and only Ruler, King of kings, and Lord of
lords;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Who only has life for ever, living in
light to which no man may come near; whom no man has seen or is able to
see: to whom be honour and power for ever. So be it.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Give orders to those who have money and
goods in this life, not to be lifted up in their minds, or to put their
hope in the uncertain chances of wealth, but in God who gives us in full
measure all things for our use;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And to do good, having wealth in good
works, being quick to give, taking part with one another;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Making ready for themselves a safe place
for the time to come, so that the true life may be theirs.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> O Timothy, take good care of that which
is given to you, turning away from the wrong and foolish talk and
arguments of that knowledge which is falsely so named;

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Through which some, who gave their minds
to it, have been turned away from the faith. Grace be with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy](ti2.md)
