[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hag)  [Next](mal.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Zechariah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the eighth month, in the second year of
Darius, the word of the Lord came to Zechariah, the son of Berechiah,
the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The Lord has been very angry with your
fathers:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And you are to say to them, These are the
words of the Lord of armies: Come back to me, says the Lord of armies,
and I will come back to you.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Be not like your fathers, to whom the voice
of the earlier prophets came, saying, Be turned now from your evil ways
and from your evil doings: but they did not give ear to me or take note,
says the Lord.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Your fathers, where are they? and the
prophets, do they go on living for ever?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But my words and my orders, which I gave to
my servants the prophets, have they not overtaken your fathers? and
turning back they said, As it was the purpose of the Lord of armies to
do to us, in reward for our ways and our doings, so has he done.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh
month, the month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of the
Lord came to Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the
prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I saw in the night a man on a red horse,
between the mountains in the valley, and at his back were horses, red,
black, white, and of mixed colours.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then I said, O my lord, what are these? And
the angel who was talking to me said to me, I will make clear to you
what they are.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the man who was between the
mountains, answering me, said, These are those whom the Lord has sent to
go up and down through the earth.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And the man who was between the
mountains, answering, said to the angel of the Lord, We have gone up and
down through the earth, and all the earth is quiet and at rest.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then the angel of the Lord, answering,
said, O Lord of armies, how long will it be before you have mercy on
Jerusalem and on the towns of Judah against which your wrath has been
burning for seventy years?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the Lord gave an answer in good and
comforting words to the angel who was talking to me.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the angel who was talking to me said
to me, Let your voice be loud and say, These are the words of the Lord
of armies: I am greatly moved about the fate of Jerusalem and of Zion.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And I am very angry with the nations who
are living untroubled: for when I was only a little angry, they made the
evil worse.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> So this is what the Lord has said: I have
come back to Jerusalem with mercies; my house is to be put up in her,
says the Lord of armies, and a line is to be stretched out over
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And again let your voice be loud and say,
This is what the Lord of armies has said: My towns will again be
overflowing with good things, and again the Lord will give comfort to
Zion and take Jerusalem for himself.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And lifting up my eyes I saw four horns.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And I said to the angel who was talking
to me, What are these? And he said to me, These are the horns which have
sent Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem in flight.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the Lord gave me a vision of four
metal-workers.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Then I said, What have these come to do?
And he said, These are the horns which sent Judah in flight, and kept
him from lifting up his head: but these men have come to send fear on
them and to put down the nations who are lifting up their horns against
the land of Judah to send it in flight.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And lifting up my eyes, I saw a man with a
measuring-line in his hand.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And I said to him, Where are you going? And
he said to me, To take the measure of Jerusalem, to see how wide and how
long it is.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the angel who was talking to me went
out, and another angel went out, and, meeting him,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Said to him, Go quickly and say to this
young man, Jerusalem will be an unwalled town, because of the great
number of men and cattle in her.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For I, says the Lord, will be a wall of
fire round about her, and I will be the glory inside her.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Ho, ho! go in flight from the land of the
north, says the Lord: for I have sent you far and wide to the four winds
of heaven, says the Lord.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Ho! Zion, go in flight from danger, you who
are living with the daughter of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For this is what the Lord of armies has
said: In the way of glory he has sent me to the nations which have taken
your goods: for anyone touching you is touching what is most dear to
him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For at the shaking of my hand over them,
their goods will be taken by those who were their servants: and you will
see that the Lord of armies has sent me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Give songs of joy, O daughter of Zion:
for I come, and I will make my resting-place among you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And a number of nations will be joined to
the Lord in that day, and will become my people; and I will be living
among you, and you will see that the Lord of armies has sent me to you.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Judah will be the Lord's heritage in
the holy land, and Jerusalem will again be his.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Let all flesh be quiet and make no sound
before the Lord: for he is awake and has come from his holy
resting-place.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he let me see Joshua, the high priest,
in his place before the angel of the Lord, and the Satan at his right
hand ready to take up a cause against him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the Lord said to the Satan, May the
Lord's word be sharp against you, O Satan, the word of the Lord who has
taken Jerusalem for himself: is this not a burning branch pulled out of
the fire?

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Now Joshua was clothed in unclean robes,
and he was in his place before the angel.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he made answer and said to those who
were there before him, Take the unclean robes off him, and let him be
clothed in clean robes;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And let them put a clean head-dress on his
head. So they put a clean head-dress on his head, clothing him with
clean robes: and to him he said, See, I have taken your sin away from
you.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the angel of the Lord made a statement
to Joshua, and said,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> These are the words of the Lord of armies:
If you will go in my ways and keep what I have put in your care, then
you will be judge over my Temple and have the care of my house, and I
will give you the right to come in among those who are there.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Give ear now, O Joshua, the high priest,
you and your friends who are seated before you; for these are men who
are a sign: for see, I will let my servant the Branch be seen.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For see, the stone which I have put before
Joshua; on one stone are seven eyes: see, the design cut on it will be
my work, says the Lord of armies, and I will take away the sin of that
land in one day.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In that day, says the Lord of armies, you
will be one another's guests under the vine and under the fig-tree.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the angel who was talking to me came
again, awaking me as a man out of his sleep.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he said to me, What do you see? And I
said, I see a light-support, made all of gold, with its cup on the top
of it and seven lights on it; and there are seven pipes to every one of
the lights which are on the top of it;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And two olive-trees by it, one on the right
side of the cup and one on the left.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And I made answer and said to the angel who
was talking to me, What are these, my lord?

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then the angel who was talking to me,
answering me, said, Have you no knowledge of what these are? And I said,
No, my lord.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> This is the word of the Lord to Zerubbabel,
saying, Not by force or by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of
armies.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Who are you, O great mountain? before
Zerubbabel you will become level: and he will let all see the headstone,
with cries of Grace, grace, to it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The hands of Zerubbabel have put the base
of this house in place, and his hands will make it complete; and it will
be clear to you that the Lord of armies has sent me to you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For who has had a poor opinion of the day
of small things? for they will be glad when they see the weighted
measuring-line in the hand of Zerubbabel. Then he said in answer to me,
These seven lights are the eyes of the Lord which go quickly up and down
through all the earth.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And I made answer and said to him, What
are these two olive-trees on the right side of the light-support and on
the left?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And answering a second time, I said to
him, What are these two olive branches, through whose gold pipes the oil
is drained out?

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he said in answer to me, Have you no
knowledge what these are? And I said, No, my lord.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And he said, These are the two sons of
oil, whose place is by the Lord of all the earth.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then again lifting up my eyes I saw a roll
in flight through the air.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And he said to me, What do you see? And I
said, A roll going through the air; it is twenty cubits long and ten
cubits wide.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then he said to me, This is the curse which
goes out over the face of all the land: for long enough has every thief
gone without punishment, and long enough has every taker of false oaths
gone without punishment.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And I will send it out, says the Lord of
armies, and it will go into the house of the thief and into the house of
him who takes a false oath by my name: and it will be in his house,
causing its complete destruction, with its woodwork and its stones.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the angel who was talking to me went
out and said to me, Let your eyes be lifted up now, and see the ephah
which is going out.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I said, What is it? And he said, This
is an ephah which is going out. And he said further, This is their
evil-doing in all the land.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And I saw a round cover of lead lifted up;
and a woman was seated in the middle of the ephah.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And he said, This is Sin; and pushing her
down into the ephah, he put the weight of lead on the mouth of it.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And lifting up my eyes I saw two women
coming out, and the wind was in their wings; and they had wings like the
wings of a stork: and they took the ephah, lifting it up between earth
and heaven.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And I said to the angel who was talking
to me, Where are they taking the ephah?

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And he said to me, To make a house for
her in the land of Shinar: and they will make a place ready, and put her
there in the place which is hers.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And again lifting up my eyes I saw four
war-carriages coming out from between the two mountains; and the
mountains were mountains of brass.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> In the first war-carriage were red horses;
and in the second, black horses;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And in the third, white horses; and in the
fourth, horses of mixed colour.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And I made answer and said to the angel who
was talking to me, What are these, my lord?

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the angel, answering, said to me, These
go out to the four winds of heaven from their place before the Lord of
all the earth.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> The carriage in which are the black horses
goes in the direction of the north country; the white go to the west;
and those of mixed colour go in the direction of the south country.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the red ones go to the east; and they
made request that they might go up and down through the earth: and he
said, Go up and down through the earth. So they went up and down through
the earth.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Then crying out to me, he said, See, those
who are going to the north country have given rest to the spirit of the
Lord in the north country.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Take the offerings of those who went away
as prisoners, from Heldai, Tobijah, and Jedaiah, and from the family of
Josiah, the son of Zephaniah, who have come from Babylon;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And take silver and gold and make a crown
and put it on the head of Zerubbabel;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And say to him, These are the words of
the Lord of armies: See, the man whose name is the Branch, under whom
there will be fertile growth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And he will be the builder of the Temple
of the Lord; and the glory will be his, and he will take his place as
ruler on the seat of power; and Joshua will be a priest at his right
hand, and between them there will be a design of peace.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the crown will be for grace to Heldai
and Tobijah and Jedaiah and the son of Zephaniah, to keep their memory
living in the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And those who are far away will come and
be builders in the Temple of the Lord, and it will be clear to you that
the Lord of armies has sent me to you.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And it came about in the fourth year of
King Darius, that the word of the Lord came to Zechariah on the fourth
day of the ninth month, the month Chislev.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Now they of Beth-el had sent Sharezer and
Regem-melech to make a request for grace from the Lord,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And to say to the priests of the house of
the Lord of armies and to the prophets, Am I to go on weeping in the
fifth month, separating myself as I have done in past years?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then the word of the Lord of armies came to
me, saying

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Say to all the people of the land and to
the priests, When you went without food and gave yourselves to grief in
the fifth and the seventh months for these seventy years, did you ever
do it because of me?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And when you are feasting and drinking, are
you not doing it only for yourselves?

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Are not these the words which the Lord said
to you by the earlier prophets, when Jerusalem was full of people and
wealth, and the towns round about her and the South and the Lowland were
peopled?

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the word of the Lord came to Zechariah,
saying,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
Let your judging be upright and done in good faith, let every man have
mercy and pity for his brother:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Do not be hard on the widow, or the child
without a father, on the man from a strange country, or on the poor; let
there be no evil thought in your heart against your brother.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But they would not give attention,
turning their backs and stopping their ears from hearing;

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And they made their hearts like the
hardest stone, so that they might not give ear to the law and the words
which the Lord of armies had said by the earlier prophets: and there
came great wrath from the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And it came about that as they would not
give ear to his voice, so I would not give ear to their voice, says the
Lord of armies:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> But with a storm-wind I sent them in
flight among all the nations of whom they had no knowledge. So the land
was waste after them, so that no man went through or came back: for they
had made waste the desired land.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the word of the Lord of armies came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> These are the words of the Lord of armies:
I am angry about the fate of Zion, I am angry about her with great
wrath.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> This is what the Lord has said: I have come
back to Zion, and will make my living-place in Jerusalem: and Jerusalem
will be named The town of good faith; and the mountain of the Lord of
armies The holy mountain.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
There will again be old men and old women seated in the open spaces of
Jerusalem, every man with his stick in his hand because he is so old.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the open spaces of the town will be
full of boys and girls playing in its open spaces.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
If this is a wonder to the rest of this people, is it a wonder to me?
says the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
See, I will be the saviour of my people from the east country, and from
the west country;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And I will make them come and be living in
Jerusalem and they will be to me a people and I will be to them a God,
in good faith and in righteousness.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
Let your hands be strong, you who are now hearing these words from the
mouths of the prophets, that is to say, in the days when the base of the
house of the Lord of armies has been put in place for the building of
the house, that is the Temple.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For before those days there was no
payment for a man's work, or for the use of a beast, and there was no
peace for him who went out or him who came in, because of the attacker:
for I had every man turned against his neighbour.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But now I will not be to the rest of this
people as I was in the past, says the Lord of armies.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For I will let the seed of peace be
planted; the vine will give her fruit and the land will give her
increase and the heavens will give their dew; and I will give to the
rest of this people all these things for their heritage.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And it will come about that, as you were
a curse among the nations, O children of Judah and children of Israel,
so I will give you salvation and you will be a blessing: have no fear
and let your hands be strong.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For this is what the Lord of armies has
said: As it was my purpose to do evil to you when your fathers made me
angry, says the Lord of armies, and my purpose was not changed:

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> So in these days it is again my purpose
to do good to Jerusalem and to the children of Judah: have no fear.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> These are the things which you are to do:
Let every man say what is true to his neighbour; and let your judging
give peace in your towns.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Let no one have any evil thought in his
heart against his neighbour; and have no love for false oaths: for all
these things are hated by me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the word of the Lord of armies came
to me, saying,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
The times of going without food in the fourth month and in the fifth and
the seventh and the tenth months, will be for the people of Judah times
of joy and happy meetings; so be lovers of good faith and of peace.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
It will again come about that when peoples and those living in great
towns come,

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the people of one town go to another
and say, Let us certainly go with a request for grace from the Lord, and
to give worship to the Lord of armies, then I will go with you.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And great peoples and strong nations will
come to give worship to the Lord of armies in Jerusalem and to make
requests for grace from the Lord.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> This is what the Lord of armies has said:
In those days, ten men from all the languages of the nations will put
out their hands and take a grip of the skirt of him who is a Jew,
saying, We will go with you, for it has come to our ears that God is
with you.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> A word of the Lord: The Lord has come to
the land of Hadrach, and Damascus is his resting-place: for the towns of
Aram are the Lord's,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> As well as Hamath, which is by its limit,
and Tyre and Zidon, because they are very wise.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And Tyre made for herself a strong place,
and got together silver like dust and the best gold like the earth of
the streets.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> See, the Lord will take away her heritage,
overturning her power in the sea; and she will be burned up with fire.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Ashkelon will see it with fear, and Gaza,
bent with pain; and Ekron, for her hope will be shamed: and the king
will be cut off from Gaza, and Ashkelon will be unpeopled.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And a mixed people will be living in
Ashdod, and I will have the pride of the Philistines cut off.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And I will take away his blood from his
mouth, and his disgusting things from between his teeth; and some of his
people will be kept for our God: and he will be as a family in Judah,
and Ekron as one living in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And I will put my forces in position round
my house, so that there may be no coming and going: and no cruel master
will again go through them: for now I have seen his trouble.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Be full of joy, O daughter of Zion; give a
glad cry, O daughter of Jerusalem: see, your king comes to you: he is
upright and has overcome; gentle and seated on an ass, on a young ass.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And he will have the war-carriage cut off
from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the bow of war will be
cut off: and he will say words of peace to the nations: and his rule
will be from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And as for you, because of the blood of
your agreement, I have sent out your prisoners from the deep hole in
which there is no water.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And they will come back to you, O
daughter of Zion, as prisoners of hope: today I say to you that I will
give you back twice as much;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For I have made Judah a bow bent for my
use, I have made Ephraim the arrows of the bow; I will make your sons, O
Zion, take up arms against your sons, O Greece, and will make you like
the sword of a man of war.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And the Lord will be seen over them, and
his arrow will go out like the thunder-flame: and the Lord God, sounding
the war-horn, will go in the storm-winds of the South.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> The Lord of armies will be a cover for
them; and they will overcome, crushing under foot the armed men; they
will take their blood for drink like wine: they will be full like the
sides of the altar.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And the Lord their God will be their
saviour in that day, giving them food like the flock of his people: for
they will be like the jewels of a crown shining over his land.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For how good it is and how beautiful!
grain will make the young men strong and new wine the virgins.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Make your request to the Lord for rain in
the time of the spring rains, even to the Lord who makes the
thunder-flames; and he will give them showers of rain, to every man
grass in the field.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For the images have said what is not
true, and the readers of signs have seen deceit; they have given
accounts of false dreams, they give comfort to no purpose: so they go
out of the way like sheep, they are troubled because they have no
keeper.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> My wrath is burning against the keepers
of the flock, and I will send punishment on the he-goats: for the Lord
of armies takes care of his flock, the people of Judah, and will make
them like the horse of his pride in the fight.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> From him will come the keystone, from him
the nail, from him the bow of war, from him will come every ruler;

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Together they will be like men of war,
crushing down their haters into the earth of the streets in the fight;
they will make war because the Lord is with them: and the horsemen will
be shamed.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And I will make the children of Judah
strong, and I will be the saviour of the children of Joseph, and I will
make them come back again, for I have had mercy on them: they will be as
if I had not given them up: for I am the Lord their God and I will give
them an answer.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Ephraim will be like a man of war,
and their hearts will be glad as with wine; and their children will see
it with joy; their hearts will be glad in the Lord.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> With the sound of the pipe I will get
them together; for I have given the price to make them free: and they
will be increased as they were increased.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Though I had them planted among the
peoples, they will keep me in mind in far countries: and they will take
care of their children and will come back.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And I will make them come back out of
the land of Egypt, and will get them together out of Assyria; and I will
take them into the land of Gilead, and it will not be wide enough for
them.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And they will go through the sea of
Egypt, and all the deep waters of the Nile will become dry: and the
pride of Assyria will be made low, and the power of Egypt will be taken
away.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And their strength will be in the Lord;
and their pride will be in his name, says the Lord.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Let your doors be open, O Lebanon, so
that fire may be burning among your cedars.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Give a cry of grief, O fir-tree, for the
fall of the cedar, because the great ones have been made low: give cries
of grief, O you oaks of Bashan, for the strong trees of the wood have
come down.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The sound of the crying of the keepers of
the flock! for their glory is made waste: the sound of the loud crying
of the young lions! for the pride of Jordan is made waste.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> This is what the Lord my God has said:
Take care of the flock of death;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Whose owners put them to death and have
no sense of sin; and those who get a price for them say, May the Lord be
praised for I have much wealth: and the keepers of the flock have no
pity for them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> For I will have no more pity for the
people of the land, says the Lord; but I will give up everyone into his
neighbour's hand and into the hand of his king: and they will make the
land waste, and I will not keep them safe from their hands.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> So I took care of the flock of death, for
those who made profit out of the flock; and I took for myself two rods,
naming one Beautiful, and the other Bands; and I took care of the flock.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And in one month I put an end to the
three keepers of the flock; for my soul was tired of them, and their
souls were disgusted with me.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And I said, I will not take care of you:
If death comes to any, let death be its fate; if any is cut off, let it
be cut off; and let the rest take one another's flesh for food.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And I took my rod Beautiful, cutting it
in two, so that the Lord's agreement, which he had made with all the
peoples, might be broken.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And it was broken on that day: and the
sheep-traders, who were watching me, were certain that it was the word
of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And I said to them, If it seems good to
you, give me my payment; and if not, do not give it. So they gave me my
payment by weight, thirty shekels of silver.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the Lord said to me, Put it into
the store-house, the price at which I was valued by them. And I took the
thirty shekels of silver and put them into the store-house in the house
of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Then I took my other rod, the one named
Bands, cutting it in two, so that the relation of brothers between Judah
and Israel might be broken.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And the Lord said to me, Take again the
instruments of a foolish keeper of sheep.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For see, I will put a sheep-keeper over
the land, who will have no care for that which is cut off, and will not
go in search of the wanderers, or make well what is broken, and he will
not give food to that which is ill, but he will take for his food the
flesh of the fat, and let their feet be broken.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> A curse on the foolish keeper who goes
away from the flock! the sword will be on his arm and on his right eye:
his arm will become quite dry and his eye will be made completely dark.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> The word of the Lord about Israel. The
Lord by whom the heavens are stretched out and the bases of the earth
put in place, and the spirit of man formed inside him, has said:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> See, I will make Jerusalem a cup of
shaking fear to all the peoples round about, when Jerusalem is shut in.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And it will come about in that day that I
will make Jerusalem a stone of great weight for all the peoples; all
those who take it up will be badly wounded; and all the nations of the
earth will come together against it.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> In that day, says the Lord, I will put
fear into every horse and make every horseman go off his head: and my
eyes will be open on the people of Judah, and I will make every horse of
the peoples blind.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And the families of Judah will say in
their hearts, The people of Jerusalem have their strength in the Lord of
armies, their God.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> In that day I will make the families of
Judah like a pot with fire in it among trees, and like a flaming stick
among cut grain; they will send destruction on all the peoples round
about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem will be living
again in the place which is hers, that is, in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And the Lord will give salvation to the
tents of Judah first, so that the glory of the family of David and the
glory of the people of Jerusalem may not be greater than that of Judah.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> In that day the Lord will be a cover over
the people of Jerusalem; and he who is feeble among them in that day
will be as strong as David, and the family of David will be as God, as
the angel of the Lord before them.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And it will come about on that day that I
will take in hand the destruction of all the nations who come against
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And I will send down on the family of
David and on the people of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of prayer;
and their eyes will be turned to the one who was wounded by their hands:
and they will be weeping for him as for an only son, and their grief for
him will be bitter, like the grief of one sorrowing for his oldest son.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> In that day there will be a great
weeping in Jerusalem, like the weeping of Hadad-rimmon in the valley of
Megiddon.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And the land will give itself to
weeping, every family separately; the family of David by themselves, and
their wives by themselves; the family of Nathan by themselves, and their
wives by themselves;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The family of Levi by themselves, and
their wives by themselves; the family of Shimei by themselves, and their
wives by themselves;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And all the other families by
themselves, and their wives by themselves.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> In that day there will be a fountain open
to the family of David and to the people of Jerusalem, for sin and for
that which is unclean.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And it will come about on that day, says
the Lord of armies, that I will have the names of the images cut off out
of the land, and there will be no more memory of them: and I will send
all the prophets and the unclean spirit away from the land.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And if anyone goes on acting as a
prophet, then his father and his mother who gave him life will say to
him, You may not go on living, for you are saying what is false in the
name of the Lord; and his father and his mother will put a sword through
him when he does so.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And it will come about in that day that
the prophets will be shamed, every man on account of his vision, when he
is talking as a prophet; and they will not put on a robe of hair for
purposes of deceit:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> But he will say, I am no prophet, but a
worker on the land; for I have been an owner of land from the time when
I was young.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And if anyone says to him, What are these
wounds between your hands? then he will say, Those with which I was
wounded in the house of my friends.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Awake! O sword, against the keeper of my
flock, and against him who is with me, says the Lord of armies: put to
death the keeper of the sheep, and the sheep will go in flight: and my
hand will be turned against the little ones.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And it will come about that in all the
land, says the Lord, two parts of it will be cut off and come to an end;
but the third will be still living there.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And I will make the third part go through
the fire, cleaning them as silver is made clean, and testing them as
gold is tested: and they will make their prayer to me and I will give
them an answer: I will say, It is my people; and they will say, The Lord
is my God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> See, a day of the Lord is coming when
they will make division of your goods taken by force before your eyes.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For I will get all the nations together
to make war against Jerusalem; and the town will be overcome, and the
goods taken from the houses, and the women taken by force: and half the
town will go away as prisoners, and the rest of the people will not be
cut off from the town.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Then the Lord will go out and make war
against those nations, as he did in the day of the fight.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And in that day his feet will be on the
Mount of Olives, which is opposite Jerusalem on the east, and the Mount
of Olives will be parted in the middle to the east and to the west,
forming a very great valley; and half the mountain will be moved to the
north and half of it to the south.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And the valley will be stopped ... and
you will go in flight as you went in flight from the earth-shock in the
days of Uzziah, king of Judah: and the Lord my God will come, and all
his holy ones with him.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And in that day there will be no heat or
cold or ice;

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And it will be unbroken day, such as the
Lord has knowledge of, without change of day and night, and even at
nightfall it will be light.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And on that day living waters will go out
from Jerusalem; half of them flowing to the sea on the east and half to
the sea on the west: in summer and in winter it will be so.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the Lord will be King over all the
earth: in that day there will be one Lord and his name one.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And all the land will become like the
Arabah, from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem; and she will be lifted
up and be living in her place; from the doorway of Benjamin to the place
of the first doorway, to the doorway of the angle, and from the tower of
Hananel to the king's wine-crushing places, men will be living in her.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And there will be no more curse; but
Jerusalem will be living without fear of danger.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And this will be the disease which the
Lord will send on all the peoples which have been warring against
Jerusalem: their flesh will be wasted away while they are on their feet,
their eyes will be wasted in their heads and their tongues in their
mouths.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And it will be on that day that a great
fear will be sent among them from the Lord; and everyone will take his
neighbour's hand, and every man's hand will be lifted against his
neighbour's.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And even Judah will be fighting against
Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the nations round about will be massed
together, a great store of gold and silver and clothing.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the horses and the transport
beasts, the camels and the asses and all the beasts in those tents will
be attacked by the same disease.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And it will come about that everyone
who is still living, of all those nations who came against Jerusalem,
will go up from year to year to give worship to the King, the Lord of
armies, and to keep the feast of tents.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And it will be that if any one of all
the families of the earth does not go up to Jerusalem to give worship to
the King, the Lord of armies, on them there will be no rain.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And if the family of Egypt does not go
up or come there, they will be attacked by the disease which the Lord
will send on the nations:

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> This will be the punishment of Egypt,
and the punishment of all the nations who do not go up to keep the feast
of tents.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> On that day all the bells of the horses
will be holy to the Lord, and the pots in the Lord's house will be like
the basins before the altar.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah
will be holy to the Lord of armies: and all those who make offerings
will come and take them for boiling their offerings: in that day there
will be no more traders in the house of the Lord of armies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi](mal.md)
