<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rgq01)  [Next](rgq03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674993365/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE787Q/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roman and Greek Questions*, by Plutarch, tr. Frank Cole Babbitt,
\[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### THE ROMAN QUESTIONS

1-9.

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> do they bid the bride touch fire
and water?

Is it that of these two, being reckoned as elements or first principles,
fire is masculine and water feminine, <span id="fr_3"></span>[a](#fn_3)
and fire supplies the beginnings of motion and water the function of the
subsistent element or the material?

Or is it because fire purifies and water cleanses, and a married woman
must remain pure and clean?

Or is it that, just as fire without moisture is unsustaining and arid,
and water without heat is unproductive and inactive, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[b](#fn_4) so also male and female apart from each
other are inert, but their union in marriage produces the perfection of
their life together?

Or is it that they must not desert each other, but must share together
every sort of fortune, even if they are destined to have nothing other
than fire and water to share with each other?

 

2\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> in the marriage rites do they
light five torches, neither more nor less, which they call *cereones*?

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Is it, as Varro has stated, that while the praetors use three, the
aediles have a right <span id="fr_5"></span>[a](#fn_5) to more, and it
is from the aediles that the wedding party light their torches?

Or is it because in their use of several numbers the odd number was
considered better and more perfect for various purposes and also better
adapted to marriage? For the even number admits division and its
equality of division suggests strife and opposition; the odd number,
however, cannot be divided into equal parts at all, but whenever it is
divided it always leaves behind a remainder of the same nature as
itself. Now, of the odd numbers, five is above all the nuptial number;
for three is the first odd number, and two is the first even number, and
five is composed of the union of these two, as it were of male and
female. <span id="fr_6"></span>[b](#fn_6)

Or is it rather that, since light is the symbol of birth, and women in
general are enabled by nature to bear, at the most, five children at one
birth, <span id="fr_7"></span>[c](#fn_7) the wedding company makes use
of exactly that number of torches?

Or is it because they think that the nuptial pair has need of five
deities: Zeus Teleios, Hera Teleia, Aphrodite, Peitho, and finally
Artemis, whom women in child-birth and travail are wont to invoke?

 

3\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> is it that, although there are
many shrines of Diana in Rome, the only one into which men may not enter
is the shrine in the so-called Vicus Patricius?

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Is it because of the current legend? For a man attempted to violate a
woman who was here worshipping the goddess, and was torn to pieces by
the dogs; and men do not enter because of the superstitious fear that
arose from this occurrence.

 

4\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> do they, as might be expected,
nail up stags’ horns in all the other shrines of Diana, but in the
shrine on the Aventine nail up horns of cattle?

Is it because they remember the ancient occurrence? <span
id="fr_8"></span>[a](#fn_8) For the tale is told that among the Sabines
in the herds of Antro Curiatius was born a heifer excelling all the
others in appearance and size. When a certain soothsayer told him that
the city of the man who should sacrifice that heifer to Diana on the
Aventine was destined to become the mightiest city and to rule all
Italy, the man came to Rome with intent to sacrifice his heifer. But a
servant of his secretly told the prophecy to the king Servius, who told
Cornelius the priest, and Cornelius gave instructions to Antro to bathe
in the Tiber before the sacrifice; for this, said he, was the custom of
those whose sacrifice was to be acceptable. Accordingly Antro went away
and bathed, but Servius sacrificed the heifer to Diana before Antro
could return, and nailed the horns to the shrine. This tale both
Juba <span id="fr_9"></span>[b](#fn_9) and Varro have recorded, except
that Varro has not noted the name of Antro; and he says that the Sabine
was cozened, not by Cornelius the priest, but by the keeper of the
temple.

 

5\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> is it that those who are falsely
reported to

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

have died in a foreign country, even if they return, men do not admit by
the door, but mount upon the roof-tiles and let them down inside?

Varro gives an explanation of the cause that is quite fabulous. For he
says that in the Sicilian war there was a great naval battle, and in the
case of many men a false report spread that they were dead. But, when
they had returned home, in a short time they all came to their end
except one who, when he tried to enter, found the doors shutting against
him of their own accord, nor did they yield when he strove to open them.
The man fell asleep there before his threshold and in his sleep saw a
vision, which instructed him to climb upon the roof and let himself down
into the house. When he had done so, he prospered and lived to an
advanced age; and from this occurrence the custom became established for
succeeding generations.

But consider if this be not in some wise similar to Greek customs; for
the Greeks did not consider pure, nor admit to familiar intercourse, nor
suffer to approach the temples any person for whom a funeral had been
held and a tomb constructed on the assumption that they were dead. The
tale is told that Aristinus, a victim of this superstition, sent to
Delphi and besought the god to release him from the difficulties in
which he was involved because of the custom; and the prophetic priestess
gave response:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">All that a woman in childbed does at the birth of
her baby,  
When this again thou hast done, to the blessed gods sacrifice
offer.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Aristinus,
accordingly, chose the part of wisdom and

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

delivered himself like a new-born babe into the hands of women to be
washed, and to be wrapped in swaddling-clothes, and to be suckled; and
all other men in such plight do likewise and they are called "Men of
Later Fate." But some will have it that this was done in the case of
such persons even before Aristinus, and that the custom is ancient.
Hence it is nothing surprising if the Romans also did not think it right
to admit by the door, through which they go out to sacrifice and come in
from sacrificing, those who are thought to have been buried once and for
all and to belong to the company of the departed, but bade them descend
from the open air above into that portion of the house which is exposed
to the sky. And with good reason, for, naturally, they perform all their
rites of purification under the open sky.

 

6\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> do the women kiss their kinsmen
on the lips?

Is it, as most authorities believe, that the drinking of wine was
forbidden to women, <span id="fr_10"></span>[a](#fn_10) and therefore,
so that women who had drunk wine should not escape detection, but should
be detected when they chanced to meet men of their household, the custom
of kissing was established?

Or is it for the reason which Aristotle <span
id="fr_11"></span>[b](#fn_11) the philosopher has recorded? For that
far-famed deed, the scene of which is laid in many different
places, <span id="fr_12"></span>[c](#fn_12) was dared, it appears, by
the Trojan women, even on the very shores of Italy. For when they had
reached the coast, and the men had disembarked, the women set fire to
the ships, since, at all hazards, they desired to be quit of their
wanderings and their sea-faring.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But they were
afraid of their husbands, and greeted with a kiss and a warm embrace
such of their kinsmen and members of their household as they
encountered; and when the men had ceased from their wrath and had become
reconciled, the women continued thereafter as well to employ this mark
of affection towards them.

Or was this rather bestowed upon the women as a privilege that should
bring them both honour and power if they should be seen to have many
good men among their kinsmen and in their household?

Or is it that, since it is not the custom for men to marry blood
relations, <span id="fr_13"></span>[a](#fn_13) affection proceeded only
so far as a kiss, and this alone remained as a token of kinship and a
participation therein? For formerly men did not marry women related to
them by ties of blood, just as even now they do not marry their aunts or
their sisters <span id="fr_14"></span>[b](#fn_14); but after a long time
they made the concession of allowing wedlock with cousins for the
following reason: a man possessed of no property, but otherwise of
excellent character and more satisfactory to the people than other
public men, had as wife his cousin, an heiress, and was thought to be
growing rich from her estate. He was accused on this ground, but the
people would not even try the case and dismissed the charge, enacting a
decree that all might marry cousins or more distant relatives; but
marriage with nearer kin was prohibited.

 

7\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> is it forbidden for a man to
receive a gift from his wife or a wife to receive a gift from her
husband? <span id="fr_15"></span>[c](#fn_15)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Is it that, Solon having promulgated a law <span
id="fr_16"></span>[a](#fn_16) that the bequests of the deceased should
be valid unless a man were constrained by force or persuaded by his
wife, whereby he excepted force as overriding the free will, and
pleasure as misleading the judgement, in this way the bequests of wives
and husbands became suspect?

Or did they regard giving as an utterly worthless token of affection
(for even strangers and persons with no kindly feelings give gifts), and
so deprived the marriage relationship of this mode of giving pleasure,
that mutual affection might be unbought and free, existing for its own
sake and for no other reason?

Or is it that women are most likely to be seduced and welcome strangers
because of gifts they receive from them; and thus it is seen to be
dignified for them to love their own husbands even though their husbands
give them no gifts?

Or is it rather that both the husbands’ property should be held in
common with their wives and the wives’ with their husbands? For anyone
who accepts what is given learns to regard what is not given to him as
belonging to another, with the result that by giving a little to each
other they deprive each other of all else that they own.

 

8\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> among the Romans is it forbidden
to receive a gift from a son-in-law or from a father-in-law?

Is the father-in-law prevented from receiving a gift from his
son-in-law, in order that the gift may not appear ultimately to reach
the wife through her father? And is the son-in-law similarly prevented,
since it is obviously just that he who may not give shall also not
receive?

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

9\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> is it that, when men who have
wives at home are returning either from the country or from abroad, they
send ahead to tell their wives that they are coming?

Is it because this is the mark of a man who is confident that his wife
is not up to any mischief, whereas coming suddenly and unexpectedly is,
as it were, an arrival by stratagem and unfair vigilance; and are they
eager to send good tidings about themselves to their wives as if they
felt certain that their wives would be longing for them and expecting
them?

Or is it rather that the men themselves long to hear news of their
wives, if they shall find them safe at home and longing for their
husbands?

Or is it because during their husbands’ absence the wives have more
household duties and occupations, and also dissensions and outbursts
against those of the household? Therefore the notice is given in advance
that the wife may rid herself of these matters and make for her husband
his welcome home undisturbed and pleasant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:a](rgq02.htm#fr_3) *Cf*. Varro, *De Lingua
Latina*, v. 61. The genders are those of *ignis* and *aqua*, not those
of the Greek words.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:b](rgq02.htm#fr_4) *Cf*. *Moralia*, 650 n;
Servius on *Virgil*, *Aeneid*, iv. 167; Lactantius, *Institutiones
Divinae*, ii. 9. 21.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[9:a](rgq02.htm#fr_5) <span id="page_8">p.
8</span> *Cf*. the *Lex Coloniae Genetivae*, column 62 (*C.I.L.*
i.<sup>2</sup> 594 = ii. 5439), where it is specified that the aediles
shall have the right and power to possess, among other things, "cereos".

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:b](rgq02.htm#fr_6) *Cf*. *Moralia*, 288 <span
class="smallcaps">D–E</span>, *infra*, 374 <span
class="smallcaps">A</span>, 429 <span class="smallcaps">A</span>, and
388 <span class="smallcaps">A</span> with the note on the last passage;
Lydus, *De Mensibus*, ii. 4.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[9:c](rgq02.htm#fr_7) <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> *Cf*. *Moralia*, 429 <span class="smallcaps">F</span>. A few
authenticated cases of sextuplets have occurred since Plutarch's day.
See also the passages of Aulus Gellius and Aristotle quoted in
*Classical Journal*, xxx. p. 493.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[11:a](rgq02.htm#fr_8) *Cf*. Livy, i. 45;
Valerius Maximus, vii. 3. 1.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[11:b](rgq02.htm#fr_9) Müller, *Frag. Hist.
Graec.* iii. p. 470.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[15:a](rgq02.htm#fr_10) <span id="page_14">p.
14</span> *Cf*. *Comparison of Lycurgus and Numa*, chap. iii. (77 <span
class="smallcaps">B</span>); Polybius, vi. 11a. 4; Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, *Roman Antiquities*, ii. 25. 6; Cicero, *De Republica*,
iv. 6; Valerius Maximus. ii. I. 5; vi. 3.9; Pliny, *Natural History*,
xiv. 13 (89); Aulus Gellius, x. 23. 1; Tertullian, *Apol*. vi.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[15:b](rgq02.htm#fr_11) Frag. 609 (ed. V. Bose).

<span id="fn_12"></span>[15:c](rgq02.htm#fr_12) <span id="page_15">p.
15</span> *Cf*. *Moralia*, 243 E and the note *ad loc*. (Vol. III. p.
480).

<span id="fn_13"></span>[17:a](rgq02.htm#fr_13) Hatzidakis objects to
the form συγγενίδας; but the very fact that Pollux, iii. 30,
characterizes it as ἐσχάτως βάρβαρον proves (as do inscriptions also)
that it was in use.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[17:b](rgq02.htm#fr_14) *Cf*. Tacitus, *Annals*,
xii. 5–7.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[17:c](rgq02.htm#fr_15) *Cf*. *Moralia*, 143
<span class="smallcaps">A</span>.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[19:a](rgq02.htm#fr_16) <span id="page_18">p.
18</span> *Cf*. *Life of Solon*, chap. xxi. (90 <span
class="smallcaps">A</span>); \[Demosthenes\] xlvi. 14; Hypereides,
*Against Athenogenes*, 17, 18.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10-19.](rgq03)

</div>
