<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Plutarch](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rgq06)  [Next](rgq08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674993365/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE787Q/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roman and Greek Questions*, by Plutarch, tr. Frank Cole Babbitt,
\[1936\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

50-59.

50\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> did the priest of Jupiter
(*Flamen Dialis*) resign his office if his wife died, as Ateius has
recorded? <span id="fr_112"></span>[a](#fn_112)

Is it because the man who has taken a wife and then lost her is more
unfortunate than one who has never taken a wife? For the house of the
married man is complete, but the house of him who has married and later
lost his wife is not only incomplete, but also crippled.

Or is it because the wife assists her husband in the rites, so that many
of them cannot be performed without the wife's presence, and for a man
who has lost his wife to marry again immediately is neither possible
perhaps nor otherwise seemly? Wherefore it was formerly illegal for the
*flamen* to divorce his wife; and it is still, as it seems, illegal, but
in my day Domitian once permitted it on petition. The priests were
present at that ceremony of divorce and performed many horrible,
strange, and gloomy rites. <span id="fr_113"></span>[b](#fn_113)

One might be less surprised at this resignation of the *flamen* if one
should adduce also the fact that when one of the censors died, the other
was obliged to resign his office <span id="fr_114"></span>[c](#fn_114);
but when the censor Livius Drusus died, his colleague Aemilius Scaurus
was unwilling to give up his office until certain tribunes ordered him
to be led away to prison.

 

51\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> is a dog placed beside the Lares
that men call by the special name of *praestites*, and why are the Lares
themselves clad in dog-skins? <span id="fr_115"></span>[d](#fn_115)

Is it because "those that stand before" are termed

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

*praestites*, and, also because it is fitting that those who stand
before a house should be its guardians, terrifying to strangers, but
gentle and mild to the inmates, even as a dog is?

Or is the truth rather, as some Romans affirm, that, just as the
philosophic school of Chrysippus <span id="fr_116"></span>[a](#fn_116)
think that evil spirits stalk about whom the gods use as executioners
and avengers upon unholy and unjust men, even so the Lares are spirits
of punishment like the Furies and supervisors of men's lives and houses?
Wherefore they are clothed in the skins of dogs and have a dog as their
attendant, in the belief that they are skilful in tracking down and
following up evil-doers.

 

52\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> do they sacrifice a bitch to the
goddess called Geneta Mana <span id="fr_117"></span>[b](#fn_117) and
pray that none of the household shall become "good"?

Is it because Geneta is a spirit concerned with the generation and birth
of beings that perish? Her name means some such thing as "flux and
birth" or "flowing birth." <span id="fr_118"></span>[c](#fn_118)
Accordingly, just as the Greeks sacrifice a bitch to Hecatê, <span
id="fr_119"></span>[d](#fn_119) even so do the Romans offer the same
sacrifice to Geneta on behalf of the members of their household. But
Socrates <span id="fr_120"></span>[e](#fn_120) says that the Argives
sacrifice a bitch to Eilioneia by reason of the ease with which the
bitch brings forth its young. But does the import of the prayer, that
none of them shall become "good," refer not to the human members of a
household, but to the dogs? For dogs should be savage and terrifying.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Or, because of the fact that the dead are gracefully called "the good,"
are they in veiled language asking in their prayer that none of their
household may die? One should not be surprised at this; Aristotle <span
id="fr_121"></span>[a](#fn_121) in fact, says that there is written in
the treaty of the Arcadians with the Spartans: "No one shall be made
good <span id="fr_122"></span>[b](#fn_122) for rendering aid to the
Spartan party in Tegea"; that is, no one shall be put to death.

 

53\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> do they even now, at the
celebration of the Capitoline games, proclaim "Sardians for
sale!", <span id="fr_123"></span>[c](#fn_123) and why is an old man led
forth in derision, wearing around his neck a child's amulet which they
call a *bulla* <span id="fr_124"></span>[d](#fn_124)?

Is it because the Etruscans called Veians fought against Romulus for a
long time, and he took this city last of all <span
id="fr_125"></span>[e](#fn_125) and sold at auction many captives
together with their king, taunting him for his stupidity and folly? But
since the Etruscans were originally Lydians, and Sardis was the capital
city of the Lydians, they offered the Veians for sale under this name;
and even to this day they preserve the custom in sport.

 

54\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> do they call the meat-markets
*macella* and *macellae*?

Is this word corrupted from *mageiroi* (cooks) and has it prevailed, as
many others have, by force of habit? For *c* and *g* have a close
relationship in

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Latin, and it was
only after many years that they made use of *g*, which Spurius
Carvilius <span id="fr_126"></span>[a](#fn_126) introduced. And *l*,
again, is substituted lispingly for *r* when people make a slip in the
pronunciation of *r* because of the indistinctness of their enunciation.

Or must this problem also be solved by history? For the story goes that
there once lived in Rome a violent man, a robber, Macellus by name, who
despoiled many people and was with great difficulty caught and punished;
from his wealth the public meat-market was built, and it acquired its
name from him.

 

55\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> is it that on the Ides of
January the flute-players are allowed to walk about the city wearing the
raiment of women <span id="fr_127"></span>[b](#fn_127)?

Is it for the reason commonly alleged? They used to enjoy, as it seems,
great honours, which King Numa had given them by reason of his piety
towards the gods. Because they were later deprived of these honours by
the *decemviri*, who were invested with consular power, <span
id="fr_128"></span>[c](#fn_128) they withdrew from the city. There was,
accordingly, inquiry made for them, and a certain superstitious fear
seized upon the priests when they sacrificed without flutes. But when
the flute-players would not hearken to those sent to summon them to
return, but remained in Tibur, a freedman secretly promised the
officials to bring them back. On the pretext of having sacrificed to the
gods, he prepared a sumptuous banquet and invited the flute-players.
Women were present, as well as wine, and a party lasting all the night
was being celebrated with merriment and dancing, when

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

suddenly the freedman interrupted, saying that his patron was coming to
see him, and, in his perturbation, he persuaded the flute-players to
climb into wagons, which were screened round about with skins, to be
conveyed back to Tibur. But this was a trick, for he turned the wagons
around, and, without being detected, since the flute-players
comprehended nothing because of the wine and the darkness, at dawn he
had brought them all to Rome. Now the majority of them happened to be
clad in raiment of feminine finery because of the nocturnal
drinking-bout; when, therefore, they had been persuaded and reconciled
by the officials, it became their custom on that day to strut through
the city clad in this manner.

 

56\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> are the matrons supposed to have
founded the temple of Carmenta originally, and why do they reverence it
now above all others?

There is a certain tale repeated that the women were prevented by the
senate from using horse-drawn vehicles <span
id="fr_129"></span>[a](#fn_129); they therefore made an agreement with
one another not to conceive nor to bear children, and they kept their
husbands at a distance, until the husbands changed their minds and made
the concession to them. When children were born to them, they, as
mothers of a fair and numerous progeny, founded the temple of Carmenta.

Some assert that Carmenta was the mother of Evander and that she came to
Italy; that her name was Themis, or, as others say, Nicostratê; and that
because she chanted oracles in verse, she was named Carmenta by the
Latins, for they call verses *carmina*.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

But others think that Carmenta is a Fate, and that this is the reason
why the matrons sacrifice to her. The true meaning of the name is
"deprived of sense," <span id="fr_130"></span>[a](#fn_130) by reason of
her divine transports. Wherefore Carmenta was not so named from
*carmina*, but rather *carmina* from her, because, in her divine frenzy,
she chanted oracles in verse and metre. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[b](#fn_131)

 

57\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> do the women that sacrifice to
Rumina pour milk over the offerings, but make no oblation of wine in the
ceremony?

Is it because the Latins call the teat *ruma*, and assert that
Ruminalis <span id="fr_132"></span>[c](#fn_132) acquired its name
inasmuch as the she-wolf offered its teat to Romulus? Therefore, as we
call wet-nurses *thelonai* from *thele* (teat), even so Rumina is she
that gives suck, the nurse and nurturer of children; she does not,
therefore, welcome pure wine, since it is harmful for babes.

 

58\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> did they use to address some of
the senators as Conscript Fathers, others merely as Fathers? <span
id="fr_133"></span>[d](#fn_133)

Is it because they used to call those senators originally assigned to
that body by Romulus fathers and patricians, that is to say "well-born,"
since they could point out their fathers, <span
id="fr_134"></span>[e](#fn_134) while they called those who were later
enrolled from the commoners conscript fathers?

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

59\. <span class="smallcaps">Why</span> did Hercules and the Muses have
an altar in common?

Is it because Hercules taught Evander's people the use of letters, as
Juba <span id="fr_135"></span>[a](#fn_135) has recorded? And this action
was held to be noble on the part of men who taught their friends and
relatives. It was a long time before they began to teach for pay, and
the first to open an elementary school was Spurius Carvilius, <span
id="fr_136"></span>[b](#fn_136) a freedman of the Carvilius <span
id="fr_137"></span>[c](#fn_137) who was the first to divorce his wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[83:a](rgq07.htm#fr_112) <span id="page_82">p.
82</span> *Cf*. Aulus Genius, x. 15.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[83:b](rgq07.htm#fr_113) <span id="page_83">p.
83</span> *Cf*. *Cambridge Ancient History*, vol. vii. p. 422.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[83:c](rgq07.htm#fr_114) *Cf*. Livy, v. 31. 6,
7; vi. 27. 4, 5; ix. 34.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[83:d](rgq07.htm#fr_115) *Cf*. Ovid, *Fasti*,
v. 129 ff.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[85:a](rgq07.htm#fr_116) <span id="page_84">p.
84</span> *Cf*. *Moralia*, 361 s, 419 <span class="smallcaps">A</span>,
1051 <span class="smallcaps">C</span>.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[85:b](rgq07.htm#fr_117) *Cf*. Pliny, *Natural
History*, xxix. 4 (58).

<span id="fn_118"></span>[85:c](rgq07.htm#fr_118) <span id="page_85">p.
85</span> An attempt to derive the name from *genitus* (-*a*, -*um*) and
*manare*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[85:d](rgq07.htm#fr_119) *Cf*. 280 <span
class="smallcaps">C</span>, *infra*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[85:e](rgq07.htm#fr_120) Müller, *Frag. Hist.
Graec*. iv. p. 498.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[87:a](rgq07.htm#fr_121) <span id="page_86">p.
86</span> Frag. 592 (ed. V. Rose); *cf*. *Moralia*, 292 <span
class="smallcaps">B</span>, *infra*.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[87:b](rgq07.htm#fr_122) *Cf*. χρηστὲ χαῖρ on
Greek tombstones.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[87:c](rgq07.htm#fr_123) <span id="page_87">p.
87</span> So apparently Plutarch; but the Latin *Sardi venales* can mean
nothing but "Sardinians for sale." Plutarch, or his authority, has
confused *Sardi* with *Sardiani* (Sardians).

<span id="fn_124"></span>[87:d](rgq07.htm#fr_124) *Cf*. *Life of
Romulus,* xxv. (33 <span class="smallcaps">E</span>).

<span id="fn_125"></span>[87:e](rgq07.htm#fr_125) This is quite contrary
to the traditional account (*cf*. for example, Livy, vi. 21–23),
according to which Veii was not captured until 396 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>

<span id="fn_126"></span>[89:a](rgq07.htm#fr_126) <span id="page_88">p.
88</span> *Cf*. 278 <span class="smallcaps">E</span>, *infra*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[89:b](rgq07.htm#fr_127) *Cf*. Livy, ix. 30;
Ovid, *Fasti*, vi. 653 ff.; Valerius Maximus, ii. 5. 4; see also
*Classical Weekly*, 1921, p. 51.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[89:c](rgq07.htm#fr_128) *Consulari potestate*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[91:a](rgq07.htm#fr_129) <span id="page_90">p.
90</span> *Cf*. Livy, v. 25. 9, and xxxiv. 1 and 8.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[93:a](rgq07.htm#fr_130) That is, carens mente.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[93:b](rgq07.htm#fr_131) *Cf*. *Life of
Romulus,* xxi. (31 <span class="smallcaps">A</span>); Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, *Roman Antiquities*, i. 31; Strabo, v. 33, p. 230; Ovid,
*Fasti*, i. 619 ff.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[93:c](rgq07.htm#fr_132) *Cf*. 320 <span
class="smallcaps">D</span>, *infra*, and *Life of Romulus,* iv. (19
<span class="smallcaps">D</span>); Ovid, *Fasti*, ii. 411 ff.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[93:d](rgq07.htm#fr_133) *Cf*. *Life of
Romulus,* xiii. (25 <span class="smallcaps">A</span>).

<span id="fn_134"></span>[93:e](rgq07.htm#fr_134) *Cf*. Livy, x. 8. 10.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[95:a](rgq07.htm#fr_135) Müller, *Frag. Hist.
Graec*. iii. p. 470.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[95:b](rgq07.htm#fr_136) *Cf*. 277 <span
class="smallcaps">D</span>, *supra*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[95:c](rgq07.htm#fr_137) *Cf*. the note on 267
<span class="smallcaps">C</span>, *supra*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 60-69.](rgq08)

</div>
