[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oon21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024NL7LM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Oracles of Nostradamus*, by Charles A. Ward, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

# Appendix

Referred to at p. 157.

THE genuine and spurious portraits of Cromwell are numerous to such a
degree, that they may almost be called innumerable; for they can never
be counted, as no one man can get at them all to reckon them up. Their
main authority is said to depend upon the works of four artists, Lely,
Cooper, Walker, Faithorne. Samuel Butler, the author of the
ever-marvelous "Hudibras," is thought to have painted a likeness, but it
counts for nothing, as it is not now to be identified as existing in any
collection. The first-named three are painters, the fourth is a great
engraver.

In all these, Mr. Frederic Harrison professes to discover "singular
resemblance" \["Cromwell," p. 32,\] but considers that Cooper's is the
most successful of them all. I find the first to be a most misleading
statement. and one that may be disproved by anybody who will compare
Cooper's likeness, as given in Carlyle's "Cromwell Letters" with the
picture by Walker in the National Portrait Gallery. They differ in every
particular,--in character, feature, temperament, and conformation.
Scarcely do they agree even in the wart. There is nothing to identify
them as representing the same individual. Either Lely copied Cooper, or
Cooper copied Lely, and they accordingly, of course, correspond with
each other; but truth is too much sacrificed to flattery by both these
courtly painters, for us to suppose that their work corresponds very
accurately with the sitter. Such examples of Faithorne as are readily
accessible in the Print Room at the Museum convey no adequate idea of
the man. Neither do they resemble Cooper, Lely, nor Walker's work. There
is a profile print by Houbraken, an excellent performance, which is
interesting as showing that both the chin and forehead receded greatly.
There is also a very peculiar engraving of Thomas Simon's medal, which
is very beautiful as a work of art. But here again the facial angle is
simply villainous, with very mean diminutive eyes, and the dress almost
clerical. The engraving from the Cooper at Sidney College gives the wart
on the left brow instead of the right.

From such discrepant things it seems to me next to impossible to derive
any correct notion regarding the face of Cromwell, except that the
facial angle of the side face must have been unusually bad. Yet Mr.
Harrison is able to express himself as follows:--

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

"No human countenance recorded is more familiar to us than that broad,
solid face with the thick and prominent red nose; the heavy gnarled
brow, with its historic wart; eyes firm, penetrating, sad; square jaw,
and close-set mouth; scanty tufts of hair on lip and chin; long loose
brown locks flowing down in waves on to the shoulder. His whole air
breathing energy, firmness, passion, pity, and sorrow." Carlyle's fancy
version is given below. <span id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_454)

This being derived from a falsity, must itself be false. But is it not
somewhat curious that friends and foes of Cromwell should alike sit down
contentedly before this admirably executed miniature of Cooper's without
devoting a second thought to its representative value as a portrait of
the man in question? Its artistic felicity should be as nothing to the
historical inquirer. Taken as a mere portrait, this Cooper is as
valueless as Veronese's presentment of Alexander the Great; or as any
fancy portrait of Oliver would be, if sent in by some skilled modern
hand to the next May show at Burlington House.

Our sense of surprise increases, when we come to remember that we
possess an authentic original to go by, in the shape of a mask still
extant that was taken at death. Historians draw up rigmarole pen-and-ink
portraits of their own, but are all silent about this, or make only
casual mention of it as "the mask at the Statuaries," just as though it
corresponded in every particular with Samuel Cooper's exquisite
pigment-figment. Romancists delight in coloured detail gathered from
history; and historians revel in romance when it saves them from
searching into dry detail. In this case historical gossip slips in to
illustrate the stringent veracity of Cromwell. When Lely was to take his
portrait, he is said to have ordered him to be faithful in representing
every blemish and defect, to paint warts and all, or he would not be
paid. Lely knew what this meant, and acted accordingly. All
portrait-painters flatter, they must to secure a practice; but, they
ought to select the best aspect possible, for so far

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

it is what it professes to be, a likeness. Now the strong point with
your court painter is, to throw in skillfully what is not there. In this
Lely and Cooper have succeeded to admiration.

Walker, in his several portraits, gives us another set of varieties. His
picture in the Portrait Gallery \[Granger, "Biog. Hist.," iii. p. 290.\]
with Cromwell's son Richard as page tying on the father's scarf, has
been finely engraved by Pierre Lombart. In this picture, which is a
little wooden, we get an average-looking gentleman going to battle. A
man we should have to look at three or four times before we should
individualize him at all in the memory. Mr. Nobody riding to nowhere
particular is the impression derived. Of the engraving, however, Evelyn
says, and he knew Cromwell perfectly well, "that it gives the strongest
resemblance of him." He therein physiognomically discovers "characters
of the greatest dissimulation, boldness, cruelty, and ambition, in every
stroke and touch." I can say nothing of this, for I have not seen the
Lombart engraving. The picture does not convey the idea.

How pliantly subservient art was in those days, is well illustrated in
another Cromwell engraving by the same Lombart. This artist had done,
after Vandyke, a "Charles on horseback," from which he erased the face,
and substituted that of Cromwell. The slender figure of the king had to
do duty for the heavy-built brewer of Huntingdon. But times change, and
we with them. So Peter reinstated the king. There must be impressions of
this turn-face print in its three states; for no doubt copies were sold
at every stage. The King is dead. God save the Protector! The Protector
is dead. God save the King! The dead lion is never so good for the crowd
as the live ass; irrespective of the latter creature being far more
representative. A quality much sought after in modern governors.

There is a portrait of Cromwell affixed to Isaac Kimber's "Life of
Oliver Cromwell," which he published anonymously \[Granger, iii. 297\].
This is pronounced in the "Letters of Mr. Hughes" to be most like the
authentic family pictures of Cromwell. Vertue engraved it in 1724 for
Rapin's "History of England," and when Granger wrote the picture was in
the possession of Sir Thomas Frankland of Old Bond Street. I suppose
this to be still in the hands of the Frankland-Russells of Chequers
Court, who also possess a plaster cast of Cromwell's face. By the
courtesy of the family I have been permitted to examine this; but it
seems to me of ne value, and it has no history.

We come now to the terra-cotta bust by Edward Pierce, which is in the
National Portrait Gallery, said to be taken from life. Pierce was an
artist in the second generation. His father, of the same Christian name,
was a painter, and assistant of Vandyke. Our Edward was trained for a
statuary, and because the pupil of Edward Bird: he also acted as
assistant to Sir Christopher Wren, and is said to have built St. Clement
Danes under him. He did a bust of Wren, for the theatre at Oxford, and
also

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

one of Newton, He died at Surrey street in the Strand, and was buried at
the old Savoy. This bust of Cromwell was, to all appearance, modelled by
him from a cast taken from life, and must therefore, as to measurement
and bulk, be of life size.

I was kindly permitted by Mr. George Scharf, of the National Portrait
Gallery, to take the dimensions of this bust by measurement, but
practically they are not very useful, inasmuch as the head has a great
abundance of short curly hair which of course in terra-cotta becomes
perfectly solid, and thereby increases the circumference of the head by
many inches.

The circumference, hair and all, at his brow is 28 2/8 inches.

Nape of neck to frontal bone, where it unites with nose 15 4/8 "

Breadth from car to ear at level of the central hole of each ear as near
as can be approximated 6 2/8 "

This last measurement is, I believe, correct, but it is a dimension that
only a large forceps could take with perfect certainty. It is so small,
however, that I feel sure that the other two dimensions must be very far
from giving the true osseous formation, so that several inches will have
to be allowed off them for the hair. Again, the measurement between the
tip of nose and back of head (9 5/8 inches) would also require that
deductions be made for a wad of hair at the back. This measurement when
reduced, and coupled with the third measurement given, indicates an
undersized skull for a broad-built man of five feet eleven in stature.

As for the physiognomy, the nose, though far from fine, is somewhat
aquiline, and the best of all the features of the face. The forehead is
low, ill-formed, and mean. The mouth firm, cruel, deceitful. The jowl
and chin sensual and gross almost to brutality. It is the face of a man
of low passions, possibly ambitious, but of great duplicity, of a
low-bred type, the type as of one sprung from a lower stratum of society
than his history indicates him to have sprung from; and you may readily
suppose that in exchanges of coarse buffoonery with the roughest trooper
of his corps, he would have been quite within his own province and at
home. His mother's portrait shows her also to have been a very masculine
coarse-featured woman.

It is well perhaps to mention here a bust that Grose in a letter to
Granger in 1774, calls "a masterly and spirited bust of Oliver Cromwell
by one Bannier." It was then in Mr. Gostling's collection. He says it is
like that engraving given in Rapin's "History." I imagine it therefore
to be a fancy rendering, and of very small historic value.

The expert historians, and of course the general public together with
them, are perfectly satisfied with the Cromwell presented to them by
Samuel Cooper. I confess that I think it a most laughable presentment,
and of quite impossible credence. I do not think Pierce's bust to be
satisfactory, but I most certainly consider that it is the only likeness
I have

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

had the opportunity of examining that conveys even a hint of what can be
supposed to be the real appearance of the man. There is but one way now
remaining to settle this question. It is very much to be regretted that,
with so much pretence of a desire for historical accuracy, we should
have allowed two hundred and fifty years to elapse without making the
least attempt to settle this question.

We learn from Breval's "Travels" that at the Old Palace at Florence
there is a cast preserved of Oliver Cromwell. The mould was obtained
from Cromwell's face *a few minutes after his decease*, "through the
dexterous management of the Tuscan resident in London." This, or a cast
from it, ought immediately to be secured for our National Portrait
Gallery. A copy of it would cost very little in either time, money, or
trouble to secure; and when secured three or four should be cast in
bronze, and placed in different museums so that one fire could not
destroy all of them at once.

I feel almost sure that it will be found to confirm the bust of Pierce,,
as being more like Cromwell than anything else that we possess. And
further, as Pierce's work is by no means a grand achievement in the
sculptor's art, I should hope to find in the Florence cast
characteristic indications that are absent from Pierce's work. Grandeur
of soul is incompatible with such a face as Pierce gives us. But I
confess that I see no grandeur whatever that could be expressed by a man
whose history it that of Oliver. His base success the world may worship
if it will. I despise success if it must be obtained by Cromwell's
methods. I observe that the great in history are always mean in fact;
and I well know that you must say to all the men who have been
triumphant, let no probing moralist come near you. Pitiable and
contemptible is the man who can envy the great in the greatness of their
crimes. I do not expect that the cast, if procured, will make the
reading any better for Cromwell; but, if it should, I am quite ready to
give him all the advantage of it. At present I hold that the face is
villainous, like the man.

                         ". . . ducitur unco,  
Spectandus: gaudent omnes. Quæ labra? Quis illi  
Vultus erat? Nunquam, si quid mihi credis, amavi  
Hunc hominem."  
                         JUVENAL, x. 66.

Still, love or no love, we have reached the end; and if we should
confirm Pierce, the flesh and bones of the man thus revived will also
confirm the epithets of Nostradamus, which first induced me to enter
upon this investigation.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

"Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet."--*John* iv. 19.

"Quod est ante pedes, nemo spectat: cœli scrutantur plagas."--Cic.,
Divin., ii. 13.

This granted, a pig is nearest wisdom.

Μάντις ἄριστος, ὅστις εἰκάζει καλῶς.--WITSIUS, Miscel., p. 14.

The best analogist is the best prophet.

"L'observation des analogies universelles a été negligée, et c'est pour
cela qu'on ne croit plus a la divination."--LEVI, Clef des Mystères, p.
216.

Μαντεῖον, ἐπὶ χείλεσι βασιλέως, ἐν δὲ κρίσει οὐ μὴ πλανηθῇ τὸ στόμα
αὐτοῦ.--Prov. xvi. 10, LXX.

There is divination on a king's lips, and judgment fails not in his
mouth.

ENVOY

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_454"></span>[306:1](oon22.htm#fr_455) "Stands some five
feet ten or more; a man of strong solid stature, and dignified, now
partly military carriage: the expression of him valour and devout
intelligence,---energy and delicacy on a basis of simplicity. Fifty-four
years old, gone April last; ruddy-fair complexion, bronzed by toil and
age; light brown hair and moustache are getting streaked with grey. A
figure of sufficient impressiveness;--not lovely to the man--milliner
species, nor pretending to be so. Massive stature; big massive head, of
somewhat leonine aspect, 'evident workshop and storehouse of a vast
treasury of natural parts.' Wart above the right eyebrow; nose of
considerable blunt aquiline proportions; strict yet copious lips, full
of all tremulous sensibilities, and also, if need were, of all
fierceness and rigours; deep loving eyes, call them grave, call them
stern, looking from under those craggy brows, as if in life-long sorrow,
and yet not thinking it sorrow, thinking it only labour, and
endeavour:--on the whole. a right noble lion-face, and hero-face."
(Carlyle, "Cromwell Letters," ii. p. 435).

"He that knows anything worth communicating and does not communicate it,
let him be hanged by the neck."--*Talmud, Sucah*, p. 58.
