[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Sappho](../sappho/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sob153.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

# NOTES

Since previous editions of the *Songs of Bilitis* have been complacently
unconcerned with the desirability of sympathetic treatment, accurate
translation or rhythmic presentation, I offer this version of an
extremely lovely book, in all humility, as leaven to their dough,
although acutely conscious that the whole is bread, where cake is (this
time) sadly in demand.

A. C. B.

<span id="xref_title">title</span>"*Translated from the Greek*": It was
M. Louÿs' little *mot* to ascribe these "songs" to a courtesan who, he
declares, was a contemporary of Sappho. To heighten this false
appearance of translation he has written his clever "Life" of Bilitis,
as well as included several songs in the table of contents which he
labels "not translated." There is, however, a strangely haunting ring,
muffled, though not too carefully disguised ... a curiously Gallic
undertone, which echoes incongruous down the centuries from Bilitis to
us, and makes her the great creation that she is. M. Louÿs took
Voltaire's sage advice. Since he has thus committed himself, the
following brief notes will be concerned only with the elucidation of the
ancient words employed, and occasional references to legends and
institutions which may be unfamiliar to the present reader. A
mock-philological study of the sources from which Louÿs drew material
for this book would be amusing, but would have little sound scholastic
value. He will be found to have dipped delicately into such writers of
the *Palatine Anthology* as *Philodemus*, *Hedylus*, *Meleager*,
*Denys*, *Paulus Silentiarius* and *Asclepiades*. In most cases he has
been content merely to elaborate a phrase or idea; in a very few others
he has charmingly appropriated a complete epigram, changing it

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

but slightly to suit his occult purposes. Sappho herself has been
"pilfered" for the chanson he calls "Love"! Louÿs' culpability in this
respect is distinctly limited, however, for by far the greatest part of
the *Chansons de Bilitis* is his original creation, and must accordingly
be judged as such.

<span id="xref_15a">15a</span>--*cyclas*: a rich robe of circular cut,
worn by women; <span id="xref_15b">15b</span>*bassaras*: a mantle or
cloak; <span id="xref_15c">15c</span>*periscelis*: anklets.

<span id="xref_17">17</span>--*she had committed murder*: This is not
strictly accurate. Phryne was accused of profaning the Eleusinian
mysteries, at that time a crime infinitely greater than any possible
assassination. It is likely that Louÿs took the liberty of changing this
detail in order to bring the "enormity" of the crime into a modem focus.

<span id="xref_20">20</span>--*No one will ever*: The French has it,
"Rien ne dira jamais ce qu'étaient ces lèvres. . . ." This is one of
those phrases which, although pregnant with subtle implications in the
original, successfully defies all attempts at accurate translation.

<span id="xref_21">21</span> I--BUCOLICS IN PAMPHYLIA: the Greek, as
translated by R. C. Trevelyan in his edition of the *Idylls of
Theocritus* published by the Casanova Society, 1925, reads (XX-28-2-9):

"Sweet is my music too, whether I warble on the pipe,  
Or discourse on the flute, or on the reed or flageolet."

<span id="xref_27">27</span>--*From his white horses' backs*: There are
so many variations of the classic myths that this might well apply to
Phaeton, although it does not matter either way.

<span id="xref_29">29</span>--*Amalthea*: a mythical figure, varying
according to the legend, from a goat to a nymph to the daughter of a
Cretan king, all attributed with having nursed or tended the infant Zeus
in Crete.

<span id="xref_33">33</span>--*Sparrow*: I have not hesitated to change
the French "*Bergeronette*" into a sparrow, the usual translation of the
birds which drew Aphrodite's car. Although the actual bird was probably
some species of finch, a qualifying adjective is needed, for the Greek
"sparrow" was not the pestiferous British bird with which we are
acquainted.

Kypris ... or *Cypris* (Aphrodite) also known as *Paphia* (vide [p.
69](sob050.htm#page_69).md). Aphrodite's innumerable epithets and
appellations, excluding her purely national names, such as *Venus*,
*Aphrodite*, *Astarte*, *Tanit*, etc., were largely derived from the

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

names of the various towns at which she had her shrines Paphos, Cyprus,
etc. In the text itself I have adhered to Louÿs' Greek spelling, with
the exception of those words whose appearance might be confusing to
readers unacquainted with classical terminology.

<span id="xref_39">39</span>--*little Helle met her death*: by falling
off the back of the ram which bore the Golden Fleece. This much
sought-after beast had been loaned to the mother of Helle (Nephele) by
Mercury, to facilitate the escape of Helle and her brother Phryxus from
the influence of their father, who was a King in Thessaly. The
Hellespont took its name from the spot "Where beauteous Helle found a
watery grave. " (Meleager).

<span id="xref_52">52</span>--Tresses: Here an apology is due, for the
necessity of translating *Chevelure* as *tresses*. I can find no other
word, hair, locks, or ringlets, which will express the word better than
the hackneyed *tresses*.

<span id="xref_61">61</span>--*strophion*: a sort of ancient
*brassière*, or sash about the breast.

<span id="xref_67">67</span> II--ELEGIES AT MYTILENE: the Greek
quotation, as translated by Wharton in his *Sappho, memoir, text,
selected renderings*, Brentano, 1920, reads (p. 94): "Mnasidica is more
shapely than the tender Gyrinno." Cf. the Life of Bilitis, [p.
17](sob002.htm#page_17.md).

<span id="xref_68">68</span>--*Notos*: the south-west wind, bringing fog
and rain. *Boreas*: the north wind.

<span id="xref_69">69</span>--*Paphia*: see above, 33. *Charites*: the
Graces, "goddesses of everything that lends charm and beauty to human
life." (Harper's Dictionary of Classical Antiquity).

<span id="xref_73">73</span>--*forty stadia*: about four and a half
miles.

<span id="xref_76">76</span>--*nymphagogue*: the matron who accompanied
the bride to her husband's home.

<span id="xref_80">80</span>--*Ares*: the Greek Mars. *Hecate*: a Titan,
variously and loosely identified with Selene (the Moon), Artemis (Diana)
and Persephone, but generally accepted as one of the underworld deities.

<span id="xref_81">81</span>--*Thetis*: a fabulously beautiful nymph,
originally sought after by the perennially potent Zeus, but destined to
be the mother of Achilles, by a mortal, in order (rather equivocally) to
fulfil the prophecy that he would be a greater man than his father.

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

<span id="xref_117">117</span> III--EPIGRAMS IN THE ISLE OF CYPRUS: the
Greek quotation as translated by Paton in the Palatine Anthology
(XI-34), reads: "Bind my head with narcissus, and let me taste the
crooked flute. Anoint my limbs with saffron ointment, wet my gullet with
wine of Mytilene, and mate me with a virgin who will love her nest."

<span id="xref_121">121</span>--*Philommeïdes*: laughter-loving.

<span id="xref_124">124</span>--*The Mysteries*: Since there is so
little known about the Eleusinian mysteries--in fact, there is nothing
here to indicate that these were the Mysteries of Eleusis, to which both
men and women were admitted (perhaps in separate groups)--it is obvious
that M. Louÿs had a rather wide latitude within which to make use of his
romantic vein. Needless to say, no initiate would ever have committed
the inestimable indiscretion of mentioning the slightest portion of the
rite. *Berbeia*: There seems to be no definite information as to who
Berbeia may have been, Louÿs having found the name in Athenæus, and
carelessly employed it as he chose. Athenæus, quoting from an earlier
poet, says it might possibly be the name of some [deity](errata.htm#0.md)
or other (3-84-C).

<span id="xref_126">126</span>--*Pasiphaë*: see below,
 [149](sob154.htm#xref_149.md). *Syrinx*: another of the ever-lovely
nymphs, who, when pursued by Pan, was sympathetically turned (by the
water-nymphs) into a tuft of reeds, thereby furnishing the rustic deity
with another deathless instrument. This is the story which should have
kept Argus awake, but, when related by Mercury, had uncomfortable
results, both for Argus and another of Zeus's mistresses (Io). *Byblis*:
daughter of Miletus, who incestuously pursued her brother until
discouraged, when she was turned into a fountain.

<span id="xref_127">127</span>--James Huneker's "*Eighth Deadly Sin . .
Perfume*" was so flourishing an art in the ancient world, that it merits
more than the passing lamentation which my space permits. Its modern
votaries are so dreadfully deficient in olfactory sense that those who
are attributed with occult powers in its use, that is to say, women, are
most strangely ignorant of its fundamental edicts. In fact, the great
decadence into which the use of scents has sadly slipped is responsible
for its very occasional use as a substitute rather

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

than as an adjunct to cleanliness. (In deference to the modern world, I
may be permitted to qualify this last statement by a wholesome doubt as
to whether this usage is wholly restricted to the small horizon of the
present). Discovered most likely by accident, its first use was probably
as incense, a pleasure-offering to an anthropomorphic god. You could
only hope, naïvely, that the god approved your taste. This usage finally
became incidental, however, and ancient literature is redolent with
passages relating the universal delight in which the scents were held.
The *Paradise of the Houris* was paved with musk. *Solomon's Beloved*
was a bundle of myrrh and frankincense. The *Cæsars* spent fortunes on
perfumes while the populace was starving. *Petronius* has hinted at this
fine abuse in his caricature of *Trimalchio*. *Suetonius* has been more
explicit in his *Nero*. Athens was flooded with strange oriental scents
and sins. The love books of the east will tell you just what tincture
should be used to interest, capture, vanquish and seduce. *Ovid* will
instruct the Roman maid. All good Athenians floated in billows of
perfume. Cosmetic was no minor art itself. Marjoram, apple, ivy, mint
and saffron; spikenard and frankincense and myrrh, all vied with the
paint-pot and the tinting-brush. If corruption was not cured, then it
was covered. (Thus they explain the origin of beauty patches!).
*Apollonius* hints that the power of *Circe* was no paltry necromancy;
she used a different perfume for each portion of her body (*ô douceur, ô
poison*!). Small wonder that her victims were real, or even merely sad
symbolic swine! *Odysseus* only knew the anti-aphrodisiac. No matter.
All the great magicians and enchantresses knew and understood the
science of the nose. That the ability to concoct and blend, apply and
harmonize these precious essences has perished almost wholly from the
earth can be no better typified than in the woman who buys and uses a
scent because she "likes it," with no regard as to its fitness for her.
I feel that there is reason for regret.

<span id="xref_130">130</span>--*Iris*: the female Mercury, Goddess of
the Rainbow, which was her steed, and who was furnished appropriately
with vari-colored wings.

<span id="xref_132">132</span>--*Tethys*.--the wife of Oceanus, and
mother of the

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

river-gods and Oceanides. *Amphitrite*: the wife of Neptune, who
succeeded with her husband to the dominion of the waters in the place of
*Tethys* and *Oceanus*, when the Titans were overthrown by *Zeus*,
*Poseidon* (Neptune) and *Dis* (Pluto).

<span id="xref_135">135</span>--*krater* and *kylix*.--otherwise a
crater and a calix: wine-vessels.

<span id="xref_141">141</span>--*lovers who resemble you*: As is so
often the case in the *Chansons*, Louÿs has amused himself by attaching
a typically Gallic innuendo. The statues of *Priapus* were little more
than a stone or wooden shaft surmounted by the god's head, and
embellished in front by a formidable phallus.

<span id="xref_149">149</span>--*Pasiphaë*--whose husband Minos was
punished properly through her passion for a bull he chose rather to keep
than sacrifice to Poseidon. Representations of this sort must have been
very common. Suetonius (*The Twelve Cæsars*, *Nero XII*) mentions that
Nero also illustrated this myth in an amphitheatre constructed in the
region of the *Campus Martius*, through the medium of a hollow wooden
cow.

<span id="xref_157">157</span>--*auletrides*: flute-blowers, who
combined their musical entertainment with "*d'autres jeux si on les leur
demande*."

<span id="xref_160">160</span>--*petasos*: "a flat felt hat, with a
broad round rim ... said to have been introduced into Greece . . . as a
distinguishing mark of the *ephebi* (youths)." (*Harper's Dictionary*,
supra).

<span id="xref_i">i</span>--BIBLIOGRAPHY: Added by Louÿs as further
"evidence" for the authenticity of the Bilitis legend. The songs which
Claude Debussy set to bewitching music are "*La Chevelure*," "*La Flûte
de Pan*" (*La Flûte*), and "*Le Tombeau des Naïades*."

New York City

April-July 1926
