[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dos00)  [Next](dos02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

HERE is a fairy tale which I found in an old Hindoo manuscript.

As the title shows, it is a solar myth. Literally translated, its name
is: *The glory of the Going Down of the Sun*. But this is only the
exoteric, physical envelope of the inner, mystical meaning, which is:
*The Divine Lustre* <span id="fr_0"></span>[a](#fn_0) *of the Descent*
(*Incarnation*) *of Him Who took Three Steps*: i.e. Wishnu, or the Sun,
the later Krishna, or Hindoo Apollo. And this epithet of the Sun is
explained by the well-known passage in the Rig-Weda (I. 22. 17  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[b](#fn_1)), '*Three steps did Wishnu stride: thrice
did* 

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

*he set down his foot*.' A mythological expression for the rise, the
zenith, and the set of the Sun. But the old magnificent simplicity of
the Rig-Weda was perverted by subsequent Pauranik glosses; and Wishnu,
according to the new legend, was said to have cheated his adversary,
Bali, by striding, in his Dwarf Incarnation, over the three worlds. In
our title, a different turn is given to the old idea, which we may
express by saying that the steps commence, not with the rise, but the
set of the Sun: his Going Down, his mysterious period of Darkness, his
Rising again. This is the inverted Race, or Cycle of the Sun, which so
much exercised the mind of primitive man, and seemed to be a symbol of
the mystery of Birth and Death.

And ours is a strange story; which seemed to the translator not unworthy
of being clothed in an English dress, containing as it did so much in
little bulk that, as the French say, *donne à penser*. Absolutely Hindoo
in its form and spirit, it is for an Englishman full of associations,
and instinct with that philosophical mythology, scraps and fragments of
which are familiar to him in the story of the Fall and the poetry of
Milton, in many an old fairy tale, in some touches of Pythagoras and
Plato, and some old religious legends. *Lux in tenebris*: a dazzling
light, in the most profound darkness: the night of the sun: a heavenly
body, doomed to put on mortality and suffer for a period in this lower
world of darkness, birth and death: in some such ways as these we may
express its central idea. But for the reader

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

not acquainted with Sanskrit it may be worth while to point out that
there runs throughout it a veiled allegory which he would not be apt to
detect, to the teaching of the Sánkhya Philosophy of Kapila, (who is
older than Thales;) according to which it is the duty of PURUSHA, the
archetype of the spirit of man, the Primæval Male, to hunt for and
pursue PRAKRITI, the feminine personification of material Nature, the
Eternal Feminine, till he finds her: when instantly she disappears 'like
an actress <span id="fr_2"></span>[c](#fn_2).' In this respect, the
story somewhat recalls the *Gita-Gowind* of Jayadewa, which according to
one school of interpreters, deals with the Soul, personified as the
lovely Rádhá, in its search after the Divine. For among the Hindoos, the
earthly and the heavenly love are always confounded.

And let not anyone suppose, that the lesson embodied to these pages is
obsolete or dead in the India of to-day. I wrote the last lines of this
translation late one evening, and I walked out in the dusk to the bridge
across the river, about half a mile away. There was not a breath of air.
It was a night as still as that which long ago Medea chose on which to
work her spells: nothing moved save the twinkling stars; all below was
plunged

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

in sleep, every tree a picture, every leaf seemed carved in stone: only,
every now and then, a flying fox burst screeching from a branch. And as
I stood upon the bridge, I could hear a faint din of tom-toms coming
from the distant city of the Peshwas. I looked westwards, up the river.
The sun had set, leaving behind it a ruddy glare which faded higher up
the sky into the darkness: and exactly on the confines of the colours,
in that bath of *nilalohita*, that *purple-red*, which is a favourite
epithet of the god Shiwa, hung, like a thing in a dream, the lovely
streak of the new moon, one day old. All was reflected in the still
mirror of the broad sheet of water formed by the river *Bund*, or dam.

I turned round. On the eastern side, below the bridge, the river runs in
disconnected pools. All was buried in dark and gloom. But about two
hundred yards away, on the right bank, there was a red spot and leaping
flames. They were burning on the bank a corpse, whose former owner had
died of plague. For here in Poona it is now, as it was of old in the
days of Homer, αἰεὶ δὲ πυραὶ νεκύων καίοντο θαμειαί. . . .

Suddenly a voice said behind me: They burn well on a cold night. I
looked round. Beside me stood a Hindoo, whose real name I do not think
it lawful to mention. His white clothes were stained and splashed all
over with red, for the Holi festival had left its mark on him.

Why, Wishwanáth, I said, what are you doing here?

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

Or have you come, like me, merely *dekhne ke wáste*, to see the sun set,
and 'eat air'?

Wishwanáth cast a careless glance at the sky. Yes, he said, it looks
well from here: but then I have seen it so often. It was a new moon
yesterday.

And very soon it will be old. Look, Wishwanáth, here is a strange thing.
See, there on that side is the moon, following the sun to rest in a bath
of fire, and they will both appear to-morrow all the better for it. But
now, look down there. There is another thing passing, away in the fire.
But how will it be with *that*?

And I pointed to the burning pyre on the other side.

The Hindoo looked steadily at it for a moment, and then at me. It will
be just the same, he said.

What! you think that *that* will come back again, like sun and moon?

He did not answer for a moment. Then he said slowly, in a low voice, as
if speaking rather to himself than me: How should it not return? *na
jáyate mriyate wa kadáchit* <span id="fr_3"></span>[d](#fn_3).

I looked at him, but said nothing. He continued to gaze steadily at the
burning pyre, in silence, and I did the same. The flames were dying
down: their work was done.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

Metempsychosis, transmigration, everlasting incarnation and
re-incarnation of the immortal soul in body after body, birth after
birth: all Hindoo literature is but the kaleidoscopic reiteration of
this one identical idea, whose beauty is such that no logic will ever
destroy it or oust it in favour of another. For the Sanskrit language is
a kind of shrine, consecrated to the embodiment and immortalisation of
this philosophical myth. The Hindoos are possessed by it; it is their
hereditary heirloom, *Kramágatam*, the legacy from an immemorial past:
it is all that they have left. And nations, like the characters in our
story, cling desperately, in periods of degradation and eclipse, to all
that reminds them of a former state of ideal prosperity, which lingers
in their literature and echoes in their souls, like dim recollections of
a forgotten paradise, or faint reminiscences of a former birth. Distance
lends enchantment, and time effaces detail, and endows stern realities
with dreamy beauty; and thus a rugged stony past fades gradually into a
picture, blue, soft, and unutterably beautiful, like some low barren
island, seen far away in the haze, over a hot and glittering sea.

 POONA,  
*March* 25, 1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:a](dos01.htm#fr_0) *Shrí* also means a Sacred
Lotus, and it is the name of the twelfth Digit of the Moon: thus
indicating the position of this story in the series to which it belongs:
for an account of which, and the manuscript, I may refer the reader to
the preface to her predecessor *Shashiní*, entitled *A Digit of the
Moon*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[ix:b](dos01.htm#fr_1) Cp. also I. 154, 155, and
elsewhere. It should be observed that learned doctors differ as to the
interpretation of the *three strides*: but this is not the place to
examine their views.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:c](dos01.htm#fr_2) From this point of view,
the period of Night would be the reign of *Tamas*, one of the three
great categories of that philosophy: the Quality of *Darkness*, as
opposed to *Light*, *Ignorance*, as opposed to *Knowledge*, *Evil*, as
opposed to *Good*, the World *Below*, as opposed to the World *Above*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xiii:d](dos01.htm#fr_3) From the Bhagwad-Gítá:
IT *is never born and never dies*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](dos02)
