[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dos09)  [Next](dos11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII. The Silver Swans

And as the water kept on rising, rising, Umra-Singh said to himself:
Extraordinary is the guile of women, and copious their tears, but this
daughter of a Daitya surely surpasses them all. For who ever heard of
tears that, like rivers, could flood a quarter of the world? But in the
meanwhile, before I find my death in these rising waters, it is better
to take refuge in a tree. So he climbed up into a tree, and looked out
over the water, on which the mist hung in the moonlight like a curtain
of silver on a floor

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of lapis-lazuli. And he said to himself: Is this merely an illusion, or
rather, is not this wood well named, being in very truth the matted hair
of the great god, with these trees for hairs, and this water for the
Ganges that wanders among them <span id="fr_64"></span>[n](#fn_64), and
yonder moon the very ornament of the moon-crested god? But this water
goes on rising, and I must ascend higher into the tree.

So he climbed up, and up, and as he climbed, the water rose after him,
higher and higher, until at last he could see nothing but the water, and
the moon, and the tree that stretched away above him into the sky. And
as he went, he said to himself: Up I must go, for there is no other
resource: and now, unless like the husband of Shrí <span
id="fr_65"></span>[o](#fn_65). I could save myself on the back of a
tortoise from this very sea of water, I must surely be destroyed. For
unless this extraordinary tree has no top, I must presently reach

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

it, and meet with my death at the same time. And even without the water,
as to how I am to get down again, I have not an idea. So he continued to
climb and climb, while the water rose, and the moon sank, and the night
gradually came to an end.

And then the sun rose over the eastern mountain, and began like himself
to climb up into the sky. And the sweat poured from his limbs, and at
last he stopped, overcome with fatigue. And he said to himself: Now I
can go no further. Since I must now in any case perish, why should I go
on climbing in vain? For surely I am on the very roof of the world, and
alone with the sun in the sky.

And as he looked down, suddenly he saw before him no water and no tree,
and his head grew dizzy, and his vision swam, and he could scarcely
believe his eyes.

For he stood on the peak of a high mountain, in the very zenith of the
sky. And all round him, and all before him, and behind him, was a vast
desert of burning sand, that stretched away to the very limit of the
range of sight, and on its edges rested the quarters of heaven. And it
glowed in the fire of the sun's rays like a furnace, and was furrowed
and pitted with holes and chasms; and its surface rose and fell, as he
watched it, like a woman's breast,

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

and it looked as if it were alive, though it was in truth the home of
death. And as he gazed, he saw, how over it there crawled swiftly living
things with pointed tails, of the colour of sand, which entered the
desert by the holes, and issued from them, and at length stood still,
and became invisible, save that their tails never rested, and their
bright eyes stood out of the sand to watch. And it seemed to Umra-Singh,
in the loneliness of that vast solitude, that all those hideous Eyes
sought him out, and fastened on him, and rested on him alone, saying to
him as it were: Thou canst not escape.

And then he said to himself: Now there is indeed no help for me, and
beyond a doubt, my end has come. For to remain here is impossible, and
equally certain the death that lies, either in going forward or going
back. And yet I could wish to die, if at all, not in the presence of
eyes such as these, but in the colour of the eyes of Shrí. Yet how shall
I escape the vigilance of yonder dreadful Dwellers in the Sand, wading
with difficulty in its substance that will sink under my feet like the
waves of the sea, but over which they scud like the shadow of a cloud?

So all day he remained on that high place, not daring to descend. And
then at length the sun went

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

to his rest in the western quarter, and the moon rose, and was reflected
in the bright eyes of those sand-haunting Rákshasas, which glittered in
the distance on the dark desert like drops of water on the leaf of a
black lotus. And all night long Umra-Singh lay and watched them, as a
bird watches the eyes of a snake.

Then in the early dawn he looked, and as the light of morning began to
glimmer in the distance on the edge of the world, he saw far away in the
pale air two dark specks in the sky. And as he gazed, they grew larger
and rapidly approached him, sending back to him, like mirrors, the red
rays of the rising sun. And they drew nearer, and he saw that they were
a pair of silver Swans, carrying in their bills the dead body of a
third, of gold. So these two Swans crossed over that dreadful desert
with the rapidity of the lightning that resembled them, and settled
beside him on the hill, to rest.

Then said Umra-Singh: Hail! ye fair birds: surely ye are no birds, but
deities, fallen into these bodies of swans by reason of a curse. Whence
come ye, and whither go ye, and what is this dead golden body that ye
carry as ye go? Then said the Swans: We are carrying home the body of
our

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

king, far away to the Mánasa lake. For he died yesterday, in the Land of
the Lotus of the Sun. And now we must bear him ever onward swiftly to
his own country, that the funeral ceremonies may duly be performed.

But when Umra-Singh heard them name the Land of the Lotus, his heart
leaped in his breast. And sword in hand, he rushed on the dead body with
a shout. And he said to the Swans: As you carried him hither from that
Land of the Lotus of the Sun, so swear now, that you will carry me first
back thither, leaving him here till you return: otherwise I will keep
him, and cut you to pieces.

Then seeing that there was no help for it, the Swans said: Be it so: and
they bound themselves to him by an oath. And then Umra-Singh took hold
of them by the neck, one in each hand; and they stretched out their
necks, and flew away with him over the desert as he hung. And he left
far behind him the eyes of those hideous Rákshasas glowing in the sand
as if with rage to see him escape: and after a long while, they came to
the edge of the desert. And Umra-Singh looked down and saw, far below
him, the blue sea, shimmering like the eyes of Shrí. And at a distance
in the water, like a dusky jewel on a purple carpet, he

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

saw an island, with a city on it. So he said to the Swans: What is that
which I see below me? And they said: It is the Land of the Lotus of the
Sun.

Then in his delight, Umra-Singh let go his hold, and clapped his hands.
And instantly he fell down like a stone into the sea. But the Swans
returned swiftly over the desert to the body which they had left upon
the hill.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[63:n](dos10.htm#fr_64) The Ganges fell from
heaven, and Shiwa caught it on his head, where it wandered in his hair
for a thousand years before it could find its way down. A legend which
doubtless has reference to the vast plateaux of the Himálaya and Tibet.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[63:o](dos10.htm#fr_65) He compares himself to
the husband of the other Shrí, i.e. the Goddess of Beauty, or Wishnu,
whose second incarnation was that of a tortoise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. The Land of the Lotus](dos11)
