[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dos13)  [Next](dos15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI. The Lord of the Beasts

Now in the meanwhile it happened that Maheshwara, as he roamed through
the sky with Párwati on his breast, looked down to earth, and caught
sight of Umra-Singh wandering in the forest, uttering lamentations, and
exclaiming: O Shrí, where art thou hiding? Hast thou, like the desert,
no pity for the antelope that is dying of thirst for the water of thine
eyes <span id="fr_68"></span>[r](#fn_68)? And immediately he remembered
his boon to Kamalamitra, and grasped the whole story from beginning to
end. So he said to Umá with a smile: Go now to thy father <span
id="fr_69"></span>[s](#fn_69), and

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

wait for me: for there is here a matter that demands my attention. Then
his consort said to him in a cajoling tone: What is the matter? tell me.
Maheshwara said: I will tell thee afterwards: at present I have no
leisure: depart. Thereupon the goddess went off pouting to the Snowy
Mountain. But the moon-crested god descended to earth. And there, taking
the form of an ascetic, he entered the forest. And standing in its
densest part, his body white with ashes, garlanded with a necklace of
skulls, with a half-moon in his yellow hair, he created by his
supernatural power a gong, hanging from a banyan tree in the centre of
the wood. And he struck with his trident a blow on that mind-born gong
that resounded through the forest like thunder.

Then instantly, hearing that terrible summons, all the denizens of the
wood, Yakshas and Pisháchas, Rákshasas and Hamadryads, with the wild
animals and the rest, assembled together and flew towards the sound, and
crowded around the gong like flies or bees to honey or a dead body. And
when they had mustered, they enquired humbly of that Lord of Creatures
animate and inanimate: What orders has the Lord of All for his servants,
and why are we now summoned? Then said the Great Ascetic:

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There is in this wood a lover looking for his
bride. And she on her part will sometime or other be here to join him.
See that none of you do them actual harm, by devouring or destroying
them: for they are to work out their redemption in the wood, by the
decree of destiny and my will and pleasure <span
id="fr_70"></span>[t](#fn_70). For they fell under a curse, and so
became mortals: but when they meet here, and the circumstances are
favourable, their curse will have an end. Therefore delude them if you
will, but beware that you touch not a hair of their heads.

Thus he spoke, and all assented, prostrating themselves at his feet. And
then he began to dance. Then all joined furiously in the festival of his
favour, seized with the madness born of devotion, uttering ecstatic
hymns of praise, each in his own language. So after that he had sported
sufficiently, and bestowed on those adorers the nectar of his presence,
that Lord whose left half is his wife remembered his promise to the
Daughter of the Mountain, and returned to the snowy peak of Kailàs, to
tell her the story and coax away her sulks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[80:r](dos14.htm#fr_68) There is here an
untranslateable play on the word *mrigatrishná*, 'the thirst of the
antelope,' i.e. the *mirage* of the desert, to which he compares her
eyes.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[80:s](dos14.htm#fr_69) i.e. the Himálaya
mountain, of which, or rather whom, Párwati is the daughter, as her name
signifies.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[82:t](dos14.htm#fr_70) The Hindoos never had a
Lucian, to laugh at their mythological contradictions. They were always
too much under the spell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Other Body](dos15)
