[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dos15)  [Next](dos17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIII. A Light in Darkness

But Shrí, when she got out of the palace, instantly went out of the city
by unfrequented paths, and entered the Great Forest. For she said to
herself: If I remain in the city, I may fall again into the power of the
King, or, it may be, of someone still worse. For alas! every man that
sees me is blinded by my eyes, and I shall not always find a door of
escape from persecution. Moreover, to beauty without its guardian, wild
beasts are less dangerous than men with souls through the influence of
passion

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

worse than those of beasts. Better far to be devoured by an animal, than
become perforce the wife of another man.

So she went on through the forest for many days, supporting her life on
roots and fruits and the water of the pools and streams. And she tore
her clothes to pieces in the bushes, and pierced her feet with their
thorns, leaving where she passed on the grass drops of blood, like
rubies, mingled with the pearls of her tears that fell beside them, as
often as she thought of her absent husband. And the deeper she went into
the wood, the more her spirit sank, and the more her soul longed for the
nectar of her husband's arms. Alas! the courage of women is but a pale
and lunar image in the mirror of that of men, and vanishes in their
absence. And at last there came a day when she was seized with panic,
and a fear of unknown evil: and she sank down at the foot of a tree, and
watered its roots with her tears.

Now it happened, that some Bhillas, hunting, by the decree of destiny,
in the forest, came upon her track, and saw the drops of blood upon the
leaves. And they followed them up, saying to themselves: Some wounded
animal has passed this way. So as they came along, every now and then
they

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

stopped and listened. And suddenly, they heard the sound of the voice of
a woman, weeping in the wood. Then full of astonishment, they proceeded
in the direction of the sound: and all at once they saw Shrí, sitting
under a tree, looking like an in-carnation of Rati grieving for her
husband, when burned by Maheshwara <span id="fr_75"></span>[a](#fn_75).
For her clothes were torn, and her hair was dishevelled, and her great
eyes filled with tears resembled the petals of a blue lotus sparkling
with drops of water cast upon them by the sporting of swans in a pool.
So those wild Bhillas wondered when they saw her, and said to each
other: What is this marvel of a dancing girl, so ragged and so
beautiful, weeping alone in the wood? And then they went up to her and
stood round her in a ring. And she looked in the midst of those black
barbarians like a digit of the moon in the jaws of Ráhu. Then after a
while the spell of her beauty entered and poisoned the hearts of those
Bhillas, like one of their own arrows. And each one said secretly to
himself: She shall be my wife. So they debated about her, and proposed
to each other to draw lots for her. But they could not agree about it,
and fell to quarrelling, and it was

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

as if a stone had been dropped into a nest of serpents.

Then one laid hands upon her, and then another, till she was nearly torn
in pieces. And finally they came to blows, and fought for her over her
body, filled by the frenzy begotten by her beauty, and the desire of
exclusive possession <span id="fr_76"></span>[b](#fn_76). And very soon
they were all either dead or dying of wounds, for each was more eager to
destroy another than to protect himself: and they lay all about her
unable to move. Then Shrí, seizing her opportunity, and urged by terror,
rose up and fled away from them, being sprinkled by their blood, mingled
with her own, for she had received in the struggle a blow from a Bhilla
that was meant for another. And she ran on, stumbling over roots and
creepers in her haste, till she came at last to a forest pool. And there
she lay down at the edge of the water and drank greedily; and afterwards
washed her wound and stains, and bathed her feet, and overcome by
weariness, fell asleep. Then the moon rose, and stole through the trees
and kissed her with beams that trembled with admiration <span
id="fr_77"></span>[c](#fn_77); and the wild animals came down, one by
one, to drink at the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

pool, and obedient to the commands of Triambaka, did her no harm, but
licked her feet and hands as she lay.

Now, as fate would have it, this was the very pool, at which Umra-Singh
had met with Ulupí, the daughter of the Daitya. And in course of the
night, Ulupí came herself to the pool, to dance and sport according to
her wont. And when she arrived, she saw Shrí., lying asleep by the pool.
So she came and stood over her, and marvelled at the beauty of her
limbs, even though her eyes were shut. And at last, out of curiosity,
she touched her on the bosom with her finger, saying to herself: Is this
an illusion, or is it a real woman, and is she dead or alive? But Shrí
shuddered at her touch, for it suggested evil to her sleeping soul. And
she opened her eyes, and their deep blue awoke the envy of the daughter
of the Daitya, and astonished her even more than before.

Then they looked at each other, like light and darkness, and each
wondered at the loveliness of the other, forgetful of her own. And at
last Ulupí said: Who art thou, and what is thy name and family, and
whence past thou come to my pool, and why? Shrí said: I am a King's
daughter, looking for my husband, whom I lost, by the operation of
crimes in

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

a former birth, at the very moment that I found him again, after that he
had returned to me from the Land of the Lotus of the Sun. But when Ulupí
heard her, she was filled with sudden rage and malice. And she said to
herself: Ha! so this is that absent lotus of the day, by reason of whom
my beauty was scorned, and set at nought by the handsome stranger who
saw me dancing by my pool. And instantly she started up, and assuming a
terrific form, she gnashed at Shrí with teeth like saws, and made
horrible grimaces at her, saying: Wretch, thou shalt never quit this
wood, but wander for ever with thy accursed beauty among its trees,
haunted and beset by hideous illusions till thou shalt long for death.
Let thy absent husband save thee if he can. And she vanished with a peal
of laughter, leaving Shrí fainting by the pool.

But Ulupí flew through the wood, and found Nightwalker, the old Wairágí,
and told him all, and begged of him a boon, saying: Torment this
miserable mortal woman, and deceive her with illusions for she has done
me deadly injury. And Nightwalker rejoiced at the opportunity, for he
remembered how Umra-Singh had defied him, and cut off his tongue in the
wood. But he said: This is no easy matter, for we are forbidden by

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Pashupati to do her harm. But though I will do
her no injury, I will delude this wandering wife of a vile husband, till
she will desire to abandon the body of her own accord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[93:a](dos16.htm#fr_75) See note, [p.
9](dos03.htm#page_9).

<span id="fn_76"></span>[94:b](dos16.htm#fr_76) *ahamahamiká*, 'each one
saying I, I.'

<span id="fn_77"></span>[94:c](dos16.htm#fr_77) The Moon proper, in
Sanskrit, is *Lunus*, not *Luna*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Illusion](dos17)
