[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04131)  [Next](cc04133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#000)<span id="iii.xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p2"></span><span
id="iii.xi.v-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7:16-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016)<span
id="iii.xi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p3"></span>**16.** And thou shalt consume all the
people which the LORD thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have
no pity upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that *will
be* a snare unto thee.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p4"></span>**16.** Absumesque omnes populos quos
Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi: non parcel oculus tuus els, nec coles deos
eorum, quid laqueus erunt tibi.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p5"></span>**17.** If thou shalt say in thine heart,
These nations *are* more than I; how can I dispossess them?

<span id="iii.xi.v-p6"></span>**17.** Quum dixeris in corde tuo, Plures
sunt gentes illae quam ego: quomodo potero expellere eas?

<span id="iii.xi.v-p7"></span>**18.** Thou shalt not be afraid of them;
*but* shalt well remember what the LORD thy God did unto Pharaoh, and
unto all Egypt;

<span id="iii.xi.v-p8"></span>**18.** Ne timeas tibi ab eis: recordando
recorderis quae fecerit Jehova Deus tuus ipsi Plaraoni, et omnibus
Aegyptiis;

<span id="iii.xi.v-p9"></span>**19.** The great temptations which thine
eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the
stretched out arm, whereby the LORD thy God brought thee out; so shall
the LORD thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p10"></span>**19.** Probationum magnarum quas
viderunt oculi tui, et signorum, portentorumque, et manus validae,
brachiique extenti quo eduxit to Jehova Deus tuus: sic faciet Jehova
Deus tuus omnibus populis a quorum conspectu times tibi.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p11"></span>**20.** Moreover the LORD thy God will
send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide
themselves from thee, be destroyed.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p12"></span>**20.** Praeterea crabronem immittet
Jehova Deus tuus in cos, donec pereant qui superfuerint, et quia
absconderint sea facie tua.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p13"></span>**21.** Thou shalt not be affrighted at
them: for the LORD thy God *is* among you, a mighty God and terrible.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p14"></span>**21.** Ne paveas a facie eorum: quia
Jehova Deus tuus est in medio tui, Deus maximus et terribilis.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p15"></span>**22.** And the LORD thy God will put out
those nations before thee by little and little: thou mayest not consume
them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p16"></span>**22.** Expelletque Jehova Deus tuus
gentes illas a facie tua paulatim paulatim: non poteris absumere eas
cito, ne multiplicetur contra to bestia agri.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p17"></span>**23.** But the LORD thy God shall
deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty
destruction, until they be destroyed.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p18"></span>**23.** Attamen tradet eas Jehova Deus
tuus coram to, et conteret eas contritione maxima, donec perdantur
ipsae.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p19"></span>**24.** And he shall deliver their kings
into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven:
there shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have
destroyed them.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p20"></span>**24.** Tradetque reges earum in manum
tuam, et perdes nomen earum de sub coelo: non consistet quisquam coram
te, donec perdas cos.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p21"></span>**25.** The graven images of their gods
shall ye burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or gold *that
is* on them, nor take *it* unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for
it *is* an abomination to the LORD thy God.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p22"></span>**25.** Sculptilia deorum ipsorum
combures igni: non concupisces argentum, et aurum quae sunt super ca, et
capias tibi: ne illaquees to in illo: abominatio enim Jehovae Dei tui
est.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p23"></span>**26.** Neither shalt thou bring an
abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: *but*
thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it
*is* a cursed thing.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p24"></span>**26.** Neque introduces abominationem in
domum tuam, et sis anathema sicut illud: detestando detestaberis illud,
et abominando abominaberis illud, quia est anathema.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p25"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.v-p26"></span><span id="iii.xi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p27"></span>**16.** *And thou shalt consume all the
people.* It is plain from the second part of the verse wherefore He
commands the people of Canaan to be destroyed, when He forbids their
gods to be worshipped. This precept, therefore, corresponds with the
others, where He dooms in like manner these nations to utter
destruction. I now pass over what I have explained elsewhere, *i.e.,*
that the vengeance which God exercised against these obstinate and
ten-times lost people cannot be ascribed to cruelty. For since 400 years
ago it had been said to Abraham that their iniquity was not yet full,
they could not be treated with severity equal to their deserts, when
they had so licentiously and wickedly abused God’s long-suffering. But
we must take notice of God’s design in so particularly enjoining on the
Israelites utterly to destroy whatever should be found there; for
besides that He had once doomed them all to the destruction they
merited, He would have the land also, in which His name was to be
invoked, purged from all pollutions. Now, if any of the old inhabitants
had survived, they would soon have endeavored to revive their
corruptions, and since the Israelites were otherwise more disposed than
enough to superstition, they would easily have been attracted to the
worship of idols. This, then, is the reason why God forbids them to shew
these people any humanity or clemency, as I have reminded you to be
clear from the context; for these things stand in connection, that they
should not spare the nations nor worship their gods. The reason which is
subjoined, “for it will be a snare or stumblingblock to you,” must be
extended to the whole context, viz., that it would be fatal to the Jews
if they should spare the nations which would allure them to impiety.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p28"></span><span id="iii.xi.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p29"></span>**17** *If thou shalt say in thine
heart.* Since it was a matter of great difficulty to destroy such a
multitude of men, and despair itself would drive them to madness, so
that it would be frivolous for the Israelites to cut off all hope of
mercy, God anticipates their fear, and exhorts them to the strenuous
execution of His sentence. From whence we gather some useful
instruction; whenever God commands anything which exceeds our power, we
must still obey and boldly break through whatever obstacles present
themselves to impede us. In all arduous matters, therefore, let this
doctrine come to our aid, that whatever is contrary to God’s will may
easily be annihilated by His almighty power. But since terror, presented
to our eyes, immediately so lays hold of all our senses that we lie as
it were torpid, God recalls to the recollection of the Israelites what
abundant grounds of confidence He had supplied them with. For all the
miracles He had wrought were so many proofs of His invincible power; and
hence they should conclude that nothing was to be dreaded, provided God
should go before them, and that, therefore, being assured of victory,
they should not descend to any treaties.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p30"></span><span id="iii.xi.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p31"></span>**20.** *Moreover, the Lord thy God will
send the hornet.* Since the destruction of their enemies might seem
long, if they were only to be slain by their hands and weapons, and
again, because it was scarcely credible that, without defending
themselves, they would voluntarily stretch forth their own throats, God
promises that in another way also He would supply the means of their
conquest. Therefore, lest the Israelites, imagining that their enemies
would be prompt and vigorous in resistance, should be alarmed or
affrighted, God declares that other forces should be at hand, for that
hornets or other poisonous insects should destroy all the fugitives. The
same declaration is found in <span id="iii.xi.v-p31.1"></span>[Ex
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span id="iii.xi.v-p31.1"></span>;
and what God had promised, Joshua relates that He performed. (<span
id="iii.xi.v-p31.2"></span>[Jos
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#012)<span
id="iii.xi.v-p31.2"></span>.) But inasmuch as these nations were not to
be destroyed in a moment, lest the people should therefore grow weary or
become inactive, God anticipates this, and reminds them that this delay
would be advantageous, for when all the inhabitants were exterminated,
the wild beasts would occupy the empty land. The prolongation of the
war, therefore, ought not to trouble them, for by it God provided for
His people’s welfare, since, if the men were speedily destroyed, they
should have to contend with wild beasts. But though the passage which I
have quoted from Exodus is similar in terms, yet I have designedly
placed it under another head; for God here refers to the extermination
of the Gentile nations with another object, *i.e.,* lest any of the
ancient pollutions should remain in the land, and lest the Israelites
should mingle with the ungodly, by whose arts they might at length be
drawn away to spurious religions.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p32"></span><span id="iii.xi.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p33"></span>**25.** *The graven images of their
gods.* He again impresses upon them the object of the destruction of the
nations, but he goes further than before. He had before forbidden them
to worship their gods. He now commands them to consume their graven
images with fire, for since the people were prone to superstition, such
snares might easily have alienated them from God’s pure worship. Nor
does he command them merely to melt the gold and silver so as to alter
its shape, but he altogether interdicts its use, since it would be a
contagious plague; for he shews how greatly God abominates idols,
inasmuch as whosoever should touch the materials of which they were
molten, would contract pollution and become accursed. This great
severity might indeed seem to condemn the metals which were created for
man’s use, as if they were impure, and as if the perfectness of natural
things was liable to be corrupted by man. But in this way idolaters
would contaminate the sun and moon, when falsely regarding them as
objects of corrupt worship; and it must be answered that the gold and
silver itself was by no means polluted by this impious abuse; but that,
although free from all stain in itself, it was polluted in respect to
the people. Such was the uncleanness of animals, not that they had in
themselves any pollution, but because God had interdicted their being
eaten. The pollution therefore which is now mentioned arises from a
similar prohibition; for otherwise the ignorant people could not be
restrained, and hence God would have that to be abominable which in
itself was pure. Still this was a political precept, and only given
temporarily to the ancient people; yet we gather from it how detestable
idolatry is, which even infects the works of God themselves with its own
filthiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 25:17-19](cc04133)
