[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04049)  [Next](cc04051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
14](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
14:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p3"></span>**23.** And thou shalt eat before the
LORD thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name
there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the
firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to
fear the LORD thy God always.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p4"></span>**23.** Et comedes coram Jehova Deo tuo
in loco quem elegerit ut habitare faciat nomen suum ibi, decimam
frumenti tui, vini tui, et olei tui, et primogenita boum tuorum, et
pecudum tuarum: ut discas timere Jehovam Deum tuum omnibus diebus.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p5"></span>**24.** And if the way be too long for
thee, so that thou art not able to carry it; *or* if the place be too
far from thee, which the LORD thy God shall choose to set his name
there, when the LORD thy God hath blessed thee:

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p6"></span>**24.** Quod si longior fuerit via quam
ut per eam ferre possis illas, quod distet a te locus ille quem elegerit
Jehova Deus tuus ut ponat nomen suum ibi, quum benedixerit tibi Jehova
Deus tuus:

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p7"></span>**25.** Then shalt thou turn *it* into
money, and bind up the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place
which the LORD thy God shall choose:

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p8"></span>**25.** Tunc dabis pro pecunia, et
colligabis pecuniam in manu tua, et ibis ad locum quem elegerit Jehova
Deus tuus:

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p9"></span>**26.** And thou shalt bestow that
money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or
for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and
thou shalt eat there before the LORD thy God, and thou shalt rejoice,
thou, and thine household,

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p10"></span>**26.** Et dabis pecuniam pro omni eo
quod desiderat anima tua, pro bobus, et pro ovibus, et pro vino, et pro
sicera, et pro cunctis denique quae postulaverit a te anima tua: et
comedes ibi coram Jehova Deo tuo, et laetaberis tu et domus tua.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p12"></span><span id="iii.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p13"></span>**23.** *And thou shalt eat before the
Lord.* He again commands the victims to be brought into the place of the
sanctuary; although by the place which God shall choose, he designates
Jerusalem, as has been said in the above commentary on chap. 12; for the
Ark of the Covenant had no settled resting-place until the time of
David, but was received as it were in temporary lodgings. Moses,
therefore, now commands, that when God shall have so greatly honored a
particular place, and shall have chosen a perpetual rest, in which His
name shall dwell, thither are the offerings to be brought. But we know
that this place was Jerusalem; and all the oblations were restricted to
this one place, lest any corruption should creep in to destroy the unity
of the faith. For all strange inventions, as has already been
sufficiently seen, are so many profanations of God’s worship. But,
whereas in chap. 12, Moses had promiscuously joined the tithes with the
firstlings, and had made the same appointment with respect to both, he
now relaxes the stringency of that law, by adding an exception, viz,
that if the way should be too long, a commutation might be made, and
money might be paid instead of corn. He does not, indeed, speak only of
the tithes, but unites with them the vows and free-gifts; nay, he refers
properly to these alone. But, since as to the latter there is no
question, let us only consider whether it was consistent that the tithes
should be paid in one place alone. They were given to the Levites for
their maintenance, who, as is well known, were dispersed throughout the
whole land; either then their residence must have been fixed at
Jerusalem, or they must not be deprived of their subsistence, wherever
they might dwell. The command, therefore, appears to be absurd, that all
the tithes of the whole land should be brought to Jerusalem, for that
would have amounted to nothing less than to destroy the poor Levites by
famine. This absurdity has compelled the commentators to fabricate a
doubtful conjecture; viz., that the people voluntarily set apart certain
tithes, which they might carry to Jerusalem at the festivals; but it is
not probable that so heavy a burden was imposed upon them,  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) as that they should only keep at home
what remained of the fifth part. But a nearer approach to probability
would be, that the tithes of the neighboring country, as convenience
offered, were carried to Jerusalem; whilst those which were collected in
more distant places were set aside there; but that they were accounted
for at Jerusalem, so that upon a calculation of the number of their
families, an equal distribution might be made to the Levites. Certainly
it is by no means probable that the respective tillers of the soil
carried up to Jerusalem what the Levites, having received there, were
compelled to take back again for the maintenance of their families; for
what would have been the advantage of all this expense and trouble of
carrying them backwards and forwards? Besides, it would have been
useless to command the Levites, and that too with the addition of severe
threats, to pay the priests faithfully, if the tithes had been first
deposited with the priests themselves, who might easily have provided
against all deception, since they had the whole quantity of corn in
their own hands. I have, therefore, no doubt but that the Levites
collected the tithes each in their own neighborhood, but that another
tithing, of which mention will be made presently, was carried up to the
sanctuary as a sacred offering, and a profession of service to God. For
we have lately seen, that after that part had been withdrawn, the nine
parts which remained were assigned to the Levites, as if they had been
grown on their own ground. But because it was a subject which might
cause complaints, that the first-fruits and other tithes should be
collected into one place, God would anticipate this by showing the
advantage of it to the whole people, in that there might be food enough
for all who should come to the celebration of the festivals; for this is
the meaning of the words, “thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God;” as
if it had been said, that the place should be sacred to God, to which
the worshippers of God might come from the whole land. Yet He commands,
in the meanwhile, the pure observation of His worship; lest a diversity
of places might draw away the people in various directions to false
superstitions.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p15"></span><span id="iii.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p16"></span>**24** *And if the way be too long.* I
am prevented from understanding this restriction as having reference to
the tithes, by the ordinance which is elsewhere made, that whosoever
would redeem them by a money-payment, (<span
id="iii.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>[Le
27:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>,) should add a fifth part, and this is
omitted here; and, again, by the explanation which is soon after added,
that they should bring money with them instead of their offerings, and
buy with it oxen and sheep, wine, and strong drink, as they pleased. The
sum is, that if it were too burdensome for them to bring from their
distant homes victims and other gifts, they were permitted to buy at
Jerusalem whatever they chose to offer, provided they made no offerings
elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc04050.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iii.iii.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p14"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.vii-p14.1"></span>De redoubler ainsi les dismes les unes sur
les autres;” thus to redouble their tithes one upon another. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 20:24,25](cc04051)
