[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04157)  [Next](cc04159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#000)<span id="v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p2"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
25:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>,
20-22

<span id="v.iv.ii-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses in
mount Sinai, saying,

<span id="v.iv.ii-p4"></span>**1.** Loquntus est Jehova ad Mosen in
monte Sinai, dicendo:

<span id="v.iv.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say unto them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then
shall the land keep a sabbath unto the LORD.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p6"></span>**2.** Alloquere filios Israel, et dic
illis, Quum veneritis in terram quam ego do vobis, sabbathizet terra
quiete Jehovae.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p7"></span>**3.** Six years thou shalt sow thy field,
and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit
thereof;

<span id="v.iv.ii-p8"></span>**3.** Sex annis seminabis agrum tuum, et
sex annis putabis vineam tuam, et fructum ejus colliges.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p9"></span>**4.** But in the seventh year shall be a
sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for the LORD: thou shalt
neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p10"></span>**4.** Septimo autem cessatio quietis erit
terrae, sabbathum Jehovae: agrum tuum non seminabis, nec vineam putabis.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p11"></span>**5.** That which groweth of its own
accord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of
thy vine undressed: *for* it is a year of rest unto the land.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p12"></span>**5.** Quae sponte gignet terra in messe
tua non metes, et uvas possessionis tuae non vindemiabis: annus enim
quietis terrae est.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p13"></span>**6.** And the sabbath of the land shall
be meat for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, and
for thy hired servant, and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thee,

<span id="v.iv.ii-p14"></span>**6.** Sed erunt vobis in cibum, tibi et
servo tuo, ancillae, et mercenario, et inquilino tuo qui peregrinatur
apud to.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p15"></span>**7.** And for thy cattle, and for the
beast that *are* in thy land, shall all the increase thereof be meat.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p16"></span>**7.** Jumentis quoque tuis et pecoribus
terrae tuae erit cunctis ejus proventus in cibum.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p17"></span>**20.** And if ye shall say, What shall we
eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our
increase:

<span id="v.iv.ii-p18"></span>**20.** Quod si dixeritis, Quid edemus
anno septimo, si neque seminabimus, nec colligemus fruges nostras?

<span id="v.iv.ii-p19"></span>**21.** Then I will command my blessing
upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three
years.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p20"></span>**21.** Ego mandabo benedictionem meam
anno sexto, et edet provenrum tribus annis.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p21"></span>**22.** And ye shall sow the eighth year,
and eat *yet* of old fruit until the ninth year; until her fruits come
in ye shall eat *of* the old *store.*

<span id="v.iv.ii-p22"></span>**22.** Seminabitis anno octavo: comedetis
tamen e proventu vetere usque ad annum nonum: donec nova nascantur
comedetis vetera.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p23"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.ii-p24"></span><span id="v.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p25"></span>**20.** *And if ye shall say.* Men will
never be obedient to God’s precepts, unless their distrust of Him is
corrected, and will be always ingenious in laying hold of pretexts for
disobedience. The difficulty, however, in this matter was a specious
excuse for the Jews; for famine might have destroyed them in these two
years, since in the seventh year they neither sowed nor reaped; and for
reaping they were obliged to wait till the end of the eighth year. Now,
whence were they to get seed enough to sow after the land had rested for
a whole year? It is not without reason, then, that God delivers them
from this doubt, promising them that He will give such abundance in the
sixth year as shall suffice for the two following ones. The phrase must
be observed, that God would “command His blessing” in an especial
manner, and beyond the usual course, so that the land should be twice or
thrice more fertile. Hence is suggested to us no ordinary ground of
confidence in asking for our daily bread. But this was a special
promise, that food should not fail the Jews on account of the Sabbatical
year; a manifestation of which God had already given in the desert, when
supplied a double portion of manna to those who gathered it on the day
before the Sabbath. Now-a-days this inconvenience is avoided by the
industry of farmers, who so divide their acres that the land should
never lie fallow altogether, but that one part should supply the
deficiency of another. This distribution did not obtain with the Jews.
Therefore God relieved them from the fear of famine down to the harvest
of the eighth year; although He seems at the same time to accustom them
to frugality, lest they should waste in intemperance and luxury what He
afforded in sufficient abundance to last for two years. To this precept
He alludes, when He declares by the Prophets that the land “enjoyed her
Sabbaths,” when it had vomited forth its inhabitants, (<span
id="v.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>[2Ch
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>;) for since they had polluted it by violating
the Sabbath, so that it groaned as if under a heavy burden, He says that
it shall rest for a long continuous period, so as to compensate for the
labor of many years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Year of Jubilee](cc04159)
