[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04050)  [Next](cc04052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Exod.
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p3"></span>**24.** An altar of earth thou shalt
make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy
peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in all places where I record
my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p4"></span>**24.** Altare terreum facies mihi, et
sacrificabis super illud holocausta tua, et sacrificia prosperitatum
tuarum, pecudes tuas, et armenta tua: in onmi loco in quo memoriam
posuero nominis mei, veniam ad te, et benedicam tibi.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p5"></span>**25.** And if thou wilt make me an
altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift
up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p6"></span>**25.** Quod si altare ex lapidibus
feceris mihi, non aedificabis eos excisos, si gladium tuum elevaveris
super illos, pollues.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p8"></span><span id="iii.iii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p9"></span>**24.** *An altar of earth thou shalt
make.* This precept differs from the other, which I have just explained;
because although it refers to the choice of a place,  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) yet the mention of a place is omitted,
and it only touches upon the material and form of the altar. God,
therefore, commands that an altar should be built to Him, either of
earth or of a heap of stones, which had not been artificially polished.
But I understand this of the altars, which either in the desert or
elsewhere should be built, before the choice of the perpetual place had
been manifested to them. God would have them built of earth, that they
might fall down of themselves, and that no trace of them might remain
after the departure of the people; but if stones were used, He forbade
their being fitted together in a permanent structure, but would have
them thrown rough and unpolished into a heap, lest their appearance
should entice posterity to superstition. I am surprised that
commentators  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) should here put
themselves to the pains of inventing allegories; since God had no other
object than to remove stumbling-blocks, whereby the Israelites might be
turned away from the sanctuary; for we know how antiquity, and the
example of our forefathers, is apt to attract the minds of the vulgar.
If anything in the shape of an altar had remained, immediately religious
notions would have been associated with it, that, God could nowhere be
more solemnly or better worshipped, than in the place already dedicated
of old by their fathers. Thus degenerate modes of worship would have
sprung up, and the dignity of the sanctuary would have been brought into
contempt. Wherefore this evil is anticipated when He forbids altars to
be built which might exist for any length of time; and only allows them
to be adapted for present use, being made of earth, or of an unfashioned
heap of stones. As to “the sacrifices of prosperities,". I have
elsewhere stated why I so translate the word <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p11.2"></span>שלומים, *shelumim,*  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) which signifies all prosperous and
happy results; for the rendering of others, viz., peaceful things,
(<span id="iii.iii.viii-p12.6"></span>*pacifica*)*,* is very unsuitable.
The latter part of the verse, “*in* *all places, where I record my name,
I will come unto thee,*” has been ignorantly perverted by commentators,
and hence has afforded a ground of error; for they have read it in
connection with the former part, as if God had forbidden such an altar
to be made in Mount Sion also; whereas He rather anticipates a doubt,
which might have otherwise perplexed the minds of the people; Will not
God be favorable to us where He heard the prayers of our fathers? He
replies, I say, to this by the promise, that they will pray to Him well
and duly, if they only obey His command, and seek no other place except
that which He shall choose. On this score it is said, that wheresoever
it shall please God that sacrifices should be offered, there He will
descend to you, to be favorable unto you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc04051.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p10"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p10.1"></span>D’autant qu’il ne traitte pas
expressement du lieu mais de la matiere, et forme de l’autel;” because
it does not treat expressly of the place, but of the matter and form of
the altar. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc04051.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p11"></span> In the *Gloss. Ord*, there is an
exposition from *Gregory,* that “to *make an altar of earth* is to found
our hopes upon the Incarnation of Christ; for our offering is then
accepted by God, when our humility bases our works upon faith in the
incarnation of our Lord;” and from *Isidore,* that “*hewn* *stones* are
those who break the unity of the Church, and sever themselves from the
society of their brethren. These Christ does not receive into His body,
which the construction of the altar represents," etc.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc04051.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p12.1"></span>שלמיך *A.V., peace-offerings. C.* says
rightly that the word <span id="iii.iii.viii-p12.2"></span>שלומים
comprehends every kind of prosperity and happy result; but the word in
the text is the pl. of <span id="iii.iii.viii-p12.3"></span>שלם. — *W.*
See Note on <span id="iii.iii.viii-p12.5"></span>[Numbers
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p12.5"></span>, *ante,* p. 105.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 27:5-7](cc04052)
