[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04114)  [Next](cc04116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.vii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#000)<span id="iii.x.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.x.vii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
5:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)<span
id="iii.x.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p3"></span>**1.** And if a soul sin, and hear the
voice of swearing, and *is* a witness, whether he hath seen or known *of
it;* if he do not utter *it,* then he shall bear his iniquity.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p4"></span>**1.** Quum autem anima peccaverit
audiendo vocem juramenti, et ipsc sit testis, quod aut videtit, aut
sciverit: nisi renuntitaverit, feret poenam iniquitatis suae.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p5"></span>**2.** Or if a soul touch any unclean
thing, whether *it be* a carcase of an unclean beast, or a carcase of
unclean cattle, or the carcase of unclean creeping things, and *if* it
be hidden from him; he also shall be unclean, and guilty.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p6"></span>**2.** Aut si anima tetigerit aliquam
remimmundam, sive cadaver ferae immundae, sive cadaver animalis immundi,
sive cadaver reptilis immundi, idque latuerit eam, tum ipsc immundus
erit, et deliquit.-

<span id="iii.x.vii-p7"></span>**3.** Or if he touch the uncleanness of
man, whatsoever uncleanness *it be* that a man shall be defiled withal,
and it be hid from him; when he knoweth *of it,* then he shall be
guilty.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p8"></span>**3.** Aut si tetigerit immunditiam
hominis in omni immunditia ejus qua polluitur, et latuerit eum, et ipse
cognoverit postea, deliquit.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p9"></span>**4.** Or if a soul swear, pronouncing
with *his* lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever *it be* that a man
shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth
*of it,* then he shall be guilty in one of these.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p10"></span>**4.** Aut anima si juraverit,
proferendo labiis se malefacturam, aut benefacturam, et secundum omne
quod profert homo juramento, et id latuerit eum, et ipse postea
cognoverit: tunc delinquet in uno ex istis.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p11"></span>**5.** And it shall be, when he shall be
guilty in one of these *things,* that he shall confess that he hath
sinned in that *thing*:

<span id="iii.x.vii-p12"></span>**5.** Erit autem quum deliquerit in uno
ex istis, et confessus fuerit id super quo peccavit.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p13"></span>**6.** And he shall bring his trespass
offering unto the LORD for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from
the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin offering; and the
priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p14"></span>**6.** Adducet oblationem pro delicto
suo Jehovae, pro peccato suo quod peccaverit, foeminam de grege, agnam,
aut capellam caprarum pro peccato: et expiabit eum sacerdos a peccato
suo.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p15"></span>**7.** And if he be not able to bring a
lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass, which he hath committed, two
turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the LORD; one for a sin
offering, and the other for a burnt offering.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p16"></span>**7.** Quod si facultas afferendae
peendis defuerit ei, tunc adducet oblationem pro delicto suo quod
peccavit, duos turtures, aut duos pullos columbae Jehovae, unum in
hostiam pro peccato, et alterum in hostism holocausti.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p17"></span>**8.** And he shall bring them unto the
priest, who shall offer *that* which *is* for the sin offering first,
and wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide *it* asunder:

<span id="iii.x.vii-p18"></span>**8.** Afferetque illos ad sacerdotem,
et offeret eum qui est in hostism pro peccato, priorem: et ungue secabit
caput ipsius e regione cervicis ejus, et non separabit.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p19"></span>**9.** And he shall sprinkle of the
blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of
the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it *is* a sin
offering.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p20"></span>**9.** Aspergetque de sanguine hostiae
pro peccato super parietem altaris, et quod superest de sanguine
exprimetur in basin ipsius altaris: oblatio pro peccato est.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p21"></span>**10.** And he shall offer the second
*for* a burnt offering, according to the manner: and the priest shall
make an atonement for him for his sin which he hath sinned, and it shall
be forgiven him.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p22"></span>**10.** Alterum autem faciet holocaustum
juxta morem: atque its expiabit eum sacerdos a peccato suo quod
peccavit, et remittetur ei.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p23"></span>**11.** But if he be not able to bring
two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring
for his offering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin
offering; he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put *any*
frankincense thereon: for it *is* a sin offering.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p24"></span>**11.** Si vero non fuerit ei facultas
offerendi duos turtures, aut duos pullos columbae, tunc afferet
oblationem suam qui peccaverit, decimam partem epha similae in
oblationem pro peccato: non ponet super eam oleum, neque ponet super cam
thus, quia oblatio pro peccato est.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p25"></span>**12.** Then shall he bring it to the
priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it, *even* a memorial
thereof, and burn *it on* the altar, according to the offerings made by
fire unto the LORD: it *is* a sin offering.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p26"></span>**12.** Afferet illam inquam ad
sacerdotem: tune sacerdos accipiet ex ea plenum pugilium suum odorem
ejus, et adolebit super altare ultra oblationes ignitas Jehovae: oblatio
pro peccato est.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p27"></span>**13.** And the priest shall make an
atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned in one of
these, and it shall be forgiven him: and *the remnant* shall be the
priest’s, as a meat offering.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p28"></span>**13.** Et expiabit eum sacerdos a
peccato suo quod peccavit in uno de istis: et remittetur el, et erit
sacerdoti sicut minha.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p29"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.vii-p30"></span><span id="iii.x.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p31"></span>**1.** *And if a soul sin.* The three
kinds of offense, to which Moses refers in the beginning of the chapter,
seem to differ much from each other; for the first, when a person
concealed a matter which he knew, could not arise from error, yet I
include this concealment of which he treats under the head of error, by
supposing it to have been when a person should be induced by shame or
fear to connive at any crime or offense respecting which he might be
interrogated, and so, without any design of perjuring himself, but by
blinding himself, should withhold what he would have said, if he had
duly examined the matter. Yet these words must be more narrowly
discussed, respecting the meaning of which men are not well agreed. Some
think that the word <span id="iii.x.vii-p31.1"></span>אלה,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) *alah,* is put for “execration,” as
though it were said, if any shall have heard a misdoing or detestable
crime worthy of execration; yet their gloss is contradicted by what
immediately follows, “Whether he hath seen or known it.” Others indeed
interpret it to mean an oath, yet improperly confine it to perjury, as
if Moses stated that he was guilty who had heard a man perjuring
himself, and had not opposed him, but had rather covered the perjury by
his own connivance or silence. I rather subscribe, then, to their
opinion who expound it as meaning “adjuration;” for the words will thus
combine very well, “If any one, being summoned as a witness, shall have
heard the voice of adjuration, whereby he shall be required in God’s
name to answer truly as to the matter proposed, and from favor, or good
nature, or any other false pretext, as if he were enveloped in a cloud
of error, shall conceal what, if he had paid diligent attention, he well
knew, he shall be guilty.” We must then here render the disjunctive
particle as the conditional. Literally it is, “If any shall have heard
the voice of adjuration, and (is) himself a witness.” But wherefore
should he say, “if he hath been a witness,” and then add, “or have known
it,” as if he referred to different things? What I have said squares
very well, that a person becomes himself guilty, who, when summoned as a
witness, does not answer to a matter of which he is cognizant. Now, what
does hearing the voice of adjuration mean, unless you understand that he
is adjured by the mouth of a judge? We must observe, too, that the three
kinds of sin which are first enumerated have a connection with each
other, since they speak of sinners who are infected by the uncleanness
of others; for, after Moses had commanded generally that offenses
committed in error should be expiated, he now adds what had not been
stated explicitly enough, that those also required atonement who had
been polluted by the defilements of others. Thus this first will accord
very well with the other two, *i.e.,* that if any should make himself an
accomplice in the offense of another, by indirect perjury, he should be
unclean until he had offered a propitiation; for this is what the
expression “bear his iniquity” conveys; as if Moses had said that he
contracts guilt who shall have concealed a crime, respecting which he
had been interrogated as a witness.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p33"></span><span id="iii.x.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p34"></span>**2.** *Or if a soul touch any unclean
thing.* This precept seems not only to be superfluous but also absurd;
for Moses had already shewn sufficiently how uncleanness contracted by
touching a dead body, or any other unclean thing, was to be purged, and
had prescribed an easy and inexpensive mode of purification. This
repetition appears, therefore, to be useless. But to impose a heavier
punishment on an offense which is extenuated by the pretext of error,
than where there is no allusion to error, is unjust. But we must
remember that not only is the uncleanness itself here punished, but; the
inadvertence, from whence it arose that he who was polluted omitted the
purification. For it may be that those who thus lie torpid in their sins
pollute for a season the service of God. No wonder, then, that a heavier
punishment is inflicted, where error, springing from supine and gross
security, begets still more sins, that thus believers may be aroused to
greater vigilance. Let the reader, therefore, recollect that the offense
which is now adverted to did not consist in the mere touching of a dead
body, but in the thoughtlessness itself; for if all would diligently
meditate on the Law of God, forgetfulness would not so easily steal over
them, whereby the distinction between right and wrong is lost. The same
is the reason for the following ordinance, where Moses subjects to the
same punishment any one who shall have touched an unclean or defiled
man: thus the very contact of a woman at a particular period produces
pollution.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p35"></span><span id="iii.x.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p36"></span>**4.** *Or if a soul shall swear.* The
Gulf is also ascribed to error and ignorance, when a person does
inconsiderately what he has promised not to do; for the oath is not in
that case violated, which would be criminal;  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) but in this very carelessness there is
enough of wrong, because sound religion would renew the recollection of
the vow. Consequently, where no anxiety (to fulfill it) is shewn, there
is no serious desire to do so. But this commandment was necessary,
because it might often happen that men who had pledged their faith in a
vow, and had broken it in thoughtlessness, would deem themselves
released from every, and would in future give themselves up to
indulgence, whereas they who arrive at such a pitch of licentiousness,
harden themselves more and more, until at length they throw off all
reverence for God. God would therefore have vows kept faithfully, lest
those who despised them should thus rush into impiety. If then any one
had thoughtlessly broken faith, he is commanded to make atonement to
God; not on account of his levity, as some think, as if he had rashly
promised what he might not, but on account of his neglect, because he
had not given diligence to remember the vow at the proper time. Now if
the Papists stupidly wrest this text after their custom, in order to
establish the obligation of all kinds of vows, their confutation is
easy; viz., that God requires this stedfastness only with respect to
lawful vows duly made. We have already understood from the teaching of
Moses, what is the rule of pious vow-making; whence we gather, that
those which profane God’s name are by no means to be kept; for if we set
out with doing wrong, obstinacy in it is doubly wicked. In this passage,
therefore, “to do evil” is not to perform any improper action, but to
undertake something which would otherwise be disagreeable and burdensome
to the flesh; such as to diminish domestic expenditure, or to deprive
one’s self of luxuries, or to determine upon abstinence from something
which would gratify or profit us.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p38"></span><span id="iii.x.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p39"></span>**6.** *And he shall bring his
trespass-offering.* He proceeds with what we have already been
considering, as to the removal of guilt by sacrifice; but he begins to
make a distinction between the poor and the rich, which distinction
applies also to what has gone before; hence it appears that the order is
not exactly observed by Moses, since the cases which he inserts seem to
interrupt the thread of his discourse; yet the fact remains clear, that
whosoever have fallen through error are unclean until they have offered
an atonement. But what had been before omitted is here inserted, that
the poor and needy are not to be pressed beyond the extent of their
means; nay, the different grades of offering are appointed, so that he
to whom it was not convenient to offer two turtle-doves, or pigeons,
might be quit for a small measure of flour. Hence we infer that God’s
only design was to shew the one true means of reconciliation to the
people, that they might have recourse to the Mediator and His sacrifice;
for the poor are here commanded to offer either two turtle-doves, or a
small quantity of meal, which would propitiate God towards them, just as
much as would the victim required of the rich. The citation,  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) however, which our interpreters make
from the poet is a lame one; viz., “Whoever shall have brought integrity
of mind into the temples, makes a sacrifice of corn;” since this blind
man did not see what was the object of sacrifices, and thus despised all
kinds of propitiations, as if purity and innocency alone recommended men
to God. We must remember, then, that the victims of themselves were of
no importance, and yet that the ancient people were exercised in these
ceremonies, to teach them that God can only be appeased by the payment
of a ransom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc04115.htm#fr_265) <span
id="iii.x.vii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p32"></span> It was in *S. M.* that *C*. found it
mentioned that some took <span id="iii.x.vii-p32.1"></span>אלה to mean
*execration,* blasphemy, or perjury; but *S. M*. himself held it to be
equivalent to <span id="iii.x.vii-p32.2"></span>שבועה, *adjuration,* and
explains the passage as meaning, “If any person shall be adjured, and
will not declare the truth, etc.” — *W*

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc04115.htm#fr_266) <span
id="iii.x.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p37"></span> “<span id="iii.x.vii-p37.1"></span>Ce
qui seroit repute a crime enorme;” which would be accounted an enormous
crime. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc04115.htm#fr_267) <span
id="iii.x.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p40"></span> “<span id="iii.x.vii-p40.1"></span>Un
poete payen a dit, ‘que celuy qui offrira un grain d’encens, ou un espi
de ble en integritd de coeur, appaisera Dieu autant que s’il tuoit une
centaine de bestes.’ Or, Il n’a parle qu’a demi, et m’esbahi comment les
Chrestiens osent alleguer ceste sentence comme vraye;” a heathen poet
has said, that he who shall offer a grain of incense, or an ear of corn
in integrity of heart, will appease God as much as if he had killed a
hundred beasts. Now he only spoke by halves; and I am astonished how
Christians dare to allege this sentence, as if it were true. — *Fr*.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p41"></span>The reference is probably to Persius,
Sat 2, *in finem* —

<span id="iii.x.vii-p42"></span>*"*<span
id="iii.x.vii-p42.1"></span>*Composttum* *jus, fasque animi, sanctosque
recessus  
Mentis, et incoctum generoso pectus honesto,  
Hoc cedo ut admoveam templis,* etfarre litabo."

<span id="iii.x.vii-p43"></span>Horace has nearly the same idea, Od.
3:23, 17-20 —

<span id="iii.x.vii-p44"></span>*"*<span
id="iii.x.vii-p44.1"></span>*Immunis* *aram si tetigit manus,  
Non sumptuosa blandior hostia  
Mollivit aversos Penates  
Farre pio, et saliente mica."*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 5:14-19](cc04116)
