[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04067)  [Next](cc04069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#000)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
29:1-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3"></span>**1.** And this *is* the thing that thou
shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest’s
office: Take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish,

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p4"></span>**1.** Hoc quoque facies eis ad
sanctificandum eos, ut sacerdotio fungantur mihi: Tolle juvencum unum
filium bovis, et arietes duos immaculatos.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p5"></span>**2.** And unleavened bread, and cakes
unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil:
*of* wheaten flour shalt thou make them.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p6"></span>**2.** Panes praeterea infermentatas, et
placentas infermentatas mixtas oleo, et lagan infermentata uncta oleo:
ex simila triticea facies ea.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p7"></span>**3.** And thou shalt put them into one
basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p8"></span>**3.** Ponesque ea in canistrum unum, et
offeres ea in canistro, una cum juveneo, et duobus arietibus.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p9"></span>**4.** And Aaron and his sons thou shalt
bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt
wash them with water.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p10"></span>**4.** Tum Aharonem et filios ejus
accedere fades ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis, et lavabis cos aqua.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p11"></span>**5.** And thou shalt take the garments,
and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod,
and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod:

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p12"></span>**5.** Et accipies vestes, induesque
Aharon tunicam, et pallium ephod, et ephod pectorale, cingesque cum
baltheo ephod.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p13"></span>**6.** And thou shalt put the mitre upon
his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p14"></span>**6.** Pones praeterea cidarim super
caput ejus: coronam autem sanctitatis pones super cidarim.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p15"></span>**7.** Then shalt thou take the
anointing oil, and pour *it* upon his head, and anoint him.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p16"></span>**7.** Postremo accipies oleum
unctionis, et fundes super caput ejus, et unges eum.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p17"></span>**8.** And thou shalt bring his sons,
and put coats upon them.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p18"></span>**8.** Post haec filios ejus accedere
facies, et indues cos tunicas.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p19"></span>**9.** And thou shalt gird them with
girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put the bonnets on them: and the
priest’s office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt
consecrate Aaron and his sons.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p20"></span>**9.** Cingesque illos baltheo: Aharon
et flios ejus, et aptabis eis pileos, et erit eis sacerdotium in
statutum perpetuum, implebisque manum Aharon, et manum filiorum ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p21"></span>**10.** And thou shalt cause a bullock
to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron and
his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p22"></span>**10.** Et offeres juveneum coram
tabernaculo conventionis, imponentque Aharon et filii ejus manus suas
super caput juvenei.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p23"></span>**11.** And thou shalt kill the bullock
before the LORD, *by* the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p24"></span>**11.** Tunc mactabis juveneum coram
Jehova ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p25"></span>**12.** And thou shalt take of the blood
of the bullock, and put *it* upon the horns of the altar with thy
finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p26"></span>**12.** Accipiesque e sanguine juvenci,
et pones super cornua altaris digito tuo: reliquum autem sanguinem
fundes ad fundamentum altaris.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p27"></span>**13.** And thou shalt take all the fat
that covereth the inwards, and the caul *that is* above the liver, and
the two kidneys, and the fat that *is* upon them, and burn *them* upon
the altar.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p28"></span>**13.** Tollesque omnem adipem
operientem intestina, et reticulum quod est super jecur, et duos renes,
et adipem qui est super illos, et incendes ea super altare.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p29"></span>**14.** But the flesh of the bullock,
and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp:
it *is* a sin offering.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p30"></span>**14.** At carnem juvenei, et pellem
ejus, fimumque ejus combures igni extra castra: sacrificium pro peccato
est.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p31"></span>**15.** Thou shalt also take one ram;
and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p32"></span>**15.** Arietem quoque alterum accipies,
et imponent Aharon et filii ejus manus suas super caput arietis.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p33"></span>**16.** And thou shalt slay the ram, and
thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle *it* round about upon the altar.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p34"></span>**16.** Tunc mactabis arietem,
accipiesque sanguinem ejus, et asperges super altare per circuitum.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p35"></span>**17.** And thou shalt cut the ram in
pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put *them* unto
his pieces, and unto his head.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p36"></span>**17.** Arietem autem concides ix,
frusta sua, et lavabis intestina ejus, cruraque ejus, et pones super
frusta ejus, et super caput ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p37"></span>**18.** And thou shalt burn the whole
ram upon the altar: it *is* a burnt offering unto the LORD: it *is* a
sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p38"></span>**18.** Incendes praeterea totum arietem
super altare: nam holocaustum est Jehovae in odorem quietis: oblatio
ignita Jehovae est.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p39"></span>**19.** And thou shalt take the other
ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the
ram.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p40"></span>**19.** Accipies insuper arietem
secundum, imponentque Aharon et filii ejus manus suas super caput
arietis.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p41"></span>**20.** Then shalt thou kill the ram,
and take of his blood, and put *it* upon the tip of the right ear of
Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb
of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and
sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p42"></span>**20.** Tunc mactabis arietem,
accipiesque de sanguine ejus, et pones super tenerum antis Aharon, et
super tenerum auris filiorum ejus dextrae, et super pollisem manus eorum
dextrae, et super pollicem pedis corum dextri, aspergesque sanguinem
super altare per circuitum.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p43"></span>**21.** And thou shalt take of the blood
that *is* upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle *it*
upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the
garments of his sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his
garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p44"></span>**21.** Tollesque de sanguine qui erit
super altare, et de oleo unctionis: atque asperges super Aharon, et
super vestes ejus, et super illlos ejus, et super vestes filiorum ejus
cum eo.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p45"></span>**22.** Also thou shalt take of the ram
the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the
caul *above* the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that *is* upon
them, and the right shoulder; for it *is* a ram of consecration:

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p46"></span>**22.** Deinde tolles de ariete adipem,
et caudam, et adipem operientem intestina, et reticulum jecoris, duosque
renes, atque adipem qui est super eos, et armum dextrum: quia aries
consecrationum est:

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p47"></span>**23.** And one loaf of bread, and one
cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened
bread that *is* before the LORD:

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p48"></span>**23.** Et tortam panis unam, et
placentam panis ex oleo unam, et laganum unum e canistro infermentatorum
qui est coram Jehova.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p49"></span>**24.** And thou shalt put all in the
hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them *for*
a wave offering before the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p50"></span>**24.** Ponesque omnia ilia in manibus
Aharon, et in manibus filiorum ejus, exaltabisque ilia exaltationem
coram Jehova.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p51"></span>**25.** And thou shalt receive them of
their hands, and burn *them* upon the altar for a burnt offering, for a
sweet savour before the LORD: it *is* an offering made by fire unto the
LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p52"></span>**25.** Accipies autem illa e manu
eorum, et incendes super altare, ultra holocaustum in odorem quietis
coram Jehova: oblatio ignita est Jehovae.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p53"></span>**26.** And thou shalt take the breast
of the ram of Aaron’s consecration, and wave it *for* a wave offering
before the LORD: and it shall be thy part.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p54"></span>**26.** Accipies item pectus arietis
consecrationum quod est ipsi Aharon, et exaltabis illud exaltationem
coram Jehova, eritque tibi in partem.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p55"></span>**27.** And thou shalt sanctify the
breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave offering,
which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration,
*even* of *that* which *is* for Aaron, and of *that* which *is* for his
sons:

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p56"></span>**27.** Sanctificabis itaque pectus
exaltationis, et armum elevationis quod exaltatum est, et qui elevatus
est de ariete consecrationum ipsius Aharon et filiorum ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p57"></span>**28.** And it shall be Aaron’s and his
sons’ by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for it *is* an
heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of
Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, *even* their heave
offering unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p58"></span>**28.** Et erit ipsi Aharon et filiis
ejus in statutum perpetuum a filiis Israel: quia exaltatio est: et
exaltatio erit a filiis Israel de sacrificiis prosperitatum suarum,
exaltatio inquam eorum erit Jehovae.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p59"></span>**29.** And the holy garments of Aaron
shall be his sons’ after him, to be anointed therein, and to be
consecrated in them.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p60"></span>**29.** Porro vestes sanctae quae sunt
ipsius Aharon, erunt filiis ejus post eum ad ungendum cos cure eis, et
ad consecrandum cum els manum eorum.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p61"></span>**30.** *And* that son that is priest in
his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the
tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy *place.*

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p62"></span>**30.** Septem diebus induct eas
sacerdos qui fuerit loco ipsius de filiis ejus, qui ingredietur
tabernaculum conventionis ad ministrandum in sanctuario.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p63"></span>**31.** And thou shalt take the ram of
the consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p64"></span>**31.** Arietem autem consecrationum
tolles, et coques carnem ejus in loco sanctitatis.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p65"></span>**32.** And Aaron and his sons shall eat
the flesh of the ram, and the bread that *is* in the basket, *by* the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p66"></span>**32.** Comedetque Aharon et filii ejus
carnem arietis, et panem qui est in canistro, ad ostium tabernaculi
conventionis.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p67"></span>**33.** And they shall eat those things
wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate *and* to sanctify them:
but a stranger shall not eat *thereof,* because they *are* holy.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p68"></span>**33.** Comedent inquam illa quibus
expiatus fuit ad consecrandum manum earum, ad sanctificandum cos: et
alienigena non comedet, quia sanctificatio sunt.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p69"></span>**34.** And if ought of the flesh of the
consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt
burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it *is*
holy.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p70"></span>**34.** Quod si superfuerit de carne
consecrationum, et de pane, usque mane, combures quod supcrest igni: non
comedettur, quia sanctitas est.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p71"></span>**35.** And thus shalt thou do unto
Aaron, and to his sons, according to all *things* which I have commanded
thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p72"></span>**35.** Facies igitur ipsi Aharon et
filiis ejus sic, juxta omnia quae praecepi tibi: septem diebus
consecrabis manum eorum.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p73"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p74"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p75"></span>**1.** *And this is the thing that thou
shalt do unto them.* Since I shall again repeat and more fully explain
these things as they are written in <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p75.1"></span>[Le 9](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p75.1"></span>, in the history of the consecration of the
tabernacle, it will be sufficient to give nothing more than a brief
summary of them here; nor is it my custom to invent mysteries out of
vague speculations,  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) such as may
rather gratify than instruct my readers. First, since the whole human
race is corrupt and infected with many impurities, so that his
uncleanness prevents every single individual from having access to God,
Moses, before he consecrates the priests, washes them by the sprinkling
of water, in order that they may be no longer deemed to be of ordinary
rank. Hence we gather that true purity and innocence, which was but
typical in the Law, is found in Christ alone. “For such an high priest
became us,” says the Apostle, “who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners,” to present Himself before God for us. (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p76.4"></span>[Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p76.4"></span>.) After they had been washed, God commands
that they should be invested with the sacerdotal dress, according to
their respective ranks: that the high priest should wear the ephod with
the *Urim* and *Thummim,* and the mitre with the golden plate, on which
shone forth “holiness to Jehovah;” and in the third place, He adds the
anointing. This preparation was for the purpose of initiating them,
before they performed the office of sacrificing; but it must be observed
that, as to this first sacrifice, the duties which were afterwards
transferred to Aaron were imposed upon Moses, as if he were the only
priest; and, in point of fact, the temporal dignity which he afterwards
resigned to his brother, was still in his own hands. What Moses
introduces about the division of the victim, we shall more conveniently
explain elsewhere, in treating of the offerings, which we have stated to
be the third part of the legal worship.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p77"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p78"></span>**16.** *And thou shalt slay the ram.*
Moses had previously been commanded to take the parts of the victim from
the hands of Aaron, to propitiate God with them, in order that he and
his posterity might be able hereafter to perform the same office; but
here a peculiar ceremony is described, that he should smear the right
ear, the thumb of the right hand, and the toe of the right foot, both of
Aaron and his sons, with the blood of a ram; and then that he should
sprinkle them and their garments with the blood which was deposited upon
the altar. What we must first observe here is, that the priest must be
sprinkled with blood, in order that he may conciliate the favor of God
towards himself for the purpose of intercession. Thus the priesthood of
Christ was dedicated with blood, so that it might be efficacious to
reconcile God with us. The question now arises, why only the right ear
and the right thumb and toe were sprinkled with blood, as if the priests
were consecrated and devoted to God only in half of their persons? I
reply, that in this one part the other was comprehended; since both the
ears, and both the hands and feet have the same object, and their
offices are so connected, that what is said of one ear applies to the
other. Again, it is asked, why the ear, and foot, and hand, were smeared
rather than the breast and the tongue? and I do not doubt but that by
the ear obedience was designated, and by the hands and feet all the
actions and the whole course of life; for there is scarcely anything
more common in Scripture than these metonymies, by which the cleanness
of the hands is taken for the integrity of the whole life, and the way,
or course, or walk for the direction, or manner of living. It is
therefore very appropriate that man’s life should be consecrated by
blood; and, inasmuch as the foundation of welldoing is obedience, which
is preferred to all sacrifices, Moses is commanded to begin with the
ear. And we know that the “odor of a sweet smell” in the sacrifice of
Christ was obedience, (<span id="iii.iv.ii-p78.2"></span>[Php
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p78.2"></span>;) on which account, David, in the spirit of
prophecy, introduces himself, saying, “Mine ears hast thou bored.”
 <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p79.2"></span>[Ps
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p79.2"></span>.) If any should object that the tongue is
of no less importance, because the priest is the messenger of the Lord
of hosts, I answer that the office of teaching is not here referred to,
but only that of intercession; wherefore in these three members Moses
embraced whatever related to atonement. But we must remember that what
is said of the consecration of Christ does not apply to His own person,
but refers to the profit of the whole Church; for neither was He
anointed for His own sake, nor had He need to borrow  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) grace from the blood; but He had
regard to His members, and devoted Himself altogether to their
salvation, as He himself testifies, “For their sake I sanctify myself.”
(<span id="iii.iv.ii-p80.2"></span>[Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p80.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p81"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p82"></span>**28.** *And it shall be Aaron’s.* Lest
the dignity of the sacred offerings, which are called the holiness of
the Lord, should be impaired, strangers are prohibited from partaking of
them; for, if it had been permitted that every one should touch them and
eat of them, there would have been no distinction between them and
ordinary food. Of the priests’ portion some parts were common to all
their families; but the holy parts were excepted, to the intent that by
this particular instance the reverence due to all might be inculcated.
The reference to place has the same object, for it was not lawful to eat
what was holy within the walls of their houses, in order that it might
be distinguished from their common and ordinary food. For the same
reason, whatever remained of it was to be burnt, lest, if the flesh
became rank, or the bread moldy, their ill savor and filthy appearance
might somewhat detract from the dignity of the holy things; for the
infirmity of the ancient people had need of childish rudiments, which
might still have a tendency to elevate the minds of the pious to things
above. This was the object of all these things, that no corruption
should creep in which might pollute or render contemptible the service
of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc04068.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p76"></span> Probably the *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p76.1"></span>de speculations volantes,” suggests the
right reading of the *Lat.* here, viz., <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p76.2"></span>*alatis* for <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p76.3"></span>*aliis*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc04068.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p78.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p79"></span> *A. V.,* “mine ears hast thou opened.”
*Margin, “Heb.,* digged.” See *C.’s own* Commentary, *in loco,* with Mr.
Anderson’s *note.* Calvin Translation Society’s edition, vol. 2, p. 99.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc04068.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p79.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p80"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.ii-p80.1"></span>La
grace de reconcilier.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 8:1-3](cc04069)
