[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04028)  [Next](cc04030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#000)<span id="ii.x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p2"></span><span id="ii.x.iv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006)<span id="ii.x.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p3"></span>**6.** If thy brother, the son of thy
mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy
friend, which *is* as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let
us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy
fathers;

<span id="ii.x.iv-p4"></span>**6.** Si incitaverit te frater tuus,
filius matris tuae, aut filia tua, aut filia tua, aut uxor complexus
tui, aut amicus tuus qui sit sicut anima tua, clam dicendo, Eamus et
colamus deos alienos quos non noveris neque tu, neque patres tui:

<span id="ii.x.iv-p5"></span>**7.** *Namely,* of the gods of the people
which *are* round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from
the *one* end of the earth even unto the *other* end of the earth;

<span id="ii.x.iv-p6"></span>**7.** E diis populorum qui sunt in
circuitu vestro, sive propinqui sint, sive remoti a te, ab extremo
regionis usque ad extremum ejus:

<span id="ii.x.iv-p7"></span>**8.** Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:

<span id="ii.x.iv-p8"></span>**8.** Non acquiesces ei, neque obedies ei,
nec parcet ei oculus tuus, neque misereberis, neque occultabis eum:

<span id="ii.x.iv-p9"></span>**9.** But thou shalt surely kill him;
thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards
the hand of all the people.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p10"></span>**9.** Sed occidendo occides eum: manus
tua erit in eum prima ad ipsum interficiendum, deinde manus universi
populi.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p11"></span>**10.** And thou shalt stone him with
stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the
LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the
house of bondage.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p12"></span>**10.** Et lapidabis eum lapidibus et
morietur: quia quaesivit te abstrahere a Jehova Deo tuo, qui eduxit te e
terra AEgypti, e domo servorum

<span id="ii.x.iv-p13"></span>**11.** And all Israel shall hear, and
fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p14"></span>**11.** Ut totus Israel audiant et
timeant, nec addant facere quicquam simile huic rei pravae in medio tui

<span id="ii.x.iv-p15"></span> 

<span id="ii.x.iv-p16"></span><span id="ii.x.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p17"></span>**6** *If thy brother, the son of thy
mother.* The punishment which he had commanded to be inflicted on false
teachers, is now extended to each one of the people. For although it is
a lighter offense in a private individual to draw others with him into
error, both because his ignorance is excusable, and the profession of a
teacher does not increase his responsibility, yet a falling away from
religion, from whencesoever it arises, is intolerable to God. Only,
those two points, to which we have already adverted, are to be kept in
remembrance, viz., that this judgment can have no place except where
religion is duly constituted; and, also, that all are not to be put to
death indifferently, who may have erred in some particular, but that
this severity is only to be exercised against apostates, who pluck up
religion by the roots, so that the worship of God is adulterated, or
pure doctrine abolished. Nor indeed does God enjoin that the
slipperiness of the tongue is to be capitally punished, if it shall have
inconsiderately let fall something amiss, but rather  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) the wicked design of altering the true
religion, as the words clearly express the matter. It is worth while
remarking with what particularity God enforces upon us the duty of
fostering and upholding religion: for, because general laws are usually
eluded by various exceptions, He expressly says that neither brother,
nor son, nor wife, nor intimate friend is to be spared.  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) The *eye* is said to pity, because the
very look is of great power in awakening the affections on both sides;
therefore it is not without reason that God requires  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) such courage as may be moved to pity
neither by tears, nor blandishments, nor the sadness of the spectacle.
The phrases, too, are emphatic, “thy brother, who proceeded from the
same womb;” “the wife who sleeps in thy bosom or embrace;” “the friend
whom you love as yourself;” in order that pure zeal, when it sees God’s
sacred name profaned, may not give way to any human affection. Christ
says that no one is worthy to be acknowledged as His disciple, but he
who shall neglect his father, and mother, and children, when necessary.
So now God declares that all our tenderest affections, which are
implanted in us by nature, and in which all the best persons sometimes
indulge, are sinful, if they hinder us from vindicating His glory.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p21"></span>It is pious and praiseworthy to love our
wives and children as our own bowels; nor is there any reason which
forbids us from regarding our brother and our friend with similar love;
only let God be preferred to all, for it is too preposterous to betray
His glory for the sake of man. For to plead the love due to our wives,
or anything of the same kind, what is this but to set our affections
against God and His precepts? Wherefore the desire to mitigate that
severity to which He would harden us, betrays an effeminacy which He
will not endure. Now, there are two most just grounds for the heaviness
of the punishment; first, because we are almost all of us slack when we
ought to be very zealous in avenging the insults which God may receive;
and, secondly, because more severe remedies are applied to perilous
diseases, so it is right that so noxious, and altogether deadly
pestilence as this should be met with extraordinary means. And to this
refers the expression “*secretly.*” For although it might seem cruel to
betray such as have not publicly transgressed, yet, inasmuch as
sectaries fly from the light, and creep in by clandestine and deceitful
arts, it is necessary to prevent them from fraudulently infecting
individual houses with their poison, as always is the case with them.
Therefore God would have their insidious endeavors checked betimes, lest
the contagion should spread.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p22"></span><span id="ii.x.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p23"></span>**7** *Namely, of the gods of the people.*
The sum of the matter is to this effect, that we should so acquiesce in
the known truth, as that our ears may be closed to all the falsehoods by
which it is opposed. Men’s neighborhood to each other commonly produces,
by their intercommunication, a conformity of habits. Thus errors pass
from one to the other;  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) and since
we are generally prone to evil, the worse pervert the better. Since,
then, the people of Israel were everywhere surrounded by idolaters, they
might have easily been enticed to imitate them, unless measures were
taken to prevent it. But the expression “round about” is used, because a
pretext for yielding might have been taken from the fact, that the
Israelites differed in religion not from a single nation only, but from
all who surrounded them on every side. For to whatever quarter they
looked, examples presented themselves to their eyes, whereby they were
attracted to a new and strange form of religion. He afterwards amplifies
this, by adding, even if those nations “be far off from thee;” for the
Israelites were not divided from their neighbors only, but severed also
from the whole human race. But this was no slight temptation, that they
found no companions in the whole world, nor any nation, which agreed
with them. Besides, distance itself sometimes causes us to have respect
for those who are unknown to us; since the curiosity of men is volatile,
and traverses in its levity sea and land, in order to procure for itself
pestiferous monsters for the sake of their novelty. Meanwhile, God
exalts the faith which is founded on His Word, in comparison with the
manners, institutions, rites, and customs of all nations; for none has
made any true proficiency in religion unless he abominates whatever is
opposed to it.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p25"></span><span id="ii.x.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p26"></span>**9** *But thou shalt surely kill him.* He
would not that every one should privately execute vengeance without a
public trial; but he referred to the ordinary custom, that the witnesses
should throw the first stone at condemned criminals, as we shall see
elsewhere. For it was an admirable provision, that God would have those
who had denounced the crime, to be the executors of its punishment, in
order that they should be more cautious and moderate in giving their
testimony. The reason, which is added at the end, “because he hath
sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, who brought thee
out*,*” etc., again exaggerates the crime on the score of its
ingratitude; which was detestable in proportion to the inestimable
blessing of their deliverance. It was an act of gross wickedness to
rebel against God after they had known Him; but it was still more gross
to undervalue their Deliverer. Finally, the advantage and fruit of this
severity is subjoined; for, whilst punishment was inflicted on one man’s
crime, all others were inspired with terror; and thus the death of one
is a wholesome discipline for all, in the way of example.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc04029.htm#fr_56) <span
id="ii.x.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.x.iv-p18.1"></span>Une
malice deliberee, et conceue de longue main;” deliberate malice, and
aforethought. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc04029.htm#fr_57) <span
id="ii.x.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p19"></span> Addition in *Fr, “*<span
id="ii.x.iv-p19.1"></span>Quand ils tomberont en ceste malheurete de
vouloir attirer quelqu’un en idolatrie;” when they shall fall into this
iniquity of wishing to tempt any one to idolatry.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc04029.htm#fr_58) <span
id="ii.x.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p20"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “<span
id="ii.x.iv-p20.1"></span>En celuy qui se voudra monstrer bon zelateur
de la religion;” in him, who would shew himself to be duly zealous in
religion.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc04029.htm#fr_59) <span
id="ii.x.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.x.iv-p24.1"></span>Trottent
ca et la, ct ont la vogue.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 13:12-17](cc04030)
