[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04078)  [Next](cc04080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
21](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p2"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
21:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#016)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p3"></span>**16.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.v.ii-p4"></span>**16.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.v.ii-p5"></span>**17.** Speak unto Aaron, saying,
Whosoever *he be* of thy seed in their generations that hath *any*
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p6"></span>**17.** Loquere ad Aharon, dicendo, Vir e
semine tuo per aetates suas, in quo fuerit macula, non accedet ut
offerat panem Dei sui.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p7"></span>**18.** For whatsoever man *he be* that
hath a blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he
that hath a flat nose, or any thing superfluous,

<span id="iii.v.ii-p8"></span>**18.** Quippe nullus vir in quo fuerit
macula, aecedet: vir crocus, vel claudus, aut diminutus, aut superfluus:

<span id="iii.v.ii-p9"></span>**19.** Or a man that is brokenfooted, or
brokenhanded,

<span id="iii.v.ii-p10"></span>**19.** Aut vir in quo fuerit fractura
pedis, vel fractura manus:

<span id="iii.v.ii-p11"></span>**20.** Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or
that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his
stones broken;

<span id="iii.v.ii-p12"></span>**20.** Aut gibbosus, aut lippus, aut qui
habebit maeulam in oculo suo, aut cui fuerit scabies vel impetigo, aut
qui contritus fuerit testiculo.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p13"></span>2l. No man that hath a blemish of the
seed of Aaron the priest shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the
LORD made by fire: he hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer
the bread of his God.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p14"></span>**21.** Omnis vir in quo fuerit macula, e
semine Aharon sacerdotis, non accedet ad offerendum oblationes ignitas
Jehovae: in quo fuertit macula, non accedet ad offerendum panem Dei sui.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p15"></span>**22.** He shall eat the bread of his
God, *both* of the most holy, and of the holy.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p16"></span>**22.** Panem quidem Dei sui e
sanctitatibus sanctitatum et e sanctis comedet.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p17"></span>**23.** Only he shall not go in unto
thevail, nor come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a blemish; that
he profane not my sanctuaries: for I the LORD do sanctify them.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p18"></span>**23.** Atqui intra velum non
ingredietur, et ad altare non aceedet: quia macula est in eo, ne polluat
sanctuaria mea: quoniam ego Jehova qui sanctifico vos.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p19"></span>**24.** And Moses told *it* unto Aaron,
and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p20"></span>**24.** Loquutus est itaque Moses ad
Aharon et filios ejus, et ad omnes filios Israel.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p21"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.ii-p22"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p23"></span>**17.** *Speak unto Aaron, saying.*
Priests in whom there was any notable bodily defect are here forbidden
from approaching the altar. I will not curiously inquire into the
defects which Moses enumerates, since the same rule is here laid down,
which is afterwards applied to the sacrifices, whereof none but perfect
ones were to be offered. For God rejected whatever was defective or
mutilated, in order that the Israelites might know that no victim would
suffice for the expiation of sin, except such as possessed complete
perfection; and this is justly required in a priest, who cannot be a
mediator between God and men unless he is free from every spot. But the
analogy must be kept in view between the external figures and the
spiritual perfection which existed only in Christ. God could bear no
defect in the priests; it follows, then, that a man of angelic purity
was to be expected, who should reconcile God to the world. The bodily
imperfections, then, which were here enumerated, must be transferred to
the soul. The offering of bread comprehends by *synecdoche* the other
offerings, and the whole legal service, which the priests were wont to
perform in their course; and this the words of Moses immediately
afterwards confirm, wherein he mentions all “the offerings made by
fire,” besides the bread. We have seen elsewhere that any of the people
wounded in the testicles were prohibited from entering the sanctuary;
that they were, not even to set foot in the court; but there was a
special reason for this as regarded the priests, lest they should
pollute the sanctuary by their defects. Hence it appears how needful for
us is the intercession of Christ; for, if his perfect cleanness did not
wash away our impurity, no oblation could proceed from us except what
would be foul and unsavory. Moreover, it is worthy of observation that
the sanctuary of God is polluted by any defect or imperfection; and,
consequently, that whatever of their own men obtrude upon God, is
condemned as profane, so far are they from conciliating God’s favor by
any merit.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p24"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p25"></span>**22.** *He shall eat the bread of his
God.* He permits them indeed to eat of the sacrifices, because no
uncleanness on account of their natural defects could prevent them from
partaking of the sacred meals;  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191)
they are only forbidden to appear in God’s presence as mediators to
propitiate Him. And here the imperfection of the legal service betrays
itself; for nothing could be found among men which could fully represent
the truth. Since then the defects of men rendered it necessary to
separate the two connected things, viz., the honor and the burden, hence
the Israelites were admonished that another priest was promised them, in
whom nothing would be wanting for the consummation of all virtues and
perfection. Finally, Moses relates that he delivered God’s commands not
only to Aaron and his sons, but to all the people likewise; so that the
humblest of them might be the censor of the priests  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) if in anything they fell short.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc04079.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iii.v.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="iii.v.ii-p26.1"></span>La
nouristure assignee aux enfans d’Aaron.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc04079.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iii.v.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="iii.v.ii-p27.1"></span>Peust
contreroler, par maniere de dire, les Sacrificateurs:” might, so to say,
control the priests. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 22:1-16](cc04080)
