[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04092)  [Next](cc04094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#000)<span id="iii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p2"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
7:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#006)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p2.1"></span>, 14, 31-36

<span id="iii.vi.v-p3"></span>**6.** Every male among the priests shall
eat thereof: it shall be eaten in the holy place: it *is* most holy.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p4"></span>**6.** Omnis masculus in sacerdotibus
comedet cam, in loco sancto comedetur, sanctificatio sanctifica tionum
est.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p5"></span>**7.** As the sin offering *is*, so *is*
the trespass offering: *there is* one law for them: the priest that
maketh atonement therewith shall have *it.*

<span id="iii.vi.v-p6"></span>**7.** Sicut hostia pro peccato, sic
hostia pro delicto, lex eadem illis: sacerdotis erit qui expiabit eum.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p7"></span>**8.** And the priest that offereth any
man’s burnt offering, *even* the priest shall have to himself the skin
of the burnt offering which he hath offered.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p8"></span>**8.** At sacerdos offerens hostiam
holocausti alicujus, pellis holocausti quod obtulerit, sacerdotis ipsius
erit.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p9"></span>**9.** And all the meat offering that is
baken in the oven, and all that is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the
pan, shall be the priest’s that offereth it.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p10"></span>**9.** Omnis praeterea minha quae
coquebatur in clibano, et omne praeparatum in sartagine et in craticula,
erit sacerdotis offerentis illud.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p11"></span>**10.** And every meat offering mingled
with oil, and dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one *as much* as
another.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p12"></span>**10.** Omnis item minha mista oleo et
arida, omnibus filiis Aharon erit erit unicuique sicut fratri suo.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p13"></span>**14.** ... it shall be the priest’s that
sprinkleth the blood of the peace-offerings.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p14"></span>**14.** Panis sacerdotis spargentis
sanguinem prosperitatum erit.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p15"></span>**31.** And the priest shall burn the fat
upon the altar: but the breast shall be Aaron’s and his sons’.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p16"></span>**31.** Et erit pectusculum illud Aharoni
et filiis ejus.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p17"></span>**32.** And the right shoulder shall ye
give unto the priest *for* an heave offering of the sacrifices of your
peace offerings.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p18"></span>**32.** Armum autem dextrum dabitis ad
elevationem sacerdoti de sacrificiis prosperitatum vestrarum.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p19"></span>**33.** He among the sons of Aaron that
offereth the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the
right shoulder for *his* part.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p20"></span>**33.** Qui offeret sanguinem
prosperitatum, et adipem e filiis Aharonis, ipsius erit armus dexter in
portionem.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p21"></span>**34.** For the wave breast and the heave
shoulder have I taken of the children of Israel from off the sacrifices
of their peace offerings, and have given them unto Aaron the priest, and
unto his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of Israel.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p22"></span>**34.** Quia pectusculum agitationis, et
armum elevationis tull a filiis Israel de sacrificiis prosperitatum
suarum, et dedi illa Aharoni sacerdoti, et filiis ejus in statutum
perpetuum a filiis Israel.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p23"></span>**35.** This *is the portion* of the
anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of the
offerings of the LORD made by fire, in the day *when* he presented them
to minister unto the LORD in the priest’s office;

<span id="iii.vi.v-p24"></span>**35.** Haec est unctio Aharon, et unctio
filiorum ejus ex oblationibus ignitis Jehovae, a die qua accedere fecit
cos ut sacerdotio fungerentur Jehovae:

<span id="iii.vi.v-p25"></span>**36.** Which the LORD commanded to be
given them of the children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them,
*by* a statute for ever throughout their generations.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p26"></span>**36.** Quas praecepit Jehova ut darent
eis a die qua unxit cos a filiis Israel statuto perpetuo in
generationibus suis.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p27"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.v-p28"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p29"></span>In these passages Moses confirms what we
have seen before as to the rights of the priests, and also adds an
exception to which he had not yet referred. In general, therefore, he
claims for the priests whatever remained of the holier victims; and
distinguishes them by this prerogative from the other Levites; from
whence we gather how free from all self-seeking Moses was, when by God’s
command he deprives his own sons not only of the dignity which was
conferred on his nephews, but also of their pecuniary advantages. Let
none, he says, but the sons of Aaron enjoy the sacred oblations, because
they are divinely anointed that they may approach the altar. But, since
some rivalry might have arisen among themselves, he adds a special law,
that certain kinds of offerings should only be taken by the priest who
had offered them. For although they ought all to have disinterestedly
discharged their duties, and not to have been attracted by lucre, yet,
that all might perform their parts more cheerfully, he appoints a reward
for their labor and diligence. On this account he prescribes that the
residue of the *minha* in the peace-offerings, and also the right
shoulder of the victim, and the flesh that remained of the
trespass-offerings, should be the recompense of the priest who had
performed the office of atonement and sprinkling the blood. It is
unquestionable that many were attracted by the desire of gain, who would
otherwise have neglected their duties; but this was a proof of God’s
fatherly indulgence, that He consulted their infirmity so that their
hire might be a spur to their diligence. Meanwhile He did not desire to
hire their services like those of slaves, so that they should be
mercenaries in heart; but rather, when He reproves them by His Prophet
because there were none of them who would “kindle fire on His altar for
nought.” (<span id="iii.vi.v-p29.1"></span>[Mal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p29.1"></span>.) He aggravates their ingratitude, not only
because they would not give their services gratuitously, but because,
when they received their hire, they defrauded Him who had appointed them
to be His ministers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rights to Tithes](cc04094)
