[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04002)  [Next](cc04004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i.i-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#000)<span id="ii.i.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.i.i-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#009)<span id="ii.i.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p3"></span>**8.** Take heed in the plague of leprosy,
that thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests
the Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, *so* ye shall observe
to do.

<span id="ii.i.i-p4"></span>**8.** Observa in plaga leprae, ad
observandum diligenter et faciendum secundum omnia quae docuerint vos
sacerdotes Levitae: sicuti praecepi eis, ita observabitis ad faciendum.

<span id="ii.i.i-p5"></span>**9.** Remember what the Lord thy God did
unto Miriam by the way, after that ye were come forth out of Egypt.

<span id="ii.i.i-p6"></span>**9.** Recordare quid fecerit Jehova Deus
tuus Mariae in itinere, quum egressi estis ex Aegypto.

<span id="ii.i.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.i.i-p8"></span><span id="ii.i.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i.i-p9"></span>**8.** *Take heed in the plague of leprosy*.
I am aware how greatly interpreters differ from each other and how
variously they twist whatever Moses has written about Leprosy. Some are
too eagerly devoted to allegories; some think that God, as a prudent
Legislator, merely gave a commandment of a sanitary, nature, in order
that a contagious disease should not, spread among the people. This
notion, however, is very. poor, and almost unmeaning; and is briefly.
refuted by Moses himself, both where he recounts the history of Miriam’s
leprosy, and also where he assigns the cause why lepers should be put
out of the camp, viz that they might not defile the camp in which God
dwelt, whilst he ranks them with those that have an issue, and that they
are defiled by the dead. Wherefore, I have thought it well, previous to
attempting the full elucidation of the matter, to adduce two passages,
by way of preface, from whence the design of God may more fully appear.
When, in this passage from Deuteronomy, He commands the people to “take
heed” and “observe diligently” the plague of leprosy, there can be no
question but that He thus ratifies what He had before set forth at
greater length in Leviticus. And, first of all, He refers the judgment
of the matter to the priests, that what they pronounce should be firm
and unalterable; and secondly, He would have the priests, lest they
should pronounce rashly, and according to their own wishes, to follow
simply what He prescribed to them, so that they may only be the
ministers, or heralds; whilst, as to the sovereign authority, He alone
should be the Judge. He confirms the law which He imposes by a special
example; because He had cast out Miriam, the sister of Moses, for a
time, lest her uncleanness during her leprosy should defile the camp.
For the view which some take, that He exhorts the people lest, through
sin, they should bring upon themselves the same evil as Miriam, is not
to the purpose. But that which I have stated makes excellent sense,
viz., that God’s command, whereby He prohibited Miriam from entering the
camp, was to have the force and weight of a perpetual law; because He
thus ordained what He would always have done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 5:1-3](cc04004)
