[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04141)  [Next](cc04143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span><span
id="iv.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
23:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**21.** When thou shalt vow a vow unto
the LORD thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for the LORD thy God
will surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**21.** Si votum voveris Jehovae Deo tuo,
non tardabis illud solvere: alioqui requirendo requiret illud Jehova
Deus tuus abs to, et erit in to peccatum.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**22.** But if thou shalt forbear to vow,
it shall be no sin in thee.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span>**22.** Quod si abstinueris a vovendo,
non erit in to peccatum:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>**23.** That which is gone out of thy
lips thou shalt keep and perform; *even* a freewill offering, according
as thou hast vowed unto the LORD thy God, which thou hast promised with
thy mouth.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>**23.** quod egressum fuerit e labiis
tuis observabis, et facies sicut vovisti Jehovae Deo tuo liberaliter, et
sicut loquutus es ore tuo.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>**21.** *When thou shalt vow a vow.* The
rule of vowing also pertains to the keeping of the Third Commandment,
since, by vowing, men exercise themselves in the sanctification of God’s
name, and to promise anything to God is a kind of swearing. For what
between men is called a covenant or agreement, with respect to God is a
vow; and therefore it may be fitly called a sacred engagement, which not
only is made with God as its witness, but which is contracted with God
Himself. We have elsewhere cursorily touched upon certain oaths, such as
that of the Nazarites; but since that consecration was a part of God’s
worship, I have placed it under the First Commandment. Nor indeed did
Moses there treat directly of the obligation itself of the vow, but of
that exercise of piety which stimulated the people to the pursuit of
purity, sanctity, and sobriety. I have followed the same course as to
the free-will-offerings, which were certainly for the most part votive,
but I have considered what was the main thing in them without much
troubling myself as to what was accessory. But now under another head
Moses confirms what he taught before, that God’s name was not to be
taken in vain; therefore he commands them to pay their vows, by
withholding which the glory of God’s name is diminished, whilst He is
Himself defrauded of His right, and the promise ratified before Him is
set at nought. Moreover, it is to be observed that all the vows which
were ever acceptable to God were testimonies of gratitude, lest the
recollection of His benefits should fail, forgetfulness of which is too
apt to steal over us. When, therefore, the saints were conscious of
tardiness or listlessness in proclaiming His goodness, they made use of
this aid and spur, as it were, to correct their sloth. Thus, when they
asked anything of importance from God, they were often accustomed to
bind themselves by some promise as a manifestation of their
thankfulness. Such are the vows which Moses commands to be solemnly and
faithfully paid, that they might not cheat God when they had escaped
from peril or had obtained what they wished, whereas in their anxiety
they had been humbly suppliant. For we know with what facility or rather
levity many are hurried into making vows, who afterwards, with the same
fickleness, think little of breaking their promise.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>On this point, then, God justly rescues
His name from contempt, and to this end demands that what has been
promised to Him should be paid. But inasmuch as superstitious persons
apply this, or rather wrest it indiscriminately to all vows, their error
must be refuted, so that we may understand the genuine meaning of Moses.
The Papists would have all vows kept without exception, because it is
written, “Thou shalt not slack to pay whatever hath passed your lips.”
But a definition of vows must first be given, or at least we must see
what vows are lawful and approved by God; for if all vows must be
effectually kept, however rashly made, of old under the Law it would
have been right to kill their sons and daughters, to erect altars to
idols, and thus under this pretext the whole Law of God would have been
entirely brought to nought. Wherefore a distinction between vows must be
laid down, unless we wish to confound right and wrong. This then is the
first point, that nothing can be properly vowed to God, except what we
know to be pleasing to Him; for if “to obey is better than sacrifice,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>,) nothing surely can be more absurd than to
indulge ourselves in the liberty of serving God, each according to his
own fancy. If a Jew had vowed that he would sacrifice a dog, it would
have been sacrilege to pay that vow, since it was forbidden by God’s
Law. But inasmuch as there is an intermediate degree between that which
God has expressly prescribed and forbidden, it might be objected that it
was allowable to make a vow in respect to things which are called
indifferent. My reply to this is, that since the principle ought always
to be maintained by the godly, that nothing is to be done without faith,
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>[Ro
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>,)it must ever be considered whether a thing
is agreeable to God’s word, otherwise our zeal is preposterous.  <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>God formerly did not forbid many things
which He still was not willing to have offered to Him in worship; and so
now-a-days, although it would be lawful not to taste meat all our
lifelong, still if any one should vow perpetual abstinence with respect
to it, he would act superstitiously; since he would inconsiderately
obtrude upon God what we gather from His word that He does not approve.
Wherefore if all our vows are not reduced to this rule, there will be
nothing in them right and sure. Another very gross error in the Papists
may also be condemned, viz., that they foolishly promise God more than
they can pay. Assuredly it is more than blind arrogance, nay, diabolical
madness, that a mortal man should wish to present as if it were his,
what he has not received; as if any one should vow that he would not eat
during his whole life, or should renounce sleep and the necessary
supports of life, by common consent he would be convicted of madness. No
gift, then, can be acceptable to God, except what He in His goodness has
conferred upon us. But what is done in the Papacy? Monks, and nuns, and
priests, bind themselves to perpetual celibacy, and do not consider that
continency is a special gift; and thus whilst none of them has regard to
the measure of his ability, they wretchedly abandon themselves to ruin,
or envelop themselves in deadly snares. Besides, every one should
consider his vocation. A monk will vow himself to his abbot, and throw
off the paternal yoke: another, who was adapted for the transaction of
public business, will abandon his children under cover of the monastic
vow, and thus acquire immunity, Hence it appears, that whether a vow
should be kept or not, is to be estimated from the character of him that
vows. But a more gross and more common error is committed in respect to
the object of vows. I said above that the godly never made vows to God,
except in testimony of gratitude; whereas almost all the vows of the
superstitious are so many fictitious acts of worship, having no other
aim than to propitiate God by the expiation of sin, or to acquire favor
meritoriously. I will not pursue at length those more detestable
hallucinations whereby they defile themselves and their vows, when they
substitute their idols in God’s place; as for instance, when a man vows
 <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) an altar to Christopher or
Barbara. To sanction this barbarous impiety, this passage of Moses is
alleged, which certainly contains something quite different, viz., that
those who vow to any other being, pervert the worship of God; and in
which also Moses takes it for granted that a vow is not accounted
legitimate, except what is made to God Himself in accordance with the
rules of religion and the prescription of the Law. Thus in this exordium
the doctrine is laid down, that guilt is incurred unless what is
promised is paid.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span>**22.** *But if thou shalt forbear to
vow.* He confirms what he said, that they would be guilty before God who
have broken their promises to Him, because no necessity compelled them
to promise, and consequently that their guilt was doubled, inasmuch as
they chose rather to sin when it was at their option not to vow. Thus
Peter, reproving the faithlessness of Ananias and Sapphira, says,  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span>"Who hath compelled you to lie to the
Holy Ghost? was not the field your own, which you might have retained?
but now to defraud God of part of the price, is impious hypocrisy.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>[Ac
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span>Meanwhile God indirectly inculcates
sobriety in vowing, when He discharges them from it as a duty; as if He
had reminded them, that there was no reason why they should incur guilt
by idly promising what He does not require. And surely nothing is wiser
than to be very sparing of vows; since those who run into them
inconsiderately, either presently repent of them, or else pay them in a
servile manner, as if it were a task to which they are driven by force,
and not without annoyance and disgust, and thus destroy the grace of the
act. As to the words, “that which is gone out of thy lips,” they do not
refer to the ceremony, on which the Jew’s as usual too unscrupulously
insist; but He puts a restraint by them on vowing, to which we are of
ourselves but too much inclined. Whence it is said in <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>[Ps.
66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span>"I will go into thy house with
burnt-offerings; I will pay these my vows, which my lips have uttered,
and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble;"

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>although the Prophet intimates that in
his sore straits he had always retained his composure and presence of
mind, so as expressly to implore God’s help, and to manifest his
constancy and confidence by making vows, still it is signified at the
same time that he did not precipitately utter empty words, but spoke
with serious reflection. And indeed since the tongue of many is too
voluble, and goes before their heart, the main obligation of vows is not
to be sought in the act of their utterance; but, to make them truly
complete, a mutual agreement is required between the heart and tongue.
The same expression will often occur again; and its repetition shews
that it is meant to remove the scruples of the weak, lest  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) as soon as any desire to vow shall
have entered their minds, they should fancy that it imposes a religious
obligation. We know that among heathen nations, in the solemn dedication
of their temples, a priest was appointed who should  <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) first recite the words; by which
ceremony they were reminded that nothing is duly offered to God except
He Himself should dictate it, as it were. I allow that this reason was
but little considered by them; nevertheless, by their example, God would
condemn all levity, or inconsiderate fervor in sacred offerings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc04142.htm#fr_311) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>Nos
voeus sont pervers et esgarez.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc04142.htm#fr_312) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>Une
chapelle a sainct Christofle, ou a saincte Barbe.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc04142.htm#fr_313) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span> It will be seen that *C*. paraphrases,
and does not quote literally the words of St. Peter.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc04142.htm#fr_314) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.1"></span>Afin
qu’ils ne se forgent point un remors de conscience, si tost qu’il leur
sera renu en fantaste de vouer;” lest they should conceive a remorse of
conscience, as soon as they shall have taken a fancy to make a vow. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc04142.htm#fr_315) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>Pour
dicter, et suggerer les mots;” to dictate and suggest the words. “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.2"></span>Mos erat, ut in exsecrationibus, et
devotionibus, in foederibus, in dedicationibus, in votis, juramentis et
aliis hujusmodi, certa verba adhiberentur (quod *carmen* dicebatur) a
quibus ne minimum quidem licebat discedere. Itaque ne quo in verbo
peccaretur, praesto erat pontilex, aut sacerdos, qui vel memoriter, vel
de scripto dictabat, quae dicenda erant. Liv. 8:9; 31:17; Val. Max. 4:1,
10,” etc. — Facciolati in *voce Praeco*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 27:1-25,27-29](cc04143)
