[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04016)  [Next](cc04018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="ii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p2"></span><span id="ii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#019),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023)<span
id="ii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>-25, 27, 28

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p3"></span>**19.** Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou
shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow
thy field with mingled seed: neither shall a garment mingled of linen
and woollen come upon thee.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p4"></span>**19.** Statuta mea observabitis. Animal
tuum non facies coire cum altero semine. Agrum tuum non seres diverso
semine, et vestis contexta ex lana et lino non ascendet super te.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p5"></span>**23.** And when ye shall come into the
land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall
count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised: three years shall it be as
uncircumcised unto you: it shall not be eaten of.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p6"></span>**23.** Quum ingressi fueritis terram, et
plantaveritis omnis generis arborem fructiferam, tune praeputia-tum
ducetis praeputium ejus, fructum ejus: tribus annis erit vobis
incircumcisa: non comedetis ejus fructus.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p7"></span>**24.** But in the fourth year all the
fruit thereof shall he holy to praise the LORD *withal.*

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p8"></span>**24.** Quarto autem anno erit omnis
fructus ejus sanctitas laudum Jehovae.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p9"></span>**25.** And in the fifth year shall ye
eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you the increase
thereof: I *am* the LORD your God.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p10"></span>**25.** Anno vero quinto comedetis
fructum ejus, ut multiplicet vobis fructum suum. Ego Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p11"></span>**27.** Ye shall not round the corners
of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p12"></span>**27.** Non attondebitis cornare
ca-pitis vestri in circuitu, nec radetis extrema barbie.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p13"></span>**28.** Ye shall not make any cuttings
in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you: I *am* the
LORD.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p14"></span>**28.** Incisionera pro mortuo non
facietis in carne vestra, neque sculp-turam notse tacietis in vobis: ego
Jellova.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p15"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p16"></span><span id="ii.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p17"></span>**23.** *And when ye shall come.* There
seems to me no question but that the circumcision of trees as well as of
men appertains to the First Commandment, not only that the Jews might
see a symbol of their own adoption in the very trees, but that they
might learn that it was permitted to none but the children of God to
feed on their fruit; and also that whatsoever the earth produces is in a
manner profane, until it is purified. For surely by this ceremony was
set forth what Paul teaches, that all things are “sanctified by the word
of God, and prayer,” (<span id="ii.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>[1Ti
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span
id="ii.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>;) not that anything is in itself impure,
but because the earth has contracted pollution from the corruption of
man, it is just, as regards us, that the harmless fruits also should be
accounted to be in uncircumcision. In sum, God would raise up a wall
whereby He might separate His people from the Gentiles, and at the same
time admonish them that a legitimate use of those things which the earth
produced could not be made by the sons of Adam, except by special
privilege. But the similitude of uncircumcision*,* until the year
appointed for their being circumcised, was a very appropriate one, that
they might acknowledge the fruits of their trees to be pure for them by
the same right whereby they were consecrated as God’s peculiar people.
But, lest the three years’ unproductiveness should press heavily upon
them, he promises them compensation from the future blessing of God;
for, if they should abstain from eating the unclean fruit, a larger
produce was to be expected in future.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p18"></span><span id="ii.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p19"></span>**27.** *Ye shall not round the
corners.* It clearly appears that God had no other object than by the
interposition of this obstacle to sever His people from heathen nations.
For there is nothing to which men are more prone than to conform
themselves to the customs of others; and hence it arises, that they
mutually communicate each other’s vices. Wherefore care was especially
to be taken lest the people of Israel should adopt foreign habits, and
by this pliableness should fall away from the true worship of God; from
whence too the ordinary phrase has arisen, that the word “common” should
be used for “unclean.” God then strictly forbids them from declining to
the habits of the Gentiles, and confounding the distinction which He had
Himself placed between them. There is no doubt but that it was usual for
the Gentiles, out of superstition, to cut marks  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p21"></span>*"*All the *castes* of the Hindoos bear
on their foreheads, or elsewhere, what are called *sectarian* marks,
which not only distinguish them in a civil, but in a religious point of
view, from each other."

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p22"></span>"Herodotus observes that the Arabs
shave, or *cut their hair round,* in honor of Bacchus; (lib. 3. ch. 8).
He says, also, that the Macians, a people of Lybia, *cut their hair
round,* so as to leave a tuft on the top of the head; (lib. 4. ch. 175."

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p23"></span>"That the ancients were very violent in
their grief, tearing the hair and face, beating the breast, etc., is
well known. Virgil represents the sister of Dido: — <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>Unguibus ora — foedans, et pectora pugnis.
AEn. iv. 672.” — Adam Clarke, *in loco.*

} upon their faces, to trim the hair in certain steps or circles, and in
their mourning to lacerate their flesh, or to disfigure it with marks.
It is well known that the priests of Cybele  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) made gashes in their flesh with knives
and razors, and covered themselves all over with wounds, for the sake of
shewing their zeal. The same thing was also commonly practiced by
others; inasmuch as the world is easily deceived by external ceremonies.
But though this were a thing in itself indifferent, yet God would not
allow His people to be at liberty to practice it, that, like children,
they might learn from these slight rudiments, that they would not be
acceptable with God, unless they were altogether different from
uncircumcised foreigners, and as far as possible from following their
examples; and especially that they should avoid all ceremonies whereby
their religion was testified. For experience teaches how greatly the
true worship of God is obscured by anything adscititious, and how easily
foul superstitions creep in, when the comments of men are tacked on to
the word of God. Doubtless that part, “Ye shall not make any cuttings in
your flesh for the dead,” etc., might be expounded as a correction of
immoderate grief; because we know how intemperately men set themselves
against God when they give the reins to their sorrow; but since the
object of the Gentiles was to pay what was due to the dead, and to
celebrate their funeral obsequies  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)
as a kind of propitiation, it is probable, and more suitable, that by
the whole context those preposterous gestures are condemned, which were
proofs of piety among the Gentiles, but which would have been
defilements to the people of God.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p27"></span>The same thing appears more clearly from
the passage in Deuteronomy, which next follows, wherein Moses condemns
cutting themselves, and making themselves bald for the dead in
connection with each other, as if they were one thing; and confirms the
law by a general argument, that they might withdraw themselves from
every pollution as the children of God; since they were chosen to be His
peculiar people; as much as to say, that God’s grace would be altogether
frustrated, if they did not differ at all from foreign nations. As to
his saying that they were chosen out of all the nations, it does not a
little illustrate the gratuitous mercy of God, wherewith He honored them
alone, by calling them to the hope of eternal salvation, and passing by
the Gentiles; for there was no nobility found in them, nor did they
exceed others either in number or in any other superiority, on account
of which He should prefer them to the whole world. But the design of
Moses in magnifying the extraordinary goodness of God, was that they
might the more abhor that impure cornmixture, which, by bringing them on
a par with the Gentiles, degraded them from this high honor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc04017.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p20"></span> “Most of the barbarous nations lately
discovered have their faces, arms:, breasts, etc., curiously carved or
*tattooed,* probably for superstitious purposes. Ancient writers abound
with accounts of marks made on the faces, arms, etc., in honor of
different idols; and to this the inspired penman alludes, (<span
id="ii.vi.iii-p20.1"></span>[Rev.
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016), [Rev.
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009)<span
id="ii.vi.iii-p20.1"></span>, etc.), where false worshippers are
represented as receiving in their hands, and in their forehead, the
marks of the beast. These were called <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p20.2"></span>στίγματα among the Greeks, and to these St.
Paul refers when he says, “I bear about in my body the marks (<span
id="ii.vi.iii-p20.3"></span>στίγματα) of the Lord Jesus.".(<span
id="ii.vi.iii-p20.4"></span>[Ga
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span id="ii.vi.iii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc04017.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p24"></span> The authorities for this practice of
the *Galli,* or Priests of Cybele, are too numerous to mention. The
following extract from a curious description given by Apuleius, of the
religious dance of her worshippers, may suffice: “<span
id="ii.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>Die sequenti variis coloribus indusiati, et
deformiter quisque formarti, facie coenoso pigmento delita, et oculis
obunctis graphice, prodeunt; mitellis, et crocotis, et carbasinis, et
bombycinis injecti. Quidam tunicas albas, in modum lanciolarum
quoquoversum fluente purpura depictas, cingulo subligati, pedes luteis
induti calceis, Deamque serico contectam amiculo mihi gerendam imponunt:
brachiisque suis humero tenus renudatis, attollentes immanes gladios ac
secures, evantes exsiliunt, incitante tibiae cantu lymphaticum
tripudium.

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p25"></span>"<span id="ii.vi.iii-p25.1"></span>Nec
paucis pererratis casulis, ad quandam villam possessoris beati
perveniunt, et ab ingressu primo statim absonis ululatibus
constrepentes, fanatice pervolant. Diuque capite demisso, cervices
lubricis intorquentes motibus, crinesque pendulos rotantes in circulum,
et nonnunquam morsibus suos incursantes musculos, ad postremum ancipiti
ferro, quod gerebant, sua quisque brachia dissecant.” — Metam. (lib. 8,
Edit). (Bipont. 1. 184-185)

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc04017.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.vi.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>Et
user de satisfactions pour racheter leurs ames;” and to offer
satisfactions for the redemption of their souls. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Clean and Unclean Beasts](cc04018)
