[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04083)  [Next](cc04085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p2"></span><span id="iii.v.vii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#001)<span
id="iii.v.vii-p2.1"></span>, 22, 23

<span id="iii.v.vii-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD said unto Aaron, Thou
and thy sons and thy father’s house with thee shall bear the iniquity of
the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity
of your priesthood.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p4"></span>**1.** Et dixit Jehova ad Aharon, Tu et
filii tui, et domus patris tui tecum, portabitis iniquitatem sanctuarii:
tu quoque et alii tui tecum portabitis iniquitatem sacerdotii vestri.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p5"></span>**2.** And thy brethren also of the tribe
of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou with thee, that they may be
joined unto thee, and minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with
thee *shall minister* before the tabernacle of witness.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p6"></span>**2.** Et etiam fratres tuos, tribum
Levi, tribum patris tui, accedere fac ad te, et adhaereant tibi,
ministrentque tibi: tu autem et filii tui tecum stabitis coram
tabernaculo testimonii.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p7"></span>**3.** And they shall keep thy charge,
and the charge of all the tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the
vessels of the sanctuary and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also,
die.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p8"></span>**3.** Et custodient custodiam tuam, et
custodiam totius tabernaculi: veruntamen ad vasa sanctitatis, et ad
altare non accedent, ne moriantur tam ipsi quinn vos.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p9"></span>**4.** And they shall be joined unto
thee, and keep the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, for all
the service of the tabernacle: and a stranger shall not crone nigh unto
you.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p10"></span>**4.** Et adhaerebunt tibi, et
custodient custodiam tabernaculi conventionis ad omnem cultum
tabernaculi: externus autem non accedet ad vos.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p11"></span>**5.** And ye shall keep the charge of
the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar: that there be no wrath any
more upon the children of Israel.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p12"></span>**5.** Custodietis igitur custodiam
sanctuarii, ne sit posthac indignatio contra filios Israel.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p13"></span>**6.** And I, behold, I have taken your
brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel: to you *they
are* given *as* a gift for the LORD, to do the service of the tabernacle
of the congregation.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p14"></span>**6.** Ego enim ecce, sumpsi fratres
vestros Levitas e medio filiorum Israel vobis donum datos, Jehovae ut
ministrent in cultu tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p15"></span>**7.** Therefore thou and thy sons with
thee shall keep your priest’s office for every thing of the altar, and
within the vail; and ye shall serve: I have given your priest’s office
*unto you* as a service of gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall
be put to death.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p16"></span>**7.** Tu autem et filii tui tecum
custodietis sacerdotium vestrum in omni ratione altaris, et intra velum
exequemini ministerium: munus dedi sacerdotii vobis, itaque extraneus
qui acceder morietur.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p17"></span>**22.** Neither must the children of
Israel henceforth come nigh the tabernacle of the congregation, lest
they bear sin, and die.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p18"></span>**22.** Neque accedent posthac filii
Israel ad tabernaculum conventionis, ut portent iniquitatem ad
moriendum.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p19"></span>**23.** But the Levites shall do the
service of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they shall bear their
iniquity: *it shall be* a statute for ever throughout your generations,
...

<span id="iii.v.vii-p20"></span>**23.** Sed ipsi Levitse facient opus;
tabernaculi conventionis, et ipsi portabunt iniquitatem suam statuto
perpetuo per generationes vestras.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p21"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.vii-p22"></span><span id="iii.v.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p23"></span>**1** *And the Lord said unto Aaron,
Thou and thy sons.* By this solemn appeal God stirs up the priests to
devote themselves to their duty with the greatest fidelity and zeal, for
He declares that if anything should be done contrary to the requirements
of religion, they should be accounted guilty of it, since those are said
to “bear the iniquity of the sanctuary” who sustain the crime and the
punishment of all its pollutions. God would have the sanctuary kept
clear from every stain and defect; and also the dignity of the
priesthood was to be maintained in chastity and pureness; a heavy
burden, therefore, was imposed upon the priests when they were set over
the holy things as their guardians, on this condition that if anything
were done amiss they were to be exposed to punishment, because the blame
rested on them; just as if God had said that negligence alone was
tantamount to sacrilege. Thus their honor, conjoined as it was with so
much difficulty and danger, was by no means to be envied.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p24"></span>In this way did God admonish them that
the legal rites were of no trifling importance, since he so severely
avenged all profanations of them; for thus it was easily to be gathered
that something far more excellent and altogether divine was to be sought
for in these earthly elements. This may also be very properly applied
spiritually to all pastors, to whom blame is justly imputed, if religion
and the holiness of God’s worship be corrupted, if purity of doctrine
impaired, if the welfare of the people endangered, since the care of all
these things is entrusted to them.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p25"></span><span id="iii.v.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p26"></span>**2.** *And thy brethren also.* He here
assigns their duties to the Levites, that they also may minister, but,
as it were, under the hand of the priests, viz., that they may be ruled
by their commands. Thus the authority was in the hands of the priests,
but the Levites afforded them their assistance. On this ground they are
prohibited from approaching the altar, or entering the greater
sanctuary; in fact, a lower degree is assigned to them, half-way between
the priests and the people. Hence did all learn how reverently God’s
majesty must be served; for although He had adopted the whole people,
yet so far was it from being lawful that any of the multitude should
penetrate to the altar, that the Law even kept back the Levites from
thence, although they were God’s peculiar ministers. Moreover, in this
figure, we perceive how necessary is a Mediator for us to conciliate
God’s favor towards us; for, if it was not allowable for the holy and
chosen seed of Abraham to approach the typical sanctuary, how should we,
who were aliens,  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) now penetrate
to heaven, unless a way of access were opened to us through Christ?
Finally, when He forbids strangers from meddling with holy things, He
does not mean only foreigners, but all the people, except the tribe of
Levi; for here a distinction is drawn, not between the Church and
heathen nations, but between the ministers of the sanctuary and the rest
of the people.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p28"></span><span id="iii.v.vii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p29"></span>**5.** *And ye shall keep the charge.*
He again exhorts the priests to be diligent in the performance of their
office, with the addition of a denunciation of punishment if they failed
in zeal and earnestness. Nor does He now threaten them alone, but the
whole people; neither does this contradict the foregoing declaration,
inasmuch as the common fault of all by no means lightened theirs. Nay,
if God punished the innocent people on account of the pollution of the
sanctuary, how much heavier a punishment awaited the priests,
(*antistites,*) by whose fault the sin was committed, so that they might
be justly accounted its authors. Meanwhile let us learn from this
passage how sincerely we ought to demean ourselves in the service of
God, the profanation of which is intolerable to Him. Moreover, in order
that the priests might engage themselves in their duties more actively,
and with greater sedulity, He shews that they cannot give way to
idleness without base ingratitude, since they reign in a manner over the
whole tribe of Levi, or at any rate they hold the supremacy among their
brethren. An indirect reproof of their negligence, if they do not
faithfully fulfill their duties, is implied, when God reminds them that
He has of His liberality honored them with the priesthood. “I have
appointed your office, as a gift,”  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) *i.e.,* I have gratuitously conferred
on you what was otherwise yours by no right. Others read it differently,
viz., “I have appointed your priesthood as a ministration of gift:” but
since the meaning amounts to the same thing, nor does it make any
difference in the main, we may freely take our choice.

<span id="iii.v.vii-p31"></span><span id="iii.v.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p32"></span>**22.** *Neither must the children of
Israel.* He again inculcates what he had before said, that the Levites
were chosen to attend to the sacred things; since God would not admit
all the people promiscuously, as before the giving of the Law, when
others also offered the sacrifices. But, nevertheless, He strongly
charges them that they should be attentive to the performance of their
duties, since, if any of them should offend, their crime would be fatal;
for so we must understand His words, “they shall bear their iniquity
 <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) to die:” just as in the next
verse He says that they shall be guilty of all the pollutions, for, if
the service of God should be defiled by inadvertency, the crime shall be
imputed to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc04084.htm#fr_199) <span
id="iii.v.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p27"></span> “<span id="iii.v.vii-p27.1"></span>Qui
estions estrangers, et rejettez au pris d’eux.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc04084.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iii.v.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p30"></span> “<span
id="iii.v.vii-p30.1"></span>Donum posui munus vestrum.” — *Lat.* “I have
given your office *unto you as* a service of gift.” — *A. V.* The latter
part of the sentence is omitted in *Fr.*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc04084.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iii.v.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii-p33"></span> See margin, *A. V.* He paraphrases the
words of verse 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 4:4-20,24-28,31-33](cc04085)
