[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04099)  [Next](cc04101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p2"></span><span
id="iii.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p3"></span>**1.** The priests the Levites, *and*
all the tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel:
they shall eat the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and his
inheritance.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p4"></span>**1.** Non erit sacerdotibus Levitis: et
toti tribui Levi portio et haereditas cum reliquo Israele, oblationes
ignitas Jehovah, et haereditatem ejus comedent.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p5"></span>**2.** Therefore shall they have no
inheritance among their brethren: the LORD *is* their inheritance, as he
hath said unto them.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p6"></span>**2.** Et haereditas non erit illi in
medio fratrum suorum, Jehova est haereditas ejus, quemadmodum dixit
illi.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p7"></span>**3.** And this shall be the priest’s
due from the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether *it be*
ox or sheep; and they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the
two cheeks, and the maw.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p8"></span>**3.** Istud autem erit jus sacerdotum a
populo, quoad sacrificantes sacrificium, sive bovem, sive agnum, dabunt
sacerdoti armum, et maxillas, et ventriculum.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p9"></span>**4.** The firstfruit *also* of thy
corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy
sheep, shalt thou give him.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p10"></span>**4.** Primitias frumenti tui, vini
tui, et olei tui, et primitias velleris ovium tuarum dabis illi.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p11"></span>**5.** For the LORD thy God hath chosen
him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of the LORD,
him and his sons for ever.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p12"></span>**5.** Ipsum enim elegit Jehova Deus
tuus e cunctis tribubus ruts, ut stet administrandum nomini Jehovae,
ipse et filii ejus omnibus diebus.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p13"></span>**6.** And if a Levite come from any of
thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourned, and come with all the
desire of his mind unto the place which the LORD shall choose;

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p14"></span>**6.** Quum autem venerit Levita ex
allqua portarum tuarum, ex omni Israele, ubi ipse peregrinabitur, et
venerit toto desiderio animae suae ad locum quem elegerit Jehova:

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p15"></span>**7.** Then he shall minister in the
name of the LORD his God, as all his brethren the Levites *do,* which
stand there before the LORD.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p16"></span>**7.** Ministrabit nomini Jehovae Dei
sui, dent omnes fratres ejus Levitin qui stant illic coram Jehova.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p17"></span>**8.** They shall have like portions to
eat, besides that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p18"></span>**8.** Partera similem parti altorum
comedent, praeter venditiones ejus ad partes.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p19"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p20"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p21"></span>**1.** *The priests, the Levites, and
all the tribe of Levi.* This chapter contains three principal heads; for
*first,* God shews that there was no reason why the Israelites should be
aggrieved at paying tithes to the Levites, and at remitting the
first-fruits and other oblations to the priests, since this tribe was
deprived of their inheritance. *Secondly,* He obviates all quarrels, and
prevents unlawful gains and pilferings, by assigning their just share to
the priests and Levites. *Thirdly,* He defines how the oblations should
be parted among them, and what part of the victims the priests were to
take. As to the first clause, since God was as it were the lot of their
inheritance, they justly claimed to themselves the right which he had
transferred to them. If it were disagreeable to the people that their
revenue should be tithed, God came as it were between, and declaring
that it was His property in His right as King, appointed the Levites to
be His stewards and collectors for receiving it. There was then no
ground for any one to raise a dispute, unless he chose professedly to
rob God. But this declaration often occurs; since it was of great
importance that the people should be assured that God accounted as
received by Himself what He had assigned to the Levites; not. only lest
any portion should be withheld from them, but also that every one should
willingly pay the lawful dues of God’s ministers; and again, lest any
should wickedly murmur because the first-fruits and some portion of the
sacrifices were appropriated for the subsistence of the priests. Another
reason is also expressed, why the honor assigned to the priests should
be paid without grudging; viz., because God had appointed them to be the
ministers of His service; but “the laborer is worthy of his hire."

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p22"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p23"></span>**3.** *And this shall be the priests’
due.* It is not only for the sake of the priests that God enumerates
what He would have them receive, that they may obtain what is their own
without murmuring or dispute; but He also has regard to the people, lest
the priests should basely and greedily take more than their due; which
sacred history relates to have been done by the sons of Eli, (<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p23.1"></span>[1Sa
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#023)<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p23.1"></span>,) for they had advanced to such a degree
of licentiousness, that, like robbers, they seized violently on whatever
their lust desired. Lest therefore they should give way to this gross
covetousness, God prescribes to them certain limits, to which they were
to confine themselves, so that if they transgressed them, it was easy
for any of the people to convict them of avarice.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p24"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p25"></span>**6.** *And if a Levite come.* This
third head more clearly explains what is elsewhere more obscurely
declared; for God seemed to curtail from the Levites whatever He gave to
the priests. But He now more distinctly places the priests in the first
rank, yet so that they should admit the Levites on the score of their
labor’s to a share of the oblations. This is the sum of the law, that
the Levites who remained at home, should be content with the tithes, and
touch nothing of the other offerings; but that from whithersoever they
should come to the sanctuary, they were to be accounted as ministers and
take their proper place. By this law then, it was provided that none
should be excluded on the ground of the intermission of their duties;
and that the condition of those that dwelt elsewhere should not be worse
than of those who lived at Jerusalem. For although they might reside in
other cities, they did not altogether cease from their ministry, since
they had other duties to perform besides that of sacrificing the
victims. Yet those who entirely devoted themselves to the work of the
sanctuary, were endowed by God with double honor; since it was by no
means just that they should be defrauded of their maintenance, who bade
adieu to domestic cares and labors, and occupied themselves totally in
holy offices. That this distribution was not superfluous, will best
appear from the narrative of Josephus, who relates that the  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) priests seized on the tithes by
violence, and deprived the Levites of their subsistence by hostile
measures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc04100.htm#fr_225) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p26"></span> About this time King Agrippa gave the
high priesthood to Ismael, who was the son of Fabi. And such was the
impudence and boldness that had seized on the high priests, that they
had the hardiness to send their servants into the threshing-floors, to
take away those tithes that were due to the priests; insomuch that it so
fell out that the poorer sort of the priests died for want.” — Whiston’s
Josephus. Antiq. 20 ch. 8, sec. 8. See also ch. 9, sec. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sacred Oblations (Lev. 24:5-9)](cc04101)
