[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04133)  [Next](cc04135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#000)<span id="iii.xi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.xi.vii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
23:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p3"></span>**3.** An Ammonite or Moabite shall not
enter into the congregation of the LORD; even to their tenth generation
shall they not enter into the congregation of the LORD for ever:

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p4"></span>**3.** Non ingredietur Ammonita et
Moabita congregationem Jehovae: etiam generatione decima non ingredietur
congregationem Jehovae usque in saeculum.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p5"></span>**4.** Because they met you not with
bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt; and
because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of
Mesopotamia, to curse thee.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p6"></span>**4.** Eo quod non exceperint vos cum
pane et aqua in via, posteaquam egressi estis ex Aegypto, et quod
mercede conduxerit adversum te Bileam filium Beor de Pethor e
Mesopotamia Syriae, ut malediceret tibi.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p7"></span>**5.** Nevertheless the LORD thy God
would not hearken unto Balaam; but the LORD thy God turned the curse
into a blessing unto thee, because the LORD thy God loved thee.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p8"></span>**5.** Sed noluit Jehova Deus tuus
audire Bileam, et convertit Jehova Deus tuus tibi maledictionem in
benedictionem, quod diligeret to Jehova Deus tuus.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p9"></span>**6.** Thou shalt not seek their peace
nor their prosperity all thy days for ever.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p10"></span>**6.** Non quaeres pacem eorum et bonum
eorum cunctis diebus tuis, in saeculum.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p11"></span>**7.** Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite;
for he *is* thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou
wast a stranger in his land.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p12"></span>**7.** Non abominaberis Edoaemum, quia
frater tuus est: non abominaberis Aegyptium, quia peregrinus fuisti in
terra ejus.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p13"></span>**8.** The children that are begotten
of them shall enter into the congregation of the LORD in their third
generation.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p14"></span>**8.** filii qui nascentur eis
generatione tertia ingredientur congregationem Jehovae.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p15"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p16"></span><span id="iii.xi.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p17"></span>**3.** *An Ammonite or Moabite shall
not enter.* As God has lately prohibited His people from all connection
and alliance with the Canaanitish nations, so He now distinguishes
between the aliens, and shews upon what conditions, and whom they might
admit (into the Church.  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) ) The
Moabites and Ammonites He altogether rejects; because they not only
refused the common rites of humanity to the people, but also took arms
against them, and even hired Balaam to curse them. They were the
descendants of Lot, and ought to have embraced the children of Abraham
as brethren. It was, then, inexcusable barbarity in them to make a
violent attack upon those who had voluntarily offered them peace; who
had promised by their messengers that they would make their way without
injury or wrong; and who finally had besought that a passage might be
granted them, provided they honestly paid the price of bread and water;
although doubtless God took vengeance rather on their impiety than their
cruelty, since they had not only endeavored to make His goodness of none
effect, but also to annihilate His faithfulness. Since, therefore, it
was not their fault that the Church did not perish, and the effect of
His promise fail, whereon the salvation of man was based, and this they
had done knowingly and wilfully, no wonder that they were excluded from
the Church.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p19"></span><span id="iii.xi.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p20"></span>**4.** *And because he hired.*  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) Although there was a common reason why
both nations should not be admitted, yet the number of the verb seems to
be changed designedly, because Balac king of Moab hired Balaam; yet,
inasmuch as they conspired together, the same crime is justly imputed to
the Ammonites. Herein indeed their detestable impiety especially
betrayed itself, that by hiring a mercenary man, to launch the thunders
of his curse against the people, they sought to overwhelm God by magical
incantations. Nor did they err through ignorance, since they obstinately
persevered in their madness until Balaam was confounded from heaven. And
on this ground it is expressly stated that he was not “hearkend unto,”
but that rather his curses and prayers were “turned into a blessing.”
Hence it appears how awful is the vengeance which awaits all who of
deliberate malice oppose God’s grace and the welfare of the Church. Thus
now-a-days no stone is left unturned by the defenders of the Papacy,
whereby they may disturb the course of heavenly doctrine, nay, whereby
they may altogether silence the Gospel if they could.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p22"></span>Since another reason for this rejection
is plainly signified, it is foolish in some to attribute this sentence
upon them to their origin, as if the Ammonites and Moabites were
excluded from the Church because they sprang from an incestuous
connection.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p23"></span><span id="iii.xi.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p24"></span>**7.** *Thou shalt not abhor an
Edomite.* In order that the punishment denounced against the Moabites
and Ammonites should be more strongly marked, he commands the Edomites
and Egyptians to be admitted in the third generation; the former,
because they derived their origin from the same ancestor, Isaac, since
they were the descendants of Esau; the latter, because they had been
their hosts. For hence it was manifest that the Ammonites and Moabites
had been dis-honored on account of their guilt, when not even aliens
were thus dealt with. Now, although Esau had cut himself off from the
prerogative of believers, yet the door was again opened to his children,
provided they returned to their source and origin, and in the humility
of faith admitted the primogeniture of Jacob, who had been chosen when
their father was passed by or degraded. But what is meant by this
inequality of punishment, when the crime was identical? for Edom
appeared in arms against Israel before Moab, and compelled them to take
their journey by another way. It did not contend with hired imprecations
for Israel’s destruction, but since, when humbly entreated on the score
of their old relationship, it had not only refused them a passage, but
had advanced against them with a great army, it should have been dealt
with no less severity than Amalek or Ammon. Besides, being connected to
them by a closer of blood, the Edomites were less excusable in their
hostility. I find, then, no reason why God shewed greater clemency to
them than the others whom He treated more severely; except that He
wished to shew that it depends on His own will to chastise more lightly
in some the same sins on which He takes more severe vengeance in others;
and, inasmuch as all are deserving of utter destruction, He justly
retains in His own hand the free right of sparing whom He will. We must
here adore His judgments, into the depths of which we cannot penetrate.
Nor is this inequality a ground for the noisy cavils of the ungodly, as
if He were inconsistent with Himself, and acted in contradiction to the
rules of His Law; since in so doing He does not judge in diverse ways,
but, condemning all alike, indulges whom He pleases, or remits a part of
their punishment. A question may also arise as to the Egyptians, why God
lays His people under an obligation to them, because they sojourned in
their land. For it was barbarous and inhospitable cruelty in them to
oppress the wretched fugitives who had trusted to their good faith. But
God here refers to their first reception; as in <span
id="iii.xi.vii-p24.1"></span>[Isa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004)<span
id="iii.xi.vii-p24.1"></span>, where, comparing the Egyptians with the
Assyrians, He says that the latter oppressed them like robbers, whilst
the former had ruled over them not without a cause, because the people
had gone down thither of their own accord. Although, therefore, the
Israelites had been unworthily oppressed by their fierce tyranny, still
God would have their old kindness acknowledged; since their dearth and
famine had been relieved, and the refugees were kindly received, when
the inhabitants of Canaan were perishing of hunger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc04134.htm#fr_304) <span
id="iii.xi.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p18"></span> Added from Fr.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc04134.htm#fr_305) <span
id="iii.xi.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p21"></span> *A. V. “They* hired.” *Malvenda* in
Poole’s Syn. “<span id="iii.xi.vii-p21.1"></span>*Hebrews et conduxit,*
nempe Moabita.” Ainsworth’s translation is, “because that they met you,
etc., — and *he hired,* etc."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 17:2-5,7](cc04135)
