[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04008)  [Next](cc04010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
15](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
15:1-33](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses and
to Aaron, saying,

<span id="ii.iii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen
et Aharon, dicendo,

<span id="ii.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say unto them, When any man hath a running issue out of his flesh,
*because of* his issue he *is* unclean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Loquimini ad filios Israel, et
dicite eis, Unusquisque quum semen ejus defluet de carne sua, immundus
est.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** And this shall be his uncleanness
in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be
stopped from his issue, it *is* his uncleanness.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Haec vero erit immunditia ejus in
semine ipsius, si emittat caro ejus semen suum, vel clauserit carnem
suam semine suo, immunditia ejus est.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Every bed whereon he lieth that
hath the issue is unclean: and every thing whereon he sitteth, shall be
unclean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p10"></span>**4.** Onme stratum in quo jacuerit qui
patitur fluxum seminis, immundum erit: et omne id super quo sederit,
immundum erit.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** And whosoever toucheth his bed
shall wash his clothes, and bathe *himself* in water, and be unclean
until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p12"></span>**5.** Quicunque item tetigerit lectum
ejus, lavabit vestimenta sua, posteaquam laverit sese aqua: eritque
immundus usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p13"></span>**6.** And he that sitteth on *any* thing
whereon he sat that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe
*himself* in water, and be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p14"></span>**6.** Et qui sederit super alquid super
quo sederit seminifluus, lavabit vestimenta sua, posteaquam laverit se
aqua: eritque immundus usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p15"></span>**7.** And he that toucheth the flesh of
him that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe *himself* in
water, and be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p16"></span>**7.** Qui vero tetigerit carnem
seminiflui, lavabit vestimenta sua, posteaquam laverit sese aqua:
eritque immundus usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p17"></span>**8.** And if he that hath the issue spit
upon him that is clean; then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe
*himself* in water, and be uncleau until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p18"></span>**8.** Et si despuerit seminifluussuper
mundum, lavabit vestimenta sua posteaquam laverit se aqua: eritque
immundus usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p19"></span>**9.** And what saddle soever he rideth
upon that hath the issue shall be unclean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p20"></span>**9.** Et omne sagma super quo
equitaverit seminifluus, immundum erit.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p21"></span>**10.** And whosoever toucheth any thing
that was under him shall be unclean until the even: and he that beareth
*any of* those things shall wash his clothes, and bathe *himself* in
water, and be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p22"></span>**10.** Atque omnis qui tetigerit omne
quitquid fuerit subter eum, immundus erit usque ad vesperam et qui
portaverit ea, lavabit vestimenta sua, posteaquam laverit sese aqua:
eritque immundus usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p23"></span>**11.** And whomsoever he toucheth that
hath the issue, and hath not rinsed his hands in water, he shalt wash
his clothes, and bathe *himself* in water, and be unclean until the
even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p24"></span>**11.** Omnis autem quem tetigerit
seminifluus, et manus suas non abluerit aqua, lavabit vestimenta sua:
posteaquam laverit sese aqua: eritque immundus usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p25"></span>**12.** And the vessel of earth that he
toucheth which hath the issue, shall be broken: and every vessel of wood
shall be rinsed in water.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p26"></span>**12.** Et vas fictile quod tetigerit
seminifluus, confringetur: onme auterm vas ligneum lavabitur aqua.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p27"></span>**13.** And when he that hath an issue is
cleansed of his issue; then he shall number to himself seven days for
his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running
water, and shall be clean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p28"></span>**13.** Quum autem mundatus fuerit
seminifluus a fluxusuo, numerabit sibi septem dies ab emundatione sua,
lavabitque vestimenta sua, posteaquam laverit quoque carnem suam aqua
viva: et mundus erit.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p29"></span>**14.** And on the eighth day he shall
take to him two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and come before the
LORD unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and give them
unto the priest:

<span id="ii.iii.i-p30"></span>**14.** Die vero octava capiet sibi duos
turtures, aut duos pullos columbinos, venietque coram Jehova ad ostium
tabernaculi conventionis, et tradet eos sacerdoti.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p31"></span>**15.** And the priest shall offer them,
the one *for* a sin offering, and the other *for* a burnt offering: and
the priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD for his
issue.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p32"></span>**15.** Quos sacrificabit sacerdos, unum
pro peccato, et alterum in holocaustum: et emundabit illum sacerdos
coram Jehova a fluxu ipsius.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p33"></span>**16.** And if any man’s seed of
copulation go out from him, then he shall wash all his flesh in water,
and be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p34"></span>**16.** Quum autem ex aliquo egressa
fuerit effusio seminis, lavabit aqua totam carnem suam: immun-dusque
erit usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p35"></span>**17.** And every garment, and every
skin, whereon is the seed of copulation, shall be washed with water, and
be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p36"></span>**17.** Et omnis vestis, omnisque pellis
super quam fuerit aliquid de effusione seminis, lavabitur aqua et
immunda erit usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p37"></span>**18.** The woman also with whom man
shall lie *with* seed of copulation, they shall *both* bathe
*themselves* in water, and be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p38"></span>**18.** Mulier quoque cum quo dormierit
vir patiens effusionem seminis, lavabitur aqua et immunda erit usque ad
vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p39"></span>**19.** And if a woman have an issue,
*and* her issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be put apart seven
days: and whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p40"></span>**19.** Mulier autem quum fuerit fluens
sanguine, et erit fluxus ejus per carnem ejus, septem diebus erit in
separatione sua: et omnis qui tetigerit eam*,* immundus erit usque ad
vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p41"></span>**20.** And every thing that she lieth
upon in her separation shall be unclean: every thing also that she
sitteth upon shall be unclean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p42"></span>**20.** Et omne super quo jacuerit
separatione sua, immundum erit: omne quoque super quo sederit, immundum
erit.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p43"></span>**21.** And whosoever toucheth her bed
shall wash his clothes, and bathe *hinself* in water, and be unclean
until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p44"></span>**21.** Omnis praeterea qui tetigerit
lectum ejus, lavabit vestimenta sua, et lavabit sese aqua: immundusque
erit usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p45"></span>**22.** And whosoever toucheth any thing
that she sat upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe *himself* in water,
and be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p46"></span>**22.** Omnis etiam qui tetigerit
quamcunque sedem super quam sederit, lavabit vestimenta sua, posteaquam
laverit sese aqua: immundusque erit usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p47"></span>**23.** And if it *be* on *her* bed, or
on any thing whereon she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall be
unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p48"></span>**23.** Quod si instrumentum aliquod
fuerit super stratum ipsum, vel super sellam super quam sederit: quum
tetigerit illud aliquis, immundus erit usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p49"></span>**24.** And if any man lie with her at
all, and her flowers be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days; and
all the bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p50"></span>**24.** Quod si dormiendo dormierit quis
cum ea*,* et fuerit immunditia ejus super eum, immundus erit septem
diebus: et omne stratum super quo dormierit, immundum erit.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p51"></span>**25.** And if a woman have an issue of
her blood many days out of the time of her separation, or if it run
beyond the time of her separation; all the days of the issue of her
uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation: she *shall be*
unclean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p52"></span>**25.** Mulier autem, quum fluet fluxum
sanguinis ultra menses suos: cunctis diebus fluxus immunditiae suae erit
sicut diebus menstrui sui, immunda est.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Every bed whereon she lieth all
the days of her issue shall be unto her as the bed of her separation:
and whatsoever she sitteth upon shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of
her separation.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p54"></span>**26.** Omne stratum in quo dormierit
cunctis diebus fluxus sui, sicut stratum menstrui sui erit, et omnis
sedes super qua sederit, immunda erit secundum immunditiam menstrui sui.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p55"></span>**27.** And whosoever toucheth those
things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe *himseIf*
in water, and be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p56"></span>**27.** Quicunque tetigerit cam immundus
erit, lavabitque vestimenta sua, et lavabit se aqua, immundusque erit
usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p57"></span>**28.** But if she be cleansed of her
issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she
shall be clean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p58"></span>**28.** Quod si mundata fuerit a fluxu
suo, tunc numerabit sibi septem dies, et postea mundabitur.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p59"></span>**29.** And on the eighth day she shall
take unto her two turtles, or two young pigeons, and bring them unto the
priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p60"></span>**29.** Die autem octava tollet sibi duos
turtures, aut duos pullos columbinos: afferetque illos ad sacerdotem ad
ostium tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p61"></span>**30.** And the priest shall offer the
one *for* a sin offering, and the other *for* a burnt offering; and the
priest shall make an atonement for her before the LORD for the issue of
her uncleanness.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p62"></span>**30.** Et faciet sacerdos unum in
hostiam pro peccato, et alterum in holocaustum: emundabitque illam
sacerdos coram Jehova a fluxu immunditiae suae.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Thus shall ye separate the
children of Israel from their uncleanness; that they die not in their
uncleanness, when they defile my tabernacle that *is* among them.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p64"></span>**31.** Separabitque filios Israel ab
imnmnditias suas, ne moriantur propter immunditias suas, dum polluertint
tabernaculum, quod est in medio eorum.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p65"></span>**32.** This *is* the law of him that
hath an issue, and *of him* whose seed goeth from him, and is defiled
therewith;

<span id="ii.iii.i-p66"></span>**32.** lsta est lex patientis fluxum
seminis, et ejus ex quo egreditur effusio seminis, ut sit immundus
propter illam.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p67"></span>**33.** And of her that is sick of her
flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of the woman,
and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p68"></span>**33.** Et aegrotantis in fluxu suo, et
ejus qui profundit fluxum suum, sive sit masculus, sive foemina, et viri
qui dormierit cum immunda.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p69"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii.i-p70"></span><span id="ii.iii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p71"></span>**2** *When any man hath a running
issue.* He here alludes to other species of contamination, for which a
solemn purification is required. And, first, he teaches that men are
defiled by the flow of the seminal fluid, which occurs in two ways,
either when it involuntarily bursts out in sleep, or when it escapes
gradually in the disease, which the Greeks call <span
id="ii.iii.i-p71.1"></span>γονόρ᾿ῥοια This Supplement might, as I have
said, be appended to the Seventh Commandment, because every  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) indisposition arising from lust appears
here to be condemned; but, if we look more closely, we shall perceive
that it is a general law for the cultivation of purity, and which must
*not* be confined to chastity alone. For this flux, arising from disease
and debility, unless it be contracted from immoderate venery, has
nothing in common with venereal lust. Besides, what is immediately after
added concerning the menstruation of women, is connected with other
forms of uncleanness and defilement. The sum then is, that the
seminal-flux is reckoned among the pollutions which prevented the
Israelites from entering the tabernacle, and from the external service
of God; and thence the rule must always be borne in mind, that whatever
proceeds from an unclean man is corrupt, and that no one can duly offer
either himself, or what he possesses, to God, except he who is pure and
perfect in soul and body. Thus Paul explains the end and object of this
ceremony, when he exhorts believers that, being received as God’s
peculiar people, they should cleanse themselves

<span id="ii.iii.i-p73"></span>"from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit.”  
(<span id="ii.iii.i-p73.2"></span>[2Co
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="ii.iii.i-p73.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iii.i-p74"></span>But Moses further declares, that
uncleanness is contracted, not only when the seed is emitted, but when
it is retained; and that not only is the man himself rendered unclean,
but whatever he may have touched — his bed, his seat, his saddle, his
clothes; and that the contagion extends to others also, if any should
have lain on the same bed, or ridden on the same saddle. Thus did God
desire to impress them with horror, that they might be more accustomed
to fly from all impurity. Nor would the crime have been detestable: in
itself, had not spiritual purity been set forth under this external
exercise and symbol. Thus, too, in (<span
id="ii.iii.i-p74.1"></span>[Ps. 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004)<span id="ii.iii.i-p74.1"></span>),
the truth of this figure is described:

<span id="ii.iii.i-p75"></span>"Who shall ascend into the hill of the
Lord? or who shall stand in His holy place? He that hath clean hands,
and a pure heart."

<span id="ii.iii.i-p76"></span>Therefore he who was conscious of no sin
in the seminal-flux, still must be reminded by this sign of the
corruption of his nature; and at the same time be an example to others,
that all should diligently take heed to themselves, because corruption
cleaves to the whole human race. In the ablution the remedy of the evil
was proposed, since the mark of ignominy induced them to repentance. It
is expedient that whosoever is infected with any stain should be brought
to shame, so as to be displeased with himself; but the acknowledgment of
the evil would produce despair, unless the hope of pardon were
associated with it. Therefore, those to whom purification was necessary,
are always sent to water; and, whenever water is mentioned, the passage
in St. John should be brought to mind, that Christ came “by water and
blood,” to purge and expiate all uncleanness. (<span
id="ii.iii.i-p76.1"></span>[1Jo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006)<span id="ii.iii.i-p76.1"></span>.)
Besides the water, a sacrifice of turtle doves, or two young pigeons is
added; and this has reference to the same thing; viz., that purification
for the unclean must be sought for elsewhere, which we have at length
obtained by the sacrifice of Christ.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p77"></span><span id="ii.iii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p78"></span>**19.** *And if a woman have an issue.*
Women are now spoken of who suffer under a twofold issue of blood; for
with almost all it occurs every month, (whence it is called *menses,* or
*menstruation,*) and some labor under a constant hemorrhage. He declares
both to be unclean; and, after menstruation, a certain period of
separation is appointed, during which the law prohibited their
cohabitation with men; but, if the blood flowed beyond the usual time,
the time of purification is postponed until it ceased. Whence it
appears, that in every shameful thing the Jews were reminded of their
uncleanness, that thus they might be accustomed to modesty and seek
after purity. And this still more clearly appears at the end of the
chapter, where it is said, (v. 3l,) “Thus shall ye separate the children
of Israel from their uncleanness; that they die not — when they defile
my tabernacle.” God, I say, briefly sets forth His intention that He
would drive away all profanation far from His people; because he desires
sincerity to prevail amongst his worshippers, and cannot bear his
tabernacle to be polluted by any stain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc04009.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p72"></span> “<span id="ii.iii.i-p72.1"></span>Toute
intemperance de la chair et *lubricite,* qu’on appelle.” — *Fr.* The
negative is here added from the *Fr*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Other Defects Which Exclude Men From Tabernacle](cc04010)
