[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04094)  [Next](cc04096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p2"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p2.1"></span>[Num.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#024)<span id="iii.vii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p3"></span>**20.** And the LORD spake unto Aaron,
Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have
any part among them: I *am* thy part and thine inheritance among the
children of Israel.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p4"></span>**20.** Dixit autem Jehova ad Aharon, De
terra eorum haereditatem non habebis, nec portio erit tibi in medio
eorum: ego portio tua, et haereditas tua in medio filiorum Israel.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p5"></span>**21.** And, behold, I have given the
children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their
service which they serve, *even* the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p6"></span>**21.** Filiis autem Levi ecce dedi omnes
decimas in Israele in haereditatem pro ministerio eorum quia ipsi
exequuntur ministerium tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p7"></span>**23.** ... that among the children of
Israel they have no inheritance.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p8"></span>**23.** Et in medio filiorum Israel non
possidebunt haereditatem.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p9"></span>**24.** But the tithes of the children of
Israel, which they offer *as* an heave offering unto the LORD, I have
given to the Levites to inherit: therefore I have said unto them, Among
the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p10"></span>**24.** Decimas enim filiorum Israel
quas offerent jehovae in elevationem, dedi Levitis in haereditatem:
idcirco dixi de illis, In medio filiorum Israel non possidebunt
haereditatem.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.i-p12"></span><span
id="iii.vii.i-p12.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p13"></span><span
id="iii.vii.i-p13.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#019)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p14"></span>**19.** Take heed to thyself that thou
forsake not the Levite as long as thou livest upon the earth.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p15"></span>**19.** Cave autem tibi ne derelinquas
Levitam omnibus diebus tuis super terrain tuam.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p16"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.i-p17"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p18"></span>**20** *And the Lord spake unto Aaron.*
This passage only refers in general to the payment of those tithes which
were common to all the Levites. We shall soon afterwards see that the
Levites, by God’s command, paid other tithes to the priest; and a third
sort will be added, which were only offered every third year. As to the
present passage, God requires tithes of the people for the maintenance
of the tribe of Levi. It is indeed certain that the custom had existed
of old among the ancient patriarchs before the Law, that they should vow
or offer tithes to God, as appears from the example of Abraham and
Jacob. Moreover, the Apostle infers that the priesthood of Melchisedec
was superior to that of the Law, because, when Abraham paid him tithes,
he also received tithes of Levi himself. (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p18.2"></span>[Ge
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p18.2"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.i-p18.3"></span>[Ge
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p18.3"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.i-p18.4"></span>[Heb
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p18.4"></span>.) But there were two different and special
reasons for this payment of tithes, which God ordained by Moses. First,
because the land had been promised to the seed of Abraham, the Levites
were the legitimate inheritors of a twelfth part of it; but they were
passed over, and the posterity of Joseph divided into two tribes:
unless, therefore, they had been provided for in some other way, the
distribution would have been unequal. Again, forasmuch as they were
employed in the sanctuary, their labor was worthy of some remuneration,
nor was it reasonable that they should be defrauded of their
subsistence, when they were set apart for the performance of the sacred
offices, and for the instruction of the people. Two reasons are
consequently laid down why God would have them receive tithes from the
rest of the people, viz., because they had no part in Israel, and
because they were engaged in the service of the tabernacle. Besides,
God, who as their King laid claim to the tithes as His own right,
resigns them to the Levites, and appoints them to be as it were His
representatives. To this the words, “I am thine inheritance,” refer.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p19"></span>The manner in which the tithes were
employed will be seen afterwards in its proper place: it will be
sufficient now to remember that the part which God had taken away from
them and transferred to the sons of Joseph was thus compensated for; and
since they were withdrawn from domestic cares, that in the name of all
the people they might be more at liberty for, and more intent upon,
sacred things, an income for their maintenance was thus given them.
Wherefore the Papal priests draw a silly inference, when they claim the
tithes for themselves, as if due to them in right of the priesthood;
else must they needs prove that those, whom they call the laity, are
their tenants, as if they were themselves the lords of the twelfth part
of all landed property; and again, it would be sacrilege to appropriate
the tithes to their own use, and to possess other lands of which they
receive the rent. Nor does that expression of the Apostle, which they no
less dishonestly than ignorantly allege, help them at all,

<span id="iii.vii.i-p20"></span>"The priesthood being changed, the right
also is at the same time transferred.” (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p20.1"></span>[Heb
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.i-p21"></span>The Apostle there contends, that
whatever the Law had conferred on the Levitical priests now belongs to
Christ alone, since their dignity and office received its end in Him.
These blockheads, just as if they had robbed Christ, appropriate to
themselves the honor peculiar to Him. If they duly performed their
duties, and, giving up all earthly business, devoted themselves
altogether to the instruction of the people, and to the execution of all
the other offices of good and faithful pastors, unquestionably they
ought to be maintained by the public; as Paul correctly infers that a
subsistence is now no less due to the ministers of the Gospel than of
old to the priests who waited at the altar, (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p21.1"></span>[1Co
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p21.1"></span>;) but under this pretext they unjustly lay
hands on the tithes, as if they were their owners, and with still
greater impudence accumulate landed properties and other revenues.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p22"></span>It is probable that when the Roman
Emperors  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) first professed
themselves Christians, either induced by just and proper feelings, or
out of superstition, or impressed with a pious solicitude that the
Church should not be without ministers, they gave the tithes for the
maintenance of the clergy; for whilst the Roman State was kee, the
people used to exact tithes from their tributary nations. And this was
the case, too, where there were kings; for the Sicilians  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) paid tithes before the Romans obtained
dominion over them. Moreover, if there was a scarcity of corn in the
city, the senate demanded a second tithe of the provinces. *Nay,* we
gather from <span id="iii.vii.i-p24.1"></span>[1Sa
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p24.1"></span>, that it was a most ancient custom for
kings to receive tithes; so that we need not be surprised that the
Romans should have imitated this example. Whence we may infer that, when
the Emperors wished to bestow a maintenance on pastors out of the public
stock, they rather chose a tenth than any other proportion, that they
might imitate God. And in fact some traces of this still remain; for the
tithes do not everywhere belong to the priests; and it is well known
that a good part of them are swallowed up by monks and abbots, who were
not formerly reckoned among the clergy. I need not say that some lands
are tithe free. But how would the Pope have allowed them to be held by
laymen, if, by divine right, (as they stupidly prate,) they had been the
sacred inheritance of the clergy? In conclusion, inasmuch as titlies are
to be counted amongst public imposts and tributes, let not private
individuals refuse to pay them, unless they wish to destroy the
political state and government of kingdoms; but let pious princes take
care to correct abuses, so that idle bellies may not devour public
revenues which are devoted to the Church.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p25"></span>*I am thy part.* I have just before
explained the meaning of this clause, viz., that, because the Levites
were excluded from the common inheritance, God compensates this loss out
of what is His, as if they received it from His hand; as much as to say,
that He in Himself afforded a supply abundantly sufficient for their
remuneration. Meanwhile, they are commanded to be contented in Him
alone. Nor can we doubt but that David alludes to this passage when he
exclaims,

<span id="iii.vii.i-p26"></span>"The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance; the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places,” (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p26.1"></span>[Ps
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p26.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.vii.i-p27"></span>for he intimates not only that God is
more to him than all earthly wealth, but that in comparison with Him all
that others accounted to be most excellent and delectable was worthless.
Since now we are all made priests in Christ, this condition is imposed
upon us, that we should seek no other portion. Not that we are actually
to renounce all earthly goods, but because our felicity is so securely
based on Him, that, contented with Him, we should patiently endure the
want of all things, whilst those who possess anything should be no less
free and unentangled than as if they possessed nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc04095.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p23"></span> “The common opinion is, that it was in
the fourth century, when magistrates began to favor the Church, and the
world was generally converted from heathenism. Some think Constantine
settled them by law upon the Church, but there is no law of
Constantine’s now extant that makes express mention of any such thing. —
Before the end of the fourth century, as Mr. Selden not only confesses
but proves out of Cassian, Eugippius, and others, tithes were paid to
the Church.” — Bingham Antiq. B. 5, ch. 5, Section 3.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc04095.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p24"></span> By the “*Lex Hieronica,”* referred to
by Cicero *in C. Verrem.,* lib. 2:13, and 3:6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 27:30-33](cc04096)
