[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04097)  [Next](cc04099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
26](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p2"></span><span
id="iii.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
26:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p3"></span>**12.** When thou hast made an end of
tithing all the tithes of thine increase the third year, *which is* the
year of tithing, and hast given *it* unto the Levite, the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be
filled;

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p4"></span>**12.** Postquam compleveris decimare
omnes decimas fructuum tuorum anno tertio, anno decimae, et dederis
Levitae, peregrino, pupillo, et viduae, et comederint intra portas tuas,
et saturati fuerint:

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p5"></span>**13.** Then thou shalt say before the
LORD thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of mine house,
and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the
fatherless, and to the widow, according to all thy commandments which
thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed thy commandments,
neither have I forgotten *them*:

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p6"></span>**13.** Tunc dices coram Jehova Deo tuo,
Subduxi sanctificatum e domo, et etiam dedi illud Levitae, et peregrino,
pupillo, et viduae, secundum omne prtaeceptum tuum quod praecepisti
mihi: non transgressus sum a praeceptis tuis, neque oblitus sum.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p7"></span>**14.** I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning, neither have I taken away *ought* thereof for *any* unclean
*use,* nor given *ought* thereof for the dead: *but* I have hearkened to
the voice of the LORD my God, *and* have done according to all that thou
hast commanded me.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p8"></span>**14.** Non comedi in tristitia mea ex
eo, neque subduxi ex eo in pollutione, neque dedi quicquam ex eo in
funere: obedivi voci Jehovae Dei mei: feci secundum omnia qum
praecepisti mihi.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p9"></span>**15.** Look down from thy holy
habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land whieh
thou hast given us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, a land that
floweth with milk and honey.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p10"></span>**15.** Respice de habitaculo
sanctitatis tuae, e coelo, et benedic populo tuo Israeli, et terrae quam
dedisti nobis, quemadmodum juravisti patribus nostris, terrae fluenti
lacte et melle.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p12"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p13"></span>**12.** *When thou hast made an end of
tithing.* In this passage Moses urgently stimulates them to offer the
tithes willingly and abundantly, by placing God, as it were, before
their eyes, as if they paid them into his hand: for a solemn
protestation is enjoined, in which they condemn themselves as guilty
before God, if they have not faithfully paid the tax imposed upon them;
but they pray for grace and peace if they have honestly discharged their
duty. For nothing can be more awakening to men, than when  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) God is introduced as the judge of any
particular matter. This is the reason why he commands them to protest in
God’s sight that they have obeyed His ordinance in the payment of their
tithes. To separate, or “bring away out of the house,” is equivalent to
their being conscious of no fraud in withholding from God what was His;
and thus that they were guiltless of sacrilege, since they had not
diverted anything holy to their private use. What follows, “I have not
transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them,” must only
be referred to the matter in hand; for it would have been too great an
act of temerity and arrogance in them, to have boasted that they had
kept and fulfilled the Law in every part and parcel. Still this manner
of speaking signifies desire rather than perfection; as if they had
said, that it was the full purpose of their minds to obey God’s
precepts. We must remember, however, what I have said, that this
properly refers to the legal ceremonies. With the same meaning it is
soon after said, “I have done according to all that thou hast commanded
me:” for if they had gloried in their perfection, they had no need of
sacrifices, or other means of purification. But as I have just said, God
only invites them to examine themselves,  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) so that they may in sincerity of heart
call upon Him as the witness of their piety.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p16"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p17"></span>**14.** *I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning* (*tristitia*) It is clear that the sacred offerings are here
spoken of; but the question is, what is meant by eating in mourning?
This is the exposition received by almost universal consent; that
although want may have tempted them to theft and fraud, yet the people
assert that, even in their poverty and straits, they have abstained from
the hallowed things; and to this I willingly assent; although this word
“mourning” may be taken for the anxiety of a mind conscious of its
iniquity in this sense, “I have not knowingly and willingly eaten
anything consecrated to God, so that the hot iron (*cauterium*) of an
evil conscience should burn me, in the way in which man’s guilt ever
torments and troubles him.” As to the second clause, interpreters
differ. Some translate the word *‘*<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p17.1"></span>בער *bagnar,*  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) *“*to destroy:” as if it were said,
that they had suffered nothing to perish through uncleanness; but others
explain it, I have taken away nothing for a profane purpose. My own
opinion is, however, that the word *‘*<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p18.2"></span>טמא, *tama,* is used adverbially for
“impurely,” so that the people testify that they are not polluted, or
contaminated by withholding anything.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) Thus, in my idea, some do not badly
translate it “by uncleanness:” for it was not possible for the
Israelites to apply the tithes to other uses, without contracting
pollution by their wicked abuse of them. The ambiguity in the third
clause is still greater; literally it is, “I have not given thereof to
the dead.” In my version I have followed those who refer it to funeral
rites; but some suppose that the word “dead” is used metaphorically for
an unclean thing; others, in a less natural sense, for expenses, which
do not contribute to support man’s life. But it does not yet appear
wherefore it should he said that nothing had been spent on funeral
rites. It is true that whatever had touched a dead body was unclean; and
therefore some expound it, that the victims had not been polluted by any
connection with funeral preparations. But if this sense is preferred,
the expression must be taken by *synecdoche* for anything unclean. My
own opinion however, is, that under this particular head all things are
included which have a shew of piety. The burial of the dead was a
praiseworthy office and a religious exercise;  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) so that it might afford a colorable
pretext for peculiar laxity; in this word, therefore, God would have the
Israelites declare, that they offered no excuse if they had misemployed
any of the consecrated things.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p21"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p22"></span>**15.** *Look down from thy holy
habitation.* Whilst they are commanded to offer their prayers and
supplications, that God would bless the land, on this condition, that
they had not defiled themselves by any sacrilege, at the same time they
are reminded, on the other hand, that God’s blessing was not else to be
hoped for. Meanwhile the expression is remarkable, “Bless the land which
thou hast given us, a land that floweth with milk and honey:” for we
infer from hence that the land was not so much fertile by nature, as
because God daily watered it by His secret blessing to make it so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc04098.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.iv-p14.1"></span>Il
n’y a rien qui esveille mieux les hommes, et les touche plus au vif, que
quand Dieu leur est amend et produit pour juge, et qu’ilsont adjournez
comme en sa presence:” there is nothing which awakens men more, or
touches them more on the quick, than when God is brought forward and
produced as their Judge, and when they are summoned as it were into His
presence. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc04098.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p15"></span> The *Fr.* gives a different turn to
this, “<span id="iii.vii.iv-p15.1"></span>seulement Dieu les a voulu
aussi examiner, en les faisant tesmoins et juges de leur syncerite et
rondeur:” God only wished them also to make an examination, calling
themselves as witnesses of their own sincerity and integrity.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc04098.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p18.1"></span>בער, is to *consume,* and especially as
fire consumes. The verb is here in Pihel, in which conjugation it
further signifies to *carry away,* as rendered in *A.V*. Our author
gives the paraphrase of Aben Ezra, as quoted in *S. M.* — W.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc04098.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.iv-p19.1"></span>En
rien appliquant a soy de ce qui appartenoit a Dieu:” by appropriating
anything to themselves of what belonged to God. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc04098.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p20"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p20.1"></span>Telle apparence pouvoit enhardir les gens a
y employer les offertes deues a Dieu:” this pretext might embolden the
people to employ upon it the offerings due to God. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 18:25-32](cc04099)
