[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04086)  [Next](cc04088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.x"></span>

<span id="iii.v.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.x-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.x-p2"></span><span id="iii.v.x-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
17:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008)<span id="iii.v.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.x-p3"></span>**8.** If there arise a matter too hard for
thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and
between stroke and stroke, *being* matters of controversy within thy
gates: then shalt thou arise, and get thee up into the place which the
LORD thy God shall choose;

<span id="iii.v.x-p4"></span>**8.** Si quid latuerit te in judicio inter
sanguinem et sanguinem, inter causam et causam, et inter plagam et
plagam, in rebus rixarum, intra portas tuas, tunc surges, et ascendes ad
locum quem elegerit Jehova Deus tuus.

<span id="iii.v.x-p5"></span>**9.** And thou shalt come unto the priests
the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and
enquire; and they shall shew thee the sentence of judgment:

<span id="iii.v.x-p6"></span>**9.** Et venies ad sacerdotes, Levitas, et
ad judicem qui fuerit in diebus illis, et quaeres, et indicabunt tibi
verbum judicii.

<span id="iii.v.x-p7"></span>**10.** And thou shalt do according to the
sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shall choose shall
shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they
inform thee:

<span id="iii.v.x-p8"></span>**10.** Et facies juxta verbum quod
indicaverint tibi e loco illo quem elegerit Jehova, et observabis facere
secundum omnia quae docuerint te.

<span id="iii.v.x-p9"></span>**11.** According to the sentence of the
law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which
they shall tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the
sentence which they shall shew thee, *to* the right hand, nor *to* the
left.

<span id="iii.v.x-p10"></span>**11.** Secundum legem quam docuerint re,
et secundum judicium quod dixerint tibi, facies: non declinabis a verbo
quod indicaverint tibi, ad dextram, aut ad sinistram.

<span id="iii.v.x-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.x-p12"></span><span id="iii.v.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.x-p13"></span>**8** *If there arise a matter too hard
for thee.* The principal office of the priests is here described under a
single head, viz., that they should declare what was right in doubtful
and obscure matters out of the Law of God; for although God seems only
to refer to civil controversies, yet there is no doubt but that by
*synecdoche* He appoints them to be interpreters of the doctrine of the
Law. That their authority might be more reverenced in general, He
commands the people to acquiesce in their judgment even on the most
disagreeable points: for if their sentence is to be submitted to where a
man’s life is in question, or when any disputes are to be settled, much
more is all exception taken away with respect to God’s worship and
spiritual doctrine. I confess that the priests are not the sole judges
here appointed, but that others of the people are associated with them
as colleagues, yet the dignity of the priesthood is especially exalted.
The opinion which some hold, that the high priest alone is intended by
the word judge, is easily refuted; because Moses distinctly enumerates
the priests, the Levites, and the judge. But it is probable that there
is by *enallage* a change of number in it; for it appears from the
sacred history that several were appointed, where Jehoshaphat is related
to have chosen “of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of
the fathers of Israel” to preside at Jerusalem in judgment. (<span
id="iii.v.x-p13.1"></span>[2Ch
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008)<span id="iii.v.x-p13.1"></span>.)
Assuredly the pious king would have been unwilling to depart in the very
least degree from the rule of the Law, and his zeal is praised by the
Holy Spirit Himself: but this was the arrangement made, as appears a
little further on, that the high priest held the primacy “in matters of
the Lord,” and the king’s governor attended to civil causes and earthly
affairs. And thus again is confirmed what I have lately adverted to,
*i.e.,* that the office of teaching was entrusted to the priests, that
they might solve any difficult questions, which is also supported by the
words of Jehoshaphat, when he says, “And what cause soever shall come to
you of your brethren — between blood and blood, between law and
commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they
trespass not against the Lord.” (<span id="iii.v.x-p13.2"></span>[2Ch
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#010)<span
id="iii.v.x-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.x-p14"></span>Certainly, as the cognisance of capital
crimes properly belonged to judges of the other tribes, so
determinations as to precepts and statutes, and the interpretation of
the whole Law, was the peculiar province of the priests; nor can we
doubt but that the words of Malachi, (<span
id="iii.v.x-p14.1"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iii.v.x-p14.1"></span>,)
“the priests’ lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law
at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts,” were taken
from this passage. Now, to come to the sum of this, God appoints the
seat of judgment to be at the sanctuary; for, although in the first
verse He seems to nominate the priests and judges indiscriminately to
the decision of earthly quarrels, yet in the fourth verse from this He
sufficiently shews that another province is committed to the priests,
*i.e.,* to keep the people in sound and pure doctrine, and to expound
what is right — in a word, to be the teachers of the Church. But,
although the people were to assent to whatever they should decide, so
that it would be sinful for them to decline from it to the right hand or
the left, yet a tyrannical power was not thus put into their hands, as
if, when they had arbitrarily changed light into darkness, their
perverted decisions were to be deemed oracular. Their interpretation was
to be received without appeal; yet, on the other hand, this rule was
prescribed to them, that they should speak as from the mouth of God. It
is true that the word here used is, <span
id="iii.v.x-p14.2"></span>תורה,  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205)
*thorah;* which, although it means teaching, yet undoubtedly signifies
that teaching which is comprised in the Law, nay, it is equivalent to
the word law. And of this Jehoshaphat is a faithful interpreter, when he
enumerates the divisions, of which Scripture everywhere shews the Law of
Moses to consist. Although <span id="iii.v.x-p15.7"></span>פי, *phi,*
taken metaphorically, is equivalent in Hebrew to discourse, yet it here
emphatically expresses the sentence which shall be taken from the pure
teaching of the Law. The children of Israel, therefore, are commanded to
do what the priests shall have taught them; but how? according to the
sentence taken from the Law. Nor can it be doubted but that God at the
same time furnished those, whom He desired to exalt to such a high
dignity, with the spirit of understanding and rectitude, that they might
not deliver any improper sentence. And this also is conveyed by the
promise, “They shall shew thee the sentence of judgment:” since it would
have been absurd that the people should have obeyed God in vain, and to
their own destruction. Since now one sole Priest, who is also our
Master, even Christ, is set over us, wo be unto us if we do not simply
submit ourselves to His word, and are not ready to obey Him, with all
the modesty and teachableness that becomes us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc04087.htm#fr_205) <span
id="iii.v.x-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.x-p15"></span> <span id="iii.v.x-p15.1"></span>על-פי
תורה, <span id="iii.v.x-p15.2"></span>[De
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011)<span id="iii.v.x-p15.2"></span>.
“According to the sentence of the law,” *A. V.* The noun <span
id="iii.v.x-p15.3"></span>תורה is avowedly formed from the verb, <span
id="iii.v.x-p15.4"></span>ירה whose most ordinary meaning in Hiphil is
*to teach.* Hence the noun in its primary meaning signifies *teaching.*
<span id="iii.v.x-p15.5"></span>פי is *the mouth,* and hence the
*voice,* which proceeds from it. <span id="iii.v.x-p15.6"></span>על-פי
according to *the word, or declaration.* —*. W.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rights of the Priests](cc04088)
