[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04035)  [Next](cc04037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xi-p1"></span><span id="ii.x.xi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#000)<span id="ii.x.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xi-p2"></span><span id="ii.x.xi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
20:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)<span id="ii.x.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xi-p3"></span>**1.** When thou goest out to battle
against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, *and* a people
more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the LORD thy God *is* with
thee, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="ii.x.xi-p4"></span>**1.** Quum egressus fueris ad praelium
contra hostes tuos ac videris equitatum, currus, et populum majorem te,
non metues ab illis: quia Jehova Dens tuus tecum est, qui te eduxit e
terra AEgypti.

<span id="ii.x.xi-p5"></span>**2.** And it shall be, when ye are come
nigh untothe battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the
people,

<span id="ii.x.xi-p6"></span>**2.** Et quum occurreritis ad praelium,
accedet sacerdos ad populum,

<span id="ii.x.xi-p7"></span>**3.** And shall say unto them, Hear, O
Israel; ye approach this day unto battle against your enemies: let not
your hearts faint; fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified
because of them;

<span id="ii.x.xi-p8"></span>**3.** Ac dicet illis, Audi Israel, vos
occurretis hodie ad praeliandum cum hostibus vestris: ne mollescat cor
vestrum, neque timeatis, neque terreamini, neque paveatis a facie eorum:

<span id="ii.x.xi-p9"></span>**4.** For the LORD your God *is* he that
goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.

<span id="ii.x.xi-p10"></span>**4.** Quoniam Jehova Deus vester incredit
vobiscum ad praeliandum pro vobis contra hostes vestros, et ad servandum
vos.

<span id="ii.x.xi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.x.xi-p12"></span><span id="ii.x.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xi-p13"></span>**1** *When thou goest out to battle.*
This law also, which concerns their political government, is a
Supplement to the First Commandment, enacting that they should carry on
their wars under the auspices of God, and, trusting in His help, should
follow Him as their leader. For it behoved them to give this proof of
their piety, so as to look to God not less in war than in peace, and not
to rest their hopes of safety on anything but the invocation of His
name. Whence we gather that the worship of God should be by no means
passed over in civil and earthly government; for, although its direct
object is to preserve mutual equity between men, yet religion always
ought to hold the first, place. The sum, therefore, is that, amidst the
very clang of arms, they must not be in such confusion as not to
recognize that they are under the guardianship of God, or to lose the
confidence they will be safe in reliance on His power. He does not,
however, encourage them rashly to engage in war, but takes it for
granted that there is a legitimate cause for it; because this would be a
gross abuse of God’s name, to seek a prosperous issue from Him, when we
are engaged in anything contrary to His command. But He forbids them to
fear, although the enemy should be superior in horses, in multitude, and
in all their warlike array; and in these words He reminds them that they
would not be liable to suffer defeat, because they were not supplied
with abundance of chariots and horses; for we have lately seen that not
even their kings were permitted to collect the forces in which the
Gentile nations gloried; and therefore, lest the consciousness of their
weakness should make them afraid, God declares that His strength would
be a sufficient safeguard to them. And without question that passage in
<span id="ii.x.xi-p13.1"></span>[Ps
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span id="ii.x.xi-p13.1"></span>,
is taken from hence, “Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we
will remember the name of the Lord our God.” On which score Isaiah
reproves the people, because, refusing the waters of Shiloah, they long
for great and rapid rivers; viz., as he elsewhere explains it, because
they trust in the horsemen of Egypt. (<span
id="ii.x.xi-p13.2"></span>[Isa. 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006),
[Isa. 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)<span
id="ii.x.xi-p13.2"></span>.) But we must observe upon what their
security is to be founded, viz., because the people ought to hope that
the same Divine power would be with them to the end, which their fathers
had experienced when they were redeemed from Egypt.

<span id="ii.x.xi-p14"></span><span id="ii.x.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xi-p15"></span>**2** *And it shall be, when ye are come
nigh.* God commits the duty of exhortation to the priests, when the time
of the conflict shall have arrived. But we gather from the expressions
used that this passage is supplementary to the First Commandment, for it
contains no more than that the priest should encourage the Israelites to
confidence, the ground of which is declared to be the help of God in
preserving and constantly protecting the Church, which He has once
redeemed. Moreover, He forbids their fears not in one word only, but
heaps many together, “let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not
tremble, neither be ye terrified.” By this we are reminded how difficult
it is to cure that evil — fear, which in so many different ways assails
and disturbs our minds, that they should not rest in God. And surely we
all experience that we are troubled by such various besetments, that we
have need of manifold remedies for the establishment of our faith. We
must observe, too, the familiar representation of the presence of God,
that He should go together with His people, to save them, viz., if they
should be exposed to danger not by their own fault, but by the unjust
aggression of their enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 10:1-10](cc04037)
