[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04010)  [Next](cc04012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** He that is wounded in the stones, or
hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the congregation of
the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p4"></span>**1.** Non ingredietur qui contusione
fractos aut abscissos habet testiculos, in congregationem Jehovae

<span id="ii.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** A bastard shall not enter into the
congregation of the LORD; even to his tenth generation shall he not
enter into the congregation of the LORD.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p6"></span>**2.** Non ingredietur spurius
congregationem Jehovae: etiam genereatione decima non ingredietur
congregationem Jehovae

<span id="ii.iv.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.i-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p9"></span>**1** *He that is wounded.* What is here
delivered respecting those who are mutilated, and who are bastards, has
a similar object; lest the Church of God should be onctaminate by foul
stains, and thus religion should lose its honor. Moses rejects from the
congregation of the faithful two sorts of men, viz, eunuchs and
bastards. But, before we treat of the subject itself, the definition of
the words is to be considered. The first question is, that it is to
enter into the congregation; the second, what it is to be wounded in the
stones; the third, who are the <span id="ii.iv.i-p9.1"></span>ממזרים,
*mamzerim*, which we have translated bastards, (<span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.2"></span>*spurios*). Many understand that both are
rejected from the church, lest they should undertake any public office
in it; others, lest they should marry wives of the seed of Abraham;
because it would not be fair that women should be thrown away upon
bastards, (*Lat,* <span id="ii.iv.i-p9.3"></span>*mamzeris;*) and it
would be absurd that those who were created to multiply God’s people,
should marry impotent persons, (<span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.4"></span>*effoeminatis*). But both these opinions appear
to me to be tame. For what is afterwards added respecting certain
foreign nations cannot be so taken, that no government or dignity should
be entrusted to them; besides, by “the congregation of the Lord,” the
purity and holiness of religion is sufficiently expressed. I do not
doubt, then, but that Moses prohibits those who are defiled by these two
stains from communicating in the sacrifices. For although they were
circumcised as well as the rest of the chosen people, still God would
have them bear this mark of their disgrace, that they might be an
example to others, and that the people might be more diligent in
preserving themselves from all pollution. This, then, is to be concluded
that the privilege which was peculiar to the legitimate Israelites, was
to be denied them of being participators and associates  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) in the sacrifices. As to the wounded
testicles, the Jews dispute more curiously, in my opinion, that the
subject warrants, and after all miss the right meaning. For God intended
nothing else than to exclude from the congregation of His people,
wherever holy assemblies were held, those who were mutilated or
defective in the genital organs; although by *synecdoche,* He
comprehends more than are specified. Finally, by condemning this
external bodily defect He commends the excellency of His people that
they may remember themselves to be His chosen property, not that they
should pride themselves upon it  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)
but that the holiness of their life may correspond with such high
nobility.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p12"></span><span id="ii.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p13"></span>**2.** *A bastard shall not enter*. All
agree that by the word <span id="ii.iv.i-p13.1"></span>ממזר, *mamzer*, a
bastard is signified, who is born of an uncertain father; but they take
it in different ways, For some extend it to all bastards who spring from
fornication, whilst others imagine that it refers to those only whose
origin is doubtful, and who are called *vulgo geniti*; viz, whose
mothers, in their base and common prostitution of themselves, have
brought it about by their gross licentiousness, that their children
should be born from this monstrous medley, as it were. This second
opinion I approve of most. But, by this symbol God would admonish the
seed of Abraham how exalted was its dignity, as being separate from the
polluted heathen. Meanwhile, He would not altogether exclude these
unhappy persons from the hope of salvation, although, by no fault of
their own, they were unable to give the name of their father; but He
only humbled them by a temporal punishment, and desired that their
example should be profitable to others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc04011.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.iv.i-p10.1"></span>Et
d’entrer au parvis pour faire service solennel a Dieu;” and to enter
into the court to perform solemn service to God — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc04011.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.iv.i-p11.1"></span>Mais
afin de se maintenir en sa grace par sainetete de vie;” but that they
might keep themselves in His favor by holiness of life—*Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The General Purification of the People](cc04012)
