[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04119)  [Next](cc04121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#000)<span id="iii.x.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.x.xii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
7:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p3"></span>**11.** And this *is* the law of the
sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p4"></span>**11.** Haec autem est lex sacrificii
prosperitatum, quod offerer Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p5"></span>**12.** If he offer it for a
thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving
unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with
oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p6"></span>**12.** Si pro gratiarum actione
obtulerit illud, tune offerer pro sacrificio gratiaram actionis,
placentas infermentatas versatas in oleo, et lagana infermentata uncta
oleo, et similam frictam una cum placentis illis versaris in oleo.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p7"></span>**13.** Besides the cakes, he shall offer
*for* his offering leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of
his peace offerings.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p8"></span>**13.** Cron placentis panis fermentati
offeret oblationem suam pro sacrificio gratiarum actionis prosperitatum
suarum.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p9"></span>**14.** And of it he shall offer one out
of the whole oblation *for* an heave offering unto the LORD, *and* it
shall be the priest’s that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p10"></span>**14.** Offeretque ex eo unum panem, ex
omni oblatione oblationem Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p11"></span>**15.** And the flesh of the sacrifice
of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that
it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p12"></span>**15.** Caro autem hostiae gratiarum
actionis prosperitatum ejus, in die oblationis ejus comedetur: non
relinquet ex eo usque mane.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p13"></span>**16.** But if the sacrifice of his
offering *be* a vow, or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same
day that he offereth his sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder
of it shall be eaten:

<span id="iii.x.xii-p14"></span>**16.** Quod si votum, vel spontaneum
fuerit sacrificium oblationis ejus, die quo ille obtulerit sacrificium
suum, comedetur, et sequenti die comedetur quod superfuerit ex co.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p15"></span>**17.** But the remainder of the flesh
of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p16"></span>**17.** Quodvero superfuerit de carne
sacrificii die tertia, igni comburetur.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p17"></span>**18.** And if *any* of the flesh of the
sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the third day, it
shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that
offereth it: it shall be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it
shall bear his iniquity.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p18"></span>**18.** Si autem comedendo comedatur
aliqnid de carne sacrificii prosperitatum ejus die tertia, non placebit
offerens illud, neque imputabitur illi, abominatio erit: et anima
comedens ex eo iniquitatem suam portabit.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p19"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xii-p20"></span><span
id="iii.x.xii-p20.1"></span>[Leviticus
22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#000)<span id="iii.x.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p21"></span><span id="iii.x.xii-p21.1"></span>[Lev.
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#030)<span id="iii.x.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p22"></span>**29.** And when ye will offer a
sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the LORD, offer *it* at your own will.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p23"></span>**29.** Quum vero sacrificaveritis
sacrificium gratiarum actionis Jehovae, in acceptationem vestri
sacrificabitis.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p24"></span>**30.** On the same day it shall be
eaten up; ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: I *am* the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p25"></span>30 Die ipsa comedetur: non relinquetus
usque mane ex eo; ego Jehova,

<span id="iii.x.xii-p26"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xii-p27"></span><span
id="iii.x.xii-p27.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="iii.x.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p28"></span><span
id="iii.x.xii-p28.1"></span>[Leviticus
19:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#005)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p29"></span>**5.** And if ye offer a sacrifice of
peace offerings unto the LORD, ye shall offer it at your own will.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p30"></span>**5.** Et quando sacrificaveritis
sacrificium prosperitatum Jehovae, in acceptationem vestri
sacrificabitis illud.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p31"></span>**6.** It shall be eaten the same day ye
offer it, and on the morrow: and if ought remain until the third day, it
shall be burnt in the fire.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p32"></span>**6.** Die quo sacrificaveritis
comedetur, et postridie: quod autem superfuerit usque ad diem tertium,
igni comburetur.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p33"></span>**7.** And if it be eaten at all on the
third day, it *is* abominable; it shall not be accepted.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p34"></span>**7.** Quod si comedendo comedatur die
tertio, profanum erit, neque placebit.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p35"></span>**8.** Therefore *every one* that eateth
it shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the hallowed thing
of the LORD: and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p36"></span>**8.** Et qui comederit illud, poenam
iniquitatis suae portabit: quia sanctitatem Jehovae polluit: et
excidetur anima ipsa e populis suis.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p37"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xii-p38"></span><span id="iii.x.xii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p39"></span>**<span
id="iii.x.xii-p39.2"></span>[Leviticus
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p39.2"></span>.** *And this is the law of the sacrifice.*
I have elsewhere  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) stated my
reasons for calling this kind of sacrifice “the sacrifice of
prosperities.” That they were offered not only in token of gratitude,
but when God’s aid was implored, is plain both from this and other
passages; yet in all cases the Jews thus testified that they
acknowledged God as the author of all good things, whether they returned
thanks for some notable blessing, or sought by His aid to be delivered
from dangers, or whether they professed in general their piety, or paid
the vows which they had made simply and without condition; for the
payment of a conditional vow was an act of thanksgiving. At any rate,
since in all they honored God with His due service, they gave proof of
their gratitude. Hence this name was justly given to these sacrifices,
because in them they either besought good success of Him, or
acknowledged that what they had already obtained was owing to His grace,
or asked for relief in adversity, or congratulated themselves on their
welfare and safety. Moses, however, distinguishes one kind, as it were,
from the others:, *i.e.,* the sacrifice of thanksgiving, whereby they
professedly returned thanks for some notable deliverance, which was not;
always offered.  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) In this case he
commands unleavened cakes fried in oil, wafers seasoned with oil, and
fine flour fried to be offered, together with leavened bread; and also
commands that the flesh of the sacrifice should be eaten on the day of
the oblation, so that none should be left. In vows and
free-will-offerings greater liberty is conceded, viz., that they might
eat the residue on the next day, provided they kept nothing till the
third day. In the passage which I have inserted from chapter 22, the
words I have translated “unto your acceptance,” might also be rendered
“unto His good-will,” (*in beneplacitum,*) for the gratuitous favor of
God is called <span id="iii.x.xii-p41.1"></span>רצון, *ratson.* The
meaning therefore is, if you would have your sacrifice accepted by God,
take care that none of the flesh should remain to the following day.
Others, however, understand it of man’s good-will, as if it were said,
“at your own will,” or “as it shall please you.” And I admit, indeed,
that the word <span id="iii.x.xii-p41.2"></span>רצון*, ratson,* is
sometimes used in this sense; but since in the same chapter  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) it can only be taken for God’s favor
or acceptance, I have preferred avoiding a variation; yet I make no
objection if any one likes the other reading better. But if my readers
weigh well the *antithesis,* when it is presently added, that if the
flesh should remain beyond the proper time  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) the sacrifice would not be pleasing to
God, they will agree with me. There is, indeed, an apparent discrepancy
here, since in this way Moses would command the voluntary sacrifice to
be eaten on the same day, which, however, he does not do. If we prefer
understanding it of the liberal feelings of men, he will exhort the
people cheerfully to offer their victims in thanksgiving. I have,
however, shewn the meaning which I approve of, and thus it will be easy
to reconcile these things, for God’s goodwill does not require this
similarity,  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) nor is it necessary
to observe the same mode of offering that they may be grateful; but they
are said to offer “unto their acceptance,” when they intermix no
corruption, but offer purely and duly. If the cause of this distinction
is asked, it is no clearer to me than is the variety between the bread
and wafers or cakes. It is certain, indeed, that God had a reason for
dealing more strictly or more indulgently; but to inquire now-a-days as
to things unknown, and which conduce not at all to piety, is neither
right nor expedient.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p45"></span><span id="iii.x.xii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p46"></span>**16.** *But if the sacrifice of his
offering.* I have observed a little above that it is not a conditional
but a simple vow which is here meant; because, if a person were under
the obligation of a vow,  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) his
payment was an act of thanksgiving, and thus his sacrifice was comprised
under the first head. But it would not be without absurdity that similar
things should be distinguished as if they differed. But inasmuch as many
made gratuitous vows, Moses combines this kind of sacrifice with the
free-will-offering, as standing in the same rank. It has also been
stated that the consecrated meats were not kept too long, lest they
should become tainted or putrified, and thus religion should fall into
contempt. Perhaps, too, vainglory was thus provided against; for if it
had been allowable to eat the meats salted, many would have made
ostentatious offerings without expense. God, therefore, imposed a
restraint, that they might offer their sacrifices more sparingly and
reverently. The penalty is added, that; the sacrifice would not be
acceptable to God, but rather abominable; and hence all who ate of them
would be guilty. Moreover, when Moses says that polluted sacrifices
would not be “imputed,” we may infer that those which are duly offered
come into account before God, so that He reckons them as things expended
for Himself. Still we must not, imagine them to be merits which lay Him
under obligation; but because He deigns to deal so liberally with us,
that no duty which we pay Him is useless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc04120.htm#fr_281) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p40"></span> *Vide,* p. 105.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc04120.htm#fr_282) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p41"></span> These words are omitted in *Fr.*

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc04120.htm#fr_283) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p42"></span> Viz., at <span
id="iii.x.xii-p42.2"></span>[Le
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#019)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p42.2"></span>, *vide infra,* p. 380. In both cases it
will be seen that *A.V*. is “at your own will,” whilst Ainsworth renders
both “for your favorable acceptation."

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc04120.htm#fr_284) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p42.4"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p43"></span> That is, at <span
id="iii.x.xii-p43.1"></span>[Le
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#020)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc04120.htm#fr_285) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p44"></span> The *Fr.* throws some light on this
rather obscure passage: “<span id="iii.x.xii-p44.1"></span>D’autant
qu’il ne s’ensuit pas, que quarid ils offriront au bon plaisir de Dieu,
il doyvent garder une facon pareille, et egale;” since it does not
follow that when they shall offer at God’s good pleasure, they must
observe a precisely similar method.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc04120.htm#fr_286) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p47"></span> *Lat., “*<span
id="iii.x.xii-p47.1"></span>damnatus esset.” Fr., “<span
id="iii.x.xii-p47.2"></span>si quelqu’un avoit voue, et obtenu ce qu’il
demandoit;” if any one had vowed, and obtained what he asked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 7:19-25,28-31,37,38](cc04121)
