[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04098)  [Next](cc04100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p2"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
18:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#025)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p3"></span>**25.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.vii.v-p4"></span>**25.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.vii.v-p5"></span>**26.** Thus speak unto the Levites, and
say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the tithes which I
have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up an
heave offering of it for the LORD, *even* a tenth *part* of the tithe.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p6"></span>**26.** Praeterea ad Levitas loqueris: et
dices eis, Quum acceperitis a filiis Israel decimas quas vobis ab illis
dedi in haereditatem vestram, tunc offeretis ex illis oblationem Jehovae
decimas ex decimis.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p7"></span>**27.** And *this* your heave offering
shall be reckoned unto you, as though *it were* the corn of the
threshingfloor, and as the fulness of the winepress.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p8"></span>**27.** Et reputabitur vobis oblatio
vestra, ut frumentum ex area, et ut plenitudo e torculari.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p9"></span>**28.** Thus ye also shall offer an heave
offering unto the LORD of all your tithes, which ye receive of the
children of Israel; and ye shall give thereof the LORD’S heave offering
to Aaron the priest.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p10"></span>**28.** Sic offeretis vos quoque
oblationem Jehovae ex onmibus decimis vestris quas acceperitis a filiis
Israel, et dabitis ex illis oblationem Jehovae Aharon sacerdoti.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p11"></span>**29.** Out of all your gifts ye shall
offer every heave offering of the LORD, of all the best thereof, *even*
the hallowed part thereof out of it.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p12"></span>**29.** Ex omnibus oblationibus vestris
offeretis omnem oblationem Jehovae, ex omni pinguedine ejus,
sanctificationem ipsius ex eo.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p13"></span>**30.** Therefore thou shalt say unto
them, When ye have heaved the best thereof from it, then it shall be
counted unto the Levites as the increase of the threshingfloor, and as
the increase of the winepress.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p14"></span>**30.** Ac dices illis, Quum attuleritis
pinguedinem eius ex co, reputabitur Levitis ut fructus arere, et ut
fructus torcularis.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p15"></span>**31.** And ye shall eat it in every
place, ye and your households: for it *is* your reward for your service
in the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p16"></span>**31.** Comedetis autem illud ill omni
loco vos et domus vestra: quia merces est vobis pro ministerio vestro in
tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p17"></span>**32.** And ye shall bear no sin by
reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it: neither shall
ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p18"></span>**32.** Et non portabitis super eo
peccatum, quum vos obtuleritis pinguedinem ejus ex eo: et
sanctiticationes filiorum Israel non polluetis, ne moriamini.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p19"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.v-p20"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p21"></span>**25.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
This is another kind of tithe, *i.e.,* a hundredth part of the whole
produce, which the Levites paid to the priests. Some reckon a third
kind; but I have given my reasons why I do not agree with this opinion.
Assuredly it is not probable that in the same year double tithes were
exacted and paid. Let this twofold division, therefore, be enough for
us. A larger portion was given to the priests, not only as an honorable
distinction, but. because greater holiness and integrity in expending
them was expected from them; and also that they might meet many peculiar
burdens. Lest then the Levites should be too sordid and niggardly, God
declares that their theft would be no less wicked if they dealt
dishonestly towards the priests, than as if the people should withhold
any part of their own just share; for this is the object of the words,
that the tithe of the tithes, which they are commanded to pay, should be
as if they paid it from the threshing-floor and the wine-press, (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p21.1"></span>[Nu
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#027)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p21.1"></span>;) as though it were said that they were no
more exempted from the second tithes, than the people from the first.
The precept is then still further extended, viz., that they should offer
a part of all the offerings. Thirdly, sincere liberality is inculcated
upon them, that they should not lay aside as the priests’ portion
anything that was lean or out of condition, or in any respect of
inferior quality, but that they should rather offer whatever was most
choice; for this is what is meant by the word <span
id="iii.vii.v-p21.2"></span>חלב, *cheleb,*  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) which some translate *adeps;* the word
*pinguedo* seemed more suitable, in which, however, there is a metaphor
contained.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p23"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p24"></span>**31.** *And ye shall eat it.* Because
the tithes were reckoned to be amongst the sacred oblations, a question
might arise, whether it was lawful to eat them anywhere except in the
sanctuary. God therefore declares, that when the Levites had separated
the <span id="iii.vii.v-p24.1"></span>δευυτεροδεκάτας (the second
tithes,) the residue passed into the nature and condition of ordinary
meats; inasmuch as they might then eat in any place of the bread made of
tithe-corn, like the produce of their own fields. The reason, which is
subjoined, seems to be by no means appropriate; via, that it was the
reward for the labor which they bestowed on the service of the
tabernacle; for hence it was rather to be inferred, that this food was
peculiarly destined for the ministers, whilst they were discharging
their official duties, and keeping watch in the tabernacle, or killing
the victims at the altar. But since by God’s command they were scattered
over the whole land, and did not cease to be ministers of the tabernacle
on account of the distance of their residence, it was justly permitted
that, wherever they might be, they should eat of the meat appointed them
by God. If it were allowable to *take* the particle <span
id="iii.vii.v-p24.2"></span>כי, *ki,*  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) adversatively, the sense would be
clearer. In the next verse he confirms the same declaration, *i.e.,*
that they should be free from all guilt when they had honestly paid the
priests. Yet at the same time they are strictly admonished that they
should not commit themselves by any fraud; for God declares that it
would amount to sacrilege, if they should have thievishly embezzled any
of it, and threatens them with capital punishment; for “to pollute the
holy things” of the people, is equivalent to profaning whatever was
consecrated in the name of the whole people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc04099.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p22"></span> <span id="iii.vii.v-p22.1"></span>[Nu
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#030)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p22.1"></span>. *A.V. “*the best *thereof.” Margin,
“Heb.,* fat.” According to Facciolati, *adeps,* means liquid fat which
does not readily become hard; and *pinguedo,* simply fat, “an oily
substance in animals and other things."

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc04099.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p25"></span> <span id="iii.vii.v-p25.1"></span>
כי*for,* or *because.* — *W.*

<span id="iii.vii.v-p26"></span>"<span id="iii.vii.v-p26.1"></span>On
pourroit aussi translater, *Combien* que ce soit votre loyer;” it might
also be translated, although this is your reward. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 18:1-8](cc04100)
